- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM AT RISK: IMPACTS OF THE U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE'S PROPOSED BIDEH RULE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM AT RISK: IMPACTS OF THE
U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE'S PROPOSED BIDEH RULE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, April 10, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-109

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-381 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                      Jared Huffman, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                          Ruben Gallego, AZ
Garret Graves, LA                       Joe Neguse, CO
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS            Mike Levin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                        Katie Porter, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR            Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                        Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Pete Stauber, MN                        Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
John R. Curtis, UT                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Tom Tiffany, WI                         Val T. Hoyle, OR
Jerry Carl, AL                          Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                      Seth Magaziner, RI
Lauren Boebert, CO                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Cliff Bentz, OR                         Ed Case, HI
Jen Kiggans, VA                         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jim Moylan, GU                          Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, April 10, 2024........................     1

Statement of Members:

Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     1
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     7
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     9

Statement of Witnesses:

Guertin, Steve, Deputy Director for Program Management and
Policy, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC.....    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Questions submitted for the record.......................    24

Staunton, Marc, Owner, Staunton Farms, Malin, Oregon.........    25
Prepared statement of....................................    27
Wielicki, David, Chief Executive Officer, South Carolina
Waterfowl Association, Pinewood, South Carolina............    31
Prepared statement of....................................    32
Haskett, Geoffrey, President, National Wildlife Refuge
Association, Washington, DC................................    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Supplemental testimony submitted for the record..........    40
Batcheller, Gordon R., Executive Secretary, Northeast
Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies, Representing the
Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies, Washington, DC....    45
Prepared statement of....................................    46

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Cooperative Farming Report at Holla Bend NWR.............    10

Submissions for the Record by Representative Bentz

Klamath Water Users, Letter to U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service................................................     3
American Exploration & Mining Association, Letter to U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service..............................    70
Montana Mining Association, Letter to U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.......................................    78
Montana Natural Resource Coalition, Letter to U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service...................................    83
Missouri River Conservation Districts Council, Letter to
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.........................    89
Western Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies, Letter
to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service......................    92
Yell County Farm Bureau, Public Comment to USFWS on
Regulations.gov website................................    93
Humboldt County Board of Commission, Letter to U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service...................................    94
Alabama Farmers Federation, Letter to U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.......................................   101
Family Farm Alliance, Letter to U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service................................................   102
State of Utah, Department of Natural Resources, Letter to
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.........................   108
Modoc County Board of Supervisors, Letter to U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service...................................   111
Wyoming Game and Fish Department, Letter to U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.......................................   115
Idaho Cattle Association, Letter to U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.......................................   116
Wildlife Federations from nine different states, Letter
to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service......................   118
Wildlife Organizations, Letter to U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service................................................   119
Montana Public Lands Groups, Letter to U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.......................................   121
National Mining Association, Statement for the Record....   123

Submissions for the Record by Representative LaMalfa

Counties of Siskiyou and Modoc, California and Klamath
County, Oregon, Letter to U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service................................................    65

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM AT RISK:
IMPACTS OF THE U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE'S PROPOSED BIDEH RULE

----------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:50 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bentz, Wittman, Graves, LaMalfa,
Carl, Hageman, Westerman; Huffman, Peltola, Mullin, Hoyle, and
Dingell.

Mr. Bentz. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Good morning, everyone. I want to welcome our witnesses,
Members, and our guests in the audience to today's hearing.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on a
hearing entitled, ``The National Wildlife Refuge System at
Risk: Impacts of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Proposed
BIDEH Rule.''
I ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Kustoff, be allowed to participate in today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. Again, I want to thank the witnesses for being
here today and our Members for their interest in the issues we
will be discussing.
Today, the Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
examines the recently proposed rule by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service entitled, ``The Biological Integrity,
Diversity, and Environmental Health Rule,'' otherwise known as
the BIDEH Rule. While this rulemaking is in the public comment
phase, given the concern expressed by those affected by this
rule, this Committee is holding this oversight hearing.
Our witnesses today will discuss many of the concerns
associated with this drastic and dramatic change in the rules
designed to govern management of our refuge system. I will
highlight some of these.
First, and perhaps most egregiously, the rule creates a
default position prohibiting use of management tools essential
to protect the use of our refuge system. For example,
management tools including normal refuge and historical
agricultural practices and native predator controls are
prohibited unless a full NEPA process and/or other bureaucratic
nightmares, such as completing a scientific peer review, are
completed. The Service, under this rule, is instantly
prohibiting practices and means of working on and around
refuges, restricting the discretion of refuge managers and
putting at risk the very purpose of individual refuges.
My district in Oregon is home to 12 National Wildlife
Refuges, including those located on the Oregon side of the
Klamath Basin. According to the authorizing law, these refuges,
``shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior for
the major purpose of waterfowl management, but with full
consideration to optimum agricultural use that is consistent
therewith.'' Of course, when they were established this was an
important part of the negotiations leading to their existence.
The proposed rule absolutely undermines these efforts and is an
open invitation for more litigation.
It should come as no surprise that some of the most vocal
supporters of this rule are anti-farming and ranching
organizations, including groups who have advocated phasing out
farming on the 22,000 acres of refuge lands in the Klamath
Basin, not to mention tens of thousands of acres of other
refuge land located around and across our nation.
Agriculture, whether by grazing or planting crops, is an
effective tool for managing refuge lands that also benefits
wildlife. These relationships not only deliver meaningful
conservation benefits to the species, but also provide valuable
recreational opportunities for hunters and those who visit our
refuges to view wildlife. Instituting this default restrictive
position prohibiting these practices will seriously damage, if
not destroy, the relationship between the agricultural
community and the refuge system.
The prohibition on native predator control included in this
rule is equally troubling. As I previously mentioned, many
refuges around the country have wildlife-specific purposes,
such as areas for waterfowl and sea turtles to nest.
Unfortunately, this proposed rule dramatically undermines the
ability for managers to capture wild predators, such as
raccoons, skunks, and ghost crabs who feed on the nests of
turtles and waterfowl. Unfortunately, the rule does not define
what constitutes a ``native predator,'' and ignores the fact
that predators don't just stay inside the refuge system. As we
will hear from our witnesses today, this approach places the
refuge system management squarely in conflict with state game
and fish agencies, who are primarily responsible for managing
predators within their state's borders.
Lastly, the rule contains vague and concerning language,
allowing the Service to address any supposed threats to refuge
resources that may arise from outside refuge boundaries. This
gives the Service enormous discretion to determine what
constitutes a ``threat,'' and how far outside refuge boundaries
this authority may extend, and what appropriate actions could
be taken to address such supposed threats.
If you are thinking that what I have described is a drastic
approach to managing our refuge system, well, you are right, it
is. Yet, the Service claims it is simply codifying and updating
their decades-old BIDEH policy. In essence, ``Nothing to see
here.'' I, for one, am highly skeptical of that narrative, and
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony regarding this
proposed, politically-driven change to our refuge system.
With that, I yield.

I also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
letter on the proposed rule from the Klamath Drainage District,
the Klamath Water Users Association, and the Tulelake
Irrigation District to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

Klamath Drainage District
Klamath Water Users Association

Tulelake Irrigation District

April 4, 2024

Public Comments Processing
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

Subject:  Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106: Comments on Proposed Rule
and Policy Updates Regarding National Wildlife Refuge System;
Biological Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health

Dear U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service:

On February 2, 2024, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
(Service) published the subject proposed rule and policy updates \1\
(proposed rule/policies). 89 Fed. Reg. 7345 (Feb. 2, 2024). We urge
that the Service not adopt the proposed rule/policies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These comments focus primarily on the proposed rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, and of specific local concern, application of the proposed
rule/policies to agricultural activities on land covered by the Kuchel
Act, Pub. L. No. 88-567, 78 Stat. 850 (codified at 16 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 695k-695r) would be contrary to that statute and the
congressional design for continuation of commercial agricultural
production on that extremely valuable cropland.
Second, and more generally, the proposed rule/policies would
impermissibly establish a presumption against allowing certain
activities on refuge lands nationwide rather than following the
requirements of the National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of
1997, Pub. L. No. 105-57, 111 Stat. 1252 (codified as 16 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 668dd-668ee) (Improvement Act), which provides that the
Service may allow activities that are not specific refuge purposes, on
a case-by-case basis, for each refuge, if the activity is determined to
be a compatible use.
Third, various aspects of the proposed rule/policies are highly
subjective or vague. The proposed rule thus proposes sweeping, self-
granted power that is undefined and would invite conflict and
litigation that would not serve the public interest. It is not good
policy or appropriate to promulgate these broad statements and
objectives as rules with legal effect.
Fourth, while the proposed rule discusses important global concerns
regarding impacts to species and ecosystems, there is no clear logic
explaining why the specific elements of proposed rule would address or
resolve these issues or improve the conditions of concern.
Finally, we provide comments below on other, specific issues
including unanalyzed impacts that must be considered.
The undersigned commenters are directly interested in these issues
due to their roles in, and association with, the Klamath Project
(Project), a Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) project authorized in
1905 under the terms of the Reclamation Act of 1902. The Project (see
map at Attachment A) provides or facilitates diversion and delivery of
water to approximately 210,000 acres of high-quality irrigated land in
Klamath County, Oregon, and Siskiyou and Modoc Counties, California. Of
this irrigated farmland, roughly 30,000 acres lies within Tule Lake
National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) and Lower Klamath NWR, and there is
additionally controlled grazing on land around Clear Lake, a Project
reservoir, in Clear Lake NWR.

Tulelake Irrigation District (TID) delivers water to approximately
65,000 acres of land, including 15,000-16,000 acres in Tule Lake NWR
that is leased for commercial agriculture. TID also operates Sumps 1A
and 1B within Tule Lake NWR (which comprise 13,000 acres) and operates
D Pumping Plant, which moves water from Sump 1A to P Canal and Lower
Klamath NWR.

Klamath Drainage District (KDD) delivers water to approximately
27,000 acres of irrigated land in Klamath County, Oregon. This includes
6000 acres that are within Lower Klamath NWR and KDD, commonly known as
Area K. The KDD-owned and operated Ady Canal is the sole means of
direct diversion and delivery of water from the Klamath River to Lower
Klamath NWR.

Klamath Water Users Association (KWUA) is a non-profit corporation,
formed in 1953. KWUA's members are public agencies such as TID and KDD
who deliver water to irrigated land served by the Project. KWUA's
mission is ``to preserve and enhance the viability of irrigated
agriculture for our membership in the Klamath Basin, for the benefit of
current and future generations.''
Kuchel Act Lands

A proposed new 50 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(d)(6) would state: ``We prohibit
the use of agricultural practices unless they are determined necessary
to meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health, and where we
cannot achieve a refuge management objective through natural
processes.'' (Emphasis added.) Other paragraphs would similarly
establish prohibitions for essential agricultural management tools and
technologies such as pesticide use, predator control, and use of
genetically modified organisms. The agricultural and other prohibitions
include vague terms and matters subject to interpretation or the
vicissitudes of future management objectives.

Fundamentally, however, these proposals do not reflect an awareness
or understanding of the agricultural lands subject to the Kuchel Act.

The agricultural lease lands have been farmed since the time that
they were uncovered from marsh and lake bottom and became productive
land. The United States received and accepted title to the lands from
the States of Oregon and California for that purpose and that purpose
only. These lands are integral to family farm operations, regional
economies, and, by contractual and statutory compromise, provide a
direct source of revenue to local public agencies including irrigation
districts and counties. They are within and are served by TID and KDD
and share in the ongoing costs of operation and maintenance of the
Project's infrastructure.

These lands also exist in areas of abundant waterfowl and wildlife.
For decades, farmers planted crops, flooded fields, and created food
and habitat for migrating waterfowl along the Pacific Flyway. Birds
thrive on waste grain and green browse fields.

Over time, ceded and uncovered lands that were originally leased by
the federal government to growers were homesteaded and transitioned
into private ownership. That process continued until the early 1950s,
as veterans of World War II became the last homesteaders on ceded lease
lands. In the meantime, due to intense hunting pressure, executive
orders established bird refuges on ceded lands, subject to continued
reclamation development.

In the 1950s, there was a public debate regarding the completion of
the original homesteading design. The ``homesteading versus continued
leasing'' debate ended in 1964, with the enactment of the Kuchel Act,
which prohibited homesteading and instead directed the continued
leasing of specific land units within Tule Lake NWR and Lower Klamath
NWR. That direction was critical to honor other legal commitments to
TID, to maintain consistency with the underlying authorizations for the
Project, and to ensure continued delivery of Project water.
The Kuchel Act deals with the entirety of four NWRs in the Klamath
Basin covering over 146,000 acres of public lands.\2\ The Act dedicates
these four NWRs to ``wildlife conservation'' to be ``administered by
the Secretary of the Interior for the major purpose of waterfowl
management, but with full consideration to optimum agricultural use
that is consistent therewith.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 695l. The Act also
provides specific directions with respect to the lease lands,
constituting approximately 15,000 of the 39,000 acres within the Tule
Lake NWR, and 6,000 of the 51,000 acres within the Lower Klamath NWR.
See CCP/EIS at 1-25 and Federal Register Vol. 81, No. 237, 89138.
Specifically, the ``Secretary shall, consistent with proper waterfowl
management, continue the present pattern of leasing [the lease
lands].'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 695n. Congress chose continued leasing, rather
than homesteading, as the land management strategy that would be
consistent with waterfowl management goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Notice of availability, Fish and Wildlife Service issued
CCP EIS--Federal Register Vol. 81, No. 237, 89138 (Dec. 9, 2016); U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Lower Klamath, Clear Lake, Tule Lake, Upper
Klamath, and Bear Valley National Wildlife Refuges--Final Comprehensive
Conservation Plan/Environmental Impact Statement (Dec. 2016)
(hereinafter referred to ``CCP/EIS'') at 1-25, id. at 4-31 & 4-37.

After passage of the Kuchel Act, Congress enacted statutes
governing the management of refuge lands generally within the National
Wildlife Refuge System, including the National Wildlife Refuge System
Administration Act of 1966, Pub. L. No. 89-669, 80 Stat. 926
(Administration Act), as amended by the Improvement Act. Acting under
those laws in December 2016, the Service issued the Final Comprehensive
Conservation Plan/ Environmental Impact Statement for the Lower
Klamath, Clear Lake, Tule Lake, Upper Klamath, and Bear Valley NWRs.
Subsequently, on January 13, 2017, the Regional Director for the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pacific Southwest Region of the Service signed the Record of Decision.

The CCP incorporated consistency determinations for continued
agricultural practices on the lease lands. These determinations were
subject to four legal challenges, in which the Service prevailed on all
issues.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Tulelake Irrigation Dist. v. United States Fish & Wildlife
Serv., 40 F.4th 930 (9th Cir. 2022); Audubon Soc'y of Portland v.
Haaland, 40 F.4th 917 (9th Cir. 2022); Audubon Soc'y of Portland v.
Haaland, 40 F.4th 967 (9th Cir. 2022).

Soils on the lease lands are among the best in the world for crop
production. Agricultural production on irrigated lease lands produces
$30 million in crop value annually, and supports hundreds of jobs,
local businesses, and local governments, all while providing food,
cover, water, and open space for waterfowl and other wildlife. In
addition, lease land farming incorporates innovative management
strategies such as the successful ``walking wetlands'' program and
other actions that have become models for other areas; these activities
are possible only if the agricultural operations are economically
viable. Finally, parts of Lower Klamath NWR and Clear Lake NWR are
managed for grazing under the Kuchel Act. Ranching on Clear Lake NWR
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lands dates to the latter 18th century.

Any alteration in management of the Kuchel Act lands would result
in negative economic, socioeconomic, and environmental impacts.

Attachment B to this letter provides a more comprehensive
discussion of the history and management of the so-called ``lease
lands'' on Project-related refuges, including under the Kuchel Act and
Improvement Act.

In recent informal discussions, Service personnel have indicated
that they do not believe the proposed rule/policies would apply to the
lease lands or would not lead to management changes. We support that
the proposed rule/policies should be irrelevant to Kuchel Act lands
specifically. However, agriculture is treated as a ``use'' of Kuchel
Act lands that must be considered and approved in compatibility or
consistency determinations. Accordingly, and for additional reasons
discussed later, the proposed rule/policies should not and cannot be
adopted for the Kuchel Act lands.
Presumptions Inconsistent with Improvement Act

The Improvement Act establishes a comprehensive, defined, and
consistent process that controls the Service's decisions to allow or
disallow a use on a refuge. In general, the Service may allow a use if
it is determined to be compatible with refuge purposes. 16 U.S.C. Sec.
``Compatible'' means that a use ``that, in the sound professional
judgment of the Director, will not materially interfere with or detract
from the fulfillment of the mission of the System or the purposes of
the refuge.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668ee; 50 C.F.R. Sec. 25.12(a). The
Improvement Act directed the Service to publish regulations
establishing the process for determining whether a use of a refuge is a
compatible use, and identified ten specific requirements related to the
regulations that were to be promulgated. 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(d)(3)(B).
Those regulations exist, and since their publication in 2000, have been
relied upon to make required compatibility determinations, commonly in
concert with the development of CCPs.

The proposed rule/policies would bypass the Improvement Act's
required process. Based on a general directive to ``ensure the
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health of the
[refuge] System are maintained, 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(B), the
Service would establish prohibitions on certain activities that would
apply unless (for example) the activity was ``determined necessary to
meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health, and where we
cannot achieve a refuge management objective through natural
processes.''

In other words, instead of allowing a use that meets the criteria
for compatibility, the proposed rule/policies would disallow uses
unless the activity meets a completely different set of criteria than
those that are applicable to compatibility determinations. This would
be improper.
Lack of Specificity or Relationship Between Stated Objectives and the
Proposed Rule/Policies

The ``management objectives'' in the proposed new Code of Federal
Regulations, title 50, section 29.3(c) are broad statements of policy
or management philosophies that are proposed for codification as legal
requirements. In these general, subjective narratives, the Service
appears to confer unbounded authority and discretion on itself. These
provisions would foster conflict and almost certainly trigger
litigation by parties who contend that specific actions or inactions by
the Service fail to carry out the legal mandates. Congress did not
establish the stated commitments and it is not good policy or in the
public interest to promulgate regulations of this sort.

The ``management activities and uses'' in the proposed new Code of
Federal Regulations, title 50 section 29.3(d) are similarly broad in
some respects but consist of prohibitions. The Service has not provided
any explanation of how these prohibitions would accomplish stated
purposes of the proposed rule.

Other Specific Comments

Pesticides, Predator Control

Refuges in our region are subject to formally adopted plans for
integrated pest management (IPM), under which chemical controls
(including organic pesticides) are allowed only under a strictly
applied pesticide use proposal process. The proposed rule would
seemingly overlay that time-tested, effective process with a new
prohibition that would serve no identifiable purpose other than the
expression of policy preferences that do not relate to real-world land
and water management.

There is a history of negative impacts resulting from failure or
inability to employ timely and effective weed and pest management
prevention or controls on the refuges in our area. We have witnessed
ditch banks and dikes becoming carpeted with noxious weeds, and damage
to crops and wildlife due to inadequate pest prevention and control.
These conditions are not only detrimental on the refuges, but they also
make a bad neighbor of the Service as seeds and pests move from the
refuges to private lands.

In the summer of 2023, astounding numbers of grasshoppers hatched
on Lower Klamath NWR and invaded private lands in the region, doing
severe crop damage with lost revenue estimates being as high as $100
million or more. The Service was unable to take any management action
to control the outbreak. We are hopeful that spraying will be possible
to combat the anticipated grasshopper surge in 2024.

We support IPM. We are extremely concerned that there not be a new,
uncertain bar that must be cleared in order to implement IPM in a
timely and effective manner.

Genetically Engineered Organisms

The proposed ban on use of genetically engineered organisms is not
based on science.
It would, to our knowledge, be inconsistent with other federal
agencies' consideration and approval of this tool. We anticipate, and
support, comments by the American Farm Bureau Association.

Thank you for your consideration of these comments.

Sincerely,

Bill Walker                   Tracey Liskey
Board President               Board President
Klamath Drainage District     Klamath Water Users Association

John Crawford
Board President
Tulelake Irrigation
District

*****

The complete letter with attachments is available for viewing
at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240410/117029/HHRG-
118-II13-20240410-SD004.PDF

------

Mr. Bentz. With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
everyone. Today, we are discussing a proposed rule by the Fish
and Wildlife Service on biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health, the acronym we refer to as BIDEH.
And I think as we consider biodiversity in the National
Refuge System, it is important to understand this is the
world's largest network of lands and waters with an explicit
mission of wildlife conservation. It is one of the crown jewels
of American natural resources. It was specifically created to
protect biodiversity and expand wildlife-dependent
opportunities across 850 million acres of land and sea.
Now, we have a global biodiversity crisis. Scientists have
told us about that. Our refuge system is not immune to it. In
1997, Congress issued a mandate in the Refuge Improvement Act
to the Fish and Wildlife Service to ensure the system's
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health. That
is what this is all about.
The rule that is being proposed uses best science. It
clarifies refuge management guidelines to reflect this long-
standing biodiversity mandate, and it would consider things
like climate change, increasing habitat connectivity, managing
fish and wildlife populations, upholding water rights, and
promoting healthy air, water, and soil. It establishes
standards for ensuring BIDEH, while also allowing flexibility
to use tailored tools and strategies that can achieve specific
wildlife conservation goals.
Now, it may come as a surprise to some of you that have
heard the claims coming from across the aisle, but nothing in
this proposed BIDEH rule affects existing cooperative
agriculture, water rights, hunting, fishing, or wildlife
viewing. It just doesn't, if you actually read the rule. I can
only assume that Team Extreme saw the rule abbreviated as
BIDEH, and mistakenly thought it was referring to Biden, and
partisan hysteria must have set in at that point. There is no
other explanation I can find for why a non-controversial rule,
a rule that simply strengthens America's refuge system against
climate change and promotes healthy air and water without
impacting agriculture, water rights, hunting, or fishing would
be sensationalized the way it is being in this hearing and by
my friends across the aisle.
Now, it is good that a year-and-a-half into this
dysfunctional hot mess of a Congress we are finally having a
hearing that talks about the National Wildlife Refuge System.
But having a hearing to sensationalize and undermine a pending
rulemaking is not good stewardship of our refuges. It is
political theater.
The Fish and Wildlife Service is here today, but their
testimony is constrained by the fact that they are in the
middle of a public comment process. We should let that process
play out instead of attempting to score cheap political points.
There is an important hearing, if we really cared about the
refuge system, that we should be having in this Committee. It
would start with a conversation about the refuge system's
budget. The budget system for our National Refuge System has
seen virtually no change since 2010. Add in inflation, and its
funding capacity is less today than it was 15 years ago.
Congress should care about that.
We should be talking about how our refuges have seen a 36
percent increase in visitation since 2010, but during that same
time period the full-time refuge staff has decreased by 16
percent. This hinders their ability to manage this incredible
system. Only half of the 500 refuge field stations are staffed
right now, so we are able to monitor less than a third of the
over 1,300 threatened and endangered species found in refuges.
Congress should care about that if it is serious about refuges.
Sixty-seven million visitors a year, but our refuge staff
has decreased by 25 percent over the last 15 years, resulting
in millions of people being turned away from visitor centers
each year. We should care about that, and we should be talking
about that.
How about public safety? We hear a lot about that from
across the aisle. We know how many public safety officers we
need in this system to meet our standards, and we are providing
just 20 percent of that number. I wish all the rhetoric that we
hear from Team Extreme about public safety carried over to our
concern about public safety for the tens of millions of
visitors in our refuge system complex.
We know that the current need is four times the current
funding level for our National Refuge System. The more we
neglect it, the more expensive it gets in the future to catch
up. So, we should care if we are fiscally conservative and care
about serving the taxpayers about beginning to step up to that
challenge, rather than pushing it off on future congresses and
future generations.
So, a lot we should be talking about refuges; this hearing
does not cover it.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. I now recognize the Full Committee Chairman, Mr.
Westerman, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Bentz. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here today. This is a subject that is very
near and dear to me, and members of this Committee often hear
me talk about how I believe true conservation means that we
have an unchosen obligation to leave the world in better
condition than we found it.
As a lifelong outdoorsman, as a hunter and a fisherman, and
a representative with a prolific agriculture industry, I know
firsthand that sportsmen and women, farmers, and ranchers are,
I believe, the world's best conservationists. The National
Wildlife Refuge System is an integral part of my district, as
it is home to four refuges. And I have worked with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and my constituents for years to
foster cooperative relationships for the betterment of these
refuges and the wildlife that depend on them.
The best example of that is the Holla Bend National
Wildlife Refuge in Yell County. I visited Holla Bend 2 years
ago after constituents expressed concerns with its condition
and the lack of waterfowl using it as a resting area, which is
actually the stated purpose of the refuge. When I visited, it
was obvious that the refuge had fallen into disrepair, and
there was only one full-time employee for the entire 7,000-acre
refuge. So, to Mr. Huffman's point, these refuges are vastly
understaffed. And my hat is off to this lady who was answering
the phone, mowing the yard, hiring the contractors. If it got
done on that refuge, it was her doing it. And it is unfair to
put someone in a position like that.
But to remedy the situation, I have met with Fish and
Wildlife and others, and the Service agreed to enter into a
cooperative farming agreement with local farmers to grow rice
and Japanese millet in the refuge. This relationship has been a
great success, resulting in more than 1 million waterfowl
energy days in 2023 for wintering waterfowl.
And for those of you unfamiliar with the term ``waterfowl
energy days,'' that is the amount of energy that is needed to
sustain one duck for 1 day and 1 million, well, that is a lot
of ducks. And we love ducks coming to Arkansas. And I have said
this many times about habitat: If you build it, they will come.
The No. 1 thing we can do for all species is to provide
them with good habitat, whether they are endangered species,
whether something like ducks or turkeys that I like to hunt, if
we want more species, we create better habitat.
The success at Holla Bend mirrors many other refuges that
utilize cooperative agriculture as a management tool. In fact,
data collected from refuges across the southeast region show
that 47 percent of waterfowl energy days, a key metric to
assess the health of wetland ecosystems, come from agricultural
practices. I will also say there has been a lot of research
being done on moist soil units, and even using native
vegetation to create mass crop for wintering waterfowl.
There are a lot of different ways to approach this. But Mr.
Chairman, I would ask that the report outlining the success of
cooperative agriculture in the Holla Bend National Wildlife
Refuge be submitted into the hearing record.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]
Cooperative Farming Report at Holla Bend NWR

Refuge staff and cooperative farmers started meeting throughout
April/May to determine how to provide better habitat for wintering
waterfowl on the refuge. Once the meetings concluded, there was a
consensus to try planting rice in some of the impoundments that could
be inundated from wells. Most of the soil is sandy/silt loam, which is
not ideal for growing rice because it does not hold water well.
Cooperative farmers and refuge staff experimented with test rice plots
in the waterfowl impoundments to increase our wintering waterfowl
foraging objectives. With adequate rainfall coming throughout the
growing season and help from pumping out of the wells, over 30 acres of
rice was successfully grown across the refuge impoundments with a high
density of sizable seed heads. These plots were managed intensely and
monitored weekly to check for undesirable species. The rice was
fertilized with Urea and sprayed with herbicide throughout the summer
to keep broadleaf plants, such as sesbania, from outcompeting the rice.
Most plots had favorable moist-soil plants mixed throughout the rice,
which will provide another excellent food source for wintering
waterfowl.

Other impoundments consisted of a diversity of favorable moist soil
plants. Slow drawdowns were conducted in April on these impoundments,
promoting the growth of Pennsylvania smartweed, barnyard grass, fall
panicum, bearded sprangletop, and toothcup. These units were also
monitored throughout the summer for unfavorable moist soil plants, but
the stands got established early and there was little undesirable
species present. There is over 20 acres of moist soil spread throughout
the refuge. These natural stands of vegetation will provide a vital
food source to waterfowl and create excellent invertebrate habitat for
waterfowl.

Fifty acres of Japanese millet was also planted in the low-lying
areas of the refuge that will be inundated when the Arkansas River
floods. The millet was also monitored throughout the summer, fertilized
with urea, and sprayed with broadleaf control herbicide targeting
sesbania. With essential rains coming late in the summer, the millet
has produced a high density of large seedheads throughout the stand.
Unharvested corn was left in/around the impoundments to serve as a
visual buffer and another food source for wintering waterfowl. The
refuge kept around 20-30 acres of corn as part of the crop share from
the cooperative farming program. All these different habitat types will
benefit waterfowl diets daily throughout the entire wintering period
(November to February), especially with how much weather patterns vary
in Arkansas. The efforts from the refuge staff and cooperative farmers
resulted in over 1,000,000 WEDs across the refuge that will serve as
excellent foraging habitat for wintering waterfowl.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Westerman. Unfortunately, the rule we are examining
today will jeopardize this innovative success and other tools
utilized across the country by prohibiting management tools
such as agricultural practices, native predator control, and
the use of genetically modified crops in the refuge system
unless each practice goes through onerous and unnecessary red
tape for approval. It sounds just like the Federal Government.
To make matters worse, the Service hasn't produced a shred
of scientific evidence to show that these practices should be
prohibited, or that they are harmful to species or the refuge
system.
I am glad we are conducting this essential oversight of the
proposed rule today. I hope we can have a productive dialogue
on how to move forward with simultaneously stewarding our
resources and allowing for active management of the refuge
system.
I want to again thank each of the witnesses for joining us
to share your experience, and I look forward to hearing your
testimony.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will now introduce
our witnesses: Mr. Steve Guertin, Deputy Director for Program
Management and Policy with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
in Washington, DC; Mr. Mark Staunton, owner of Staunton Farms
in Malin, Oregon; Mr. David Wielicki, CEO of the South Carolina
Waterfowl Association in Pinewood, South Carolina; Mr. Jeffrey
Haskett, President of the National Wildlife Refuge Association
in Washington, DC; and Mr. Gordon Batcheller, Executive
Secretary of the Northeast Association of Fish and Wildlife
Agencies, testifying on behalf of the Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies in Washington, DC.
Let remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of the 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
And I would remind you, although it is hardly necessary,
that the microphone system in this room is challenged, so
please speak directly into the microphone. And if we can't hear
you, I will say so.
I now recognize Mr. Guertin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVE GUERTIN, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR PROGRAM
MANAGEMENT AND POLICY, U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Guertin. Good morning, Chairman Westerman, Chairman
Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on our
proposed biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health regulations and policy updates, or our BIDEH proposal.
For the purposes of my testimony, I will refer to the
concept of biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health as ecological integrity. Maintaining ecological
integrity is a statutory mandate that has been a focus of
national wildlife refuge management for over 25 years. This
mandate stems from the National Wildlife Refuge System
Improvement Act, an organic charter for the National Wildlife
Refuge System that passed Congress with near unanimous support
in 1997.
Under the Improvement Act, we manage refuges to maintain
biodiversity across multiple scales and develop strategies to
address conservation threats using the latest science. Our
first policy to provide internal direction on this mandate was
in 2001, and over the 20 years since that policy, the threats
to the ecological integrity of the refuge system have changed.
Refuges have begun to experience climate change impacts while
facing other stressors like habitat loss, disease, and invasive
species. These threats are making it harder for the refuge
system to achieve its conservation mission.
At the same time, the refuge system and the healthy
ecosystems it protects are increasingly vital to addressing
climate change and biodiversity loss. Meeting these modern
conservation challenges requires a modern approach. This
includes ensuring the refuge system has the capacity it needs
to conserve our shared natural resources now and into the
future. To that end, our Fiscal Year 2025 budget request
includes $602 million for the refuge system, which will
increase our capacity to conserve species and habitats and
connect visitors with nature.
With our BIDEH proposal we are also striving to equip
refuge managers with improved tools and guidance for achieving
the refuge system mission. Through this proposal, we would
provide a more consistent, transparent, and science-based
approach for maintaining the ecological integrity of the refuge
system.
The proposal does this in several ways. It includes
management directives that create a science-based framework
that refuge managers can use to evaluate and implement
management actions. This will help our refuge managers connect
habitats, protect species, sustain ecological function,
incorporate Indigenous knowledge, and increase resilience.
The proposal has updated definitions that include the
impacts of climate change on refuge ecosystems, unlike our 2001
policy. Under that previous policy, we asked our refuge
managers to seek to manage to historic conditions. While our
BIDEH proposal acknowledges the importance of historic
conditions as a reference point, it also recognizes that
sustaining historic conditions to achieve ecological integrity
is not possible in many places.
In addition, the proposal provides guidance for certain
management activities and uses that have a propensity to affect
ecological integrity, activities like agriculture, native
predator control, pesticide use. While the proposal directs a
default position for each of these specific management
activities, it does not ban these activities. Rather, it
provides refuge managers with the flexibility to use these
practices when necessary to meet statutory requirements,
fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure ecological integrity.
We believe the proposal does not require brand new
processes for decision-making. Instead, it codifies and
standardizes the processes that many refuge managers already
follow in making management decisions. It also does not
supersede any of our other statutory obligations, including the
Improvement Act's many other directives.
Our BIDEH proposal is open for public comment through May
6, and we appreciate the strong public interest in the proposal
to date. In response to several requests for an extension of
the comment period, including from leadership of this
Committee, we extended the initial 30-day public comment period
by 60 days to ensure all interested parties have an opportunity
to share their feedback during this extended comment period. We
are also continuing to explore additional opportunities for
public engagement.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today. We appreciate your support for the refuge system, and
look forward to answering your questions about our BIDEH
proposal. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Guertin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy,
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior

Introduction

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy
at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) within the Department
of the Interior (Department). I appreciate the opportunity to testify
before you today on the Service's proposed Biological Integrity,
Diversity, and Environmental Health (BIDEH) regulations and policy
updates. For the purposes of this testimony, we will refer to the
management objective to ensure biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health as ``ecological integrity'' and the proposed
regulation and policy update as the ``BIDEH proposal.''
Ensuring ecological integrity on the National Wildlife Refuge
System (Refuge System) is a statutory mandate that has been a focus of
national wildlife refuge management for over 25 years. The Service's
BIDEH proposal provides updated approaches for refuge managers to meet
current challenges in maintaining ecological integrity on national
wildlife refuges. The proposal would support conservation throughout
the Refuge System by equipping refuge managers with tools to better
address the threats of climate change and biodiversity loss to fish,
wildlife, plants, and their habitats. This advances the Service's
mission to work with others to conserve, protect, and enhance fish,
wildlife, and plant populations and their habitats for the continuing
benefit of the American people.
Last month, Department and Service leadership visited the nation's
first wildlife refuge--Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge--to
commemorate the Refuge System's 121st birthday. To add to the
celebration of more than a century of conservation success, the
Department also announced a new addition to the Refuge System, the
Everglades to Gulf Conservation Area. The establishment of this new
wildlife refuge, the System's 571st unit, will catalyze conservation
within a 4.05-million-acre area in southwest Florida, one of the most
biodiverse regions in the world. Working hand-in-hand with willing
landowners, the Service will protect habitat for species like the
Florida panther, Everglade snail kite, Florida black bear, and more
than 100 threatened or endangered species.
Despite being in its infancy, the Everglades to Gulf Conservation
Area embodies all the qualities that make the Refuge System such a
special network of public lands. It was established, first and
foremost, to conserve fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats. It is
the product of years of collaboration between the Service and diverse
partners and stakeholders to address a shared conservation concern. It
will support local communities, who benefit from healthy fish and
wildlife populations, by providing opportunities for outdoor
recreation, stimulating local economies, and keeping working lands
working. Finally, it will contribute to broader efforts across the
landscape to protect wildlife corridors and enhance climate resilience
for wildlife and communities, amplifying its conservation impact.
This concept of individual refuges supporting healthy ecosystems at
both the local- and landscape-level is what the BIDEH proposal is all
about. The National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act (Improvement
Act), which was championed by stakeholders across the ideological
spectrum, and enacted by Congress with near unanimous support in 1997,
directed the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) to ``ensure that the
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health of the Refuge
System are maintained.'' This important management directive (BIDEH
mandate) has shaped the Service's administration of the Refuge System
over the past two decades, considered along with individual refuge
purposes and the Refuge System's broader mission.
At the same time, the threats facing the Refuge System have evolved
significantly over the past 20 years. National wildlife refuges are
experiencing the unavoidable negative effects of climate change while
continuing to face other stressors, such as invasive species and
disease. The evidence of these impacts can be seen at refuges in your
districts and across the country. These threats erode the Service's
ability to achieve the Refuge System's conservation mission.
Simultaneously, the Refuge System and the healthy ecosystems it
protects, are increasingly vital to addressing climate change,
biodiversity loss, and boosting climate resilience. By restoring and
conserving wildlife habitat across the country, the Refuge System
reduces vulnerability to coastal flooding, erosion, drought, and
catastrophic wildfire.
Supporting refuge managers in addressing these contemporary
conservation challenges requires modern tools and guidance. Updating
our implementation of the BIDEH mandate through new regulations and
policy revisions is one way that we are working to support conservation
throughout the Refuge System. The Service's BIDEH proposal will provide
a more consistent, science-based, and transparent approach for
upholding ecological integrity across the Refuge System. Through the
proposal, we seek to ensure that units of the Refuge System meet their
individual purposes and collective mission. This will ensure that
national wildlife refuges remain strongholds of biodiversity and
lynchpins to conserving America's wildlife heritage for future
generations.
Building the Refuge System

To understand the why the Service is updating its implementation of
the BIDEH mandate, it is important to understand why the Refuge System
was established and what forces over the past century have shaped it
into the system it is today.
This vast network of public lands and waters got its start on a
tiny spit of land in the brackish waters along Florida's Atlantic
coast, where, at the turn of the twentieth century, poaching was
driving steep declines in populations of pelicans, herons, egrets, and
other birds. The demand for feathers was so high that they were
reportedly worth more than gold. Concerned citizens, researchers, and
conservation organizations sought to address this conservation crisis
by advocating for the protection of Pelican Island--a five-acre
mangrove island that served as one of the last remaining breeding
grounds for brown pelicans on Florida's east coast.
Working together, these conservation advocates persuaded President
Theodore Roosevelt to take executive action designating Pelican Island
as a federal bird reservation in 1903. The protection of this tiny bird
reserve--a precursor to today's national wildlife refuge--marked the
first time that the federal government set aside land for the sake of
wildlife.
This idea of designating public lands as places where wildlife
comes first caught on, catalyzing the growth of similar wildlife
reserves across the country. By the end of his administration in 1909,
President Roosevelt had established more than 50 wildlife reserves.
Congress also took action to expand this loose network of protected
wildlife habitats.
Through the mid-1900s, this network of conservation lands continued
to grow as landmark conservation laws like the 1934 Migratory Bird
Hunting and Conservation Stamp Act, championed by hunters, and the Fish
and Wildlife Act of 1956 gave the Service the authority and funding to
acquire lands for national wildlife refuges. In response to growing
recreational pressures, the 1962 Refuge Recreation Act required that
any recreational use of a national wildlife refuge be compatible with
the primary conservation purpose for which the refuge was established.
In 1966, Congress took action to formally establish the Refuge
System. The National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966
(Administration Act) laid the groundwork for the Service's
administration of the Refuge System and recognized the need for
disparate wildlife refuges to be administered under a unified umbrella.
While the Administration Act provided an overarching framework for
management of the Refuge System, it failed to unify its units under a
single mission or provide clear guidance as to how the Refuge System
should be administered as a national conservation network.
In the decades to follow, this lack of clear guidance resulted in
the growth of major management challenges across the system. The
conservation purpose of many national wildlife refuges was compromised
as they came under increased pressures for uses that were incompatible
with wildlife conservation.
By the 1990s, activities that were incompatible with the wildlife
conservation purposes had become common across the Refuge System.
Various studies, reports, and lawsuits highlighted the widespread
growth of the incompatible uses on the Refuge System, with a 1989
Government Accountability Office Report finding that at least one
incompatible use was occurring on nearly 60 percent of the nation's
wildlife refuges. These reports emphasized that without stronger legal
mandates to shield national wildlife refuges from external pressures,
the integrity of the entire Refuge System was at risk.
In response to these challenges, a bipartisan coalition that
included Members of Congress, the executive branch, and conservation
and sportsmen's organizations worked together to draft and pass the
National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act--a visionary organic
charter for the Refuge System.
The Improvement Act dramatically reformed and built upon the
Administration Act. It established a statutory mission for the Refuge
System to ``administer a national network of lands and waters for the
conservation, management, and where appropriate, restoration of the
fish, wildlife, and plant resources within the United States for the
benefit of present and future generations of Americans.'' It directed
the Secretary, acting through the Service, to manage each refuge to
fulfill the mission of the system, as well as individual refuge
purposes. The Improvement Act also established a process for
determining compatible uses of national wildlife refuges; recognized
and gave priority to the ``big six'' wildlife-dependent recreational
uses including hunting, fishing, wildlife observation, photography,
environmental education, and interpretation; and provided guidance for
refuge planning and strategic growth of the Refuge System. Notably, it
also included directives for the Secretary's administration of the
Refuge System, including the BIDEH mandate.
Under the leadership of the late Congressman Don Young of Alaska
and Congressman John Dingell of Michigan, the Improvement Act passed
the House by a vote of 419-1 and the Senate by unanimous consent. It
was signed into law by President Clinton in 1997. Even today, nearly 30
years later, the Improvement Act remains one of the strongest
legislative charters for the guidance of nature reserves.
The Refuge System Today

The idea of designating public lands and waters where wildlife
comes first has resulted in the growth of what is now the largest and
most diverse network of conservation lands and waters in the world: the
Refuge System.
Since 1903, the Refuge System has grown to include 571 national
wildlife refuges, 38 wetland management districts, and 5 marine
national monuments, the latter of which the Service co-manages with the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Encompassing more than
96 million land acres and 760 million acres of ocean and submerged
land, the Refuge System spans 12 time zones as it stretches from the
U.S. Virgin Islands to Guam, with at least one unit in every U.S. state
and territory.
This vast network of public lands and waters is home to more than
800 species of birds, 220 species of mammals, 250 species of reptiles
and amphibians, and 1,100 species of fish, supporting incredible
biodiversity. The Refuge System's protected landscapes are especially
important for imperiled species. National wildlife refuges are home to
more than 380 threatened and endangered species, some of which cannot
be found anywhere else in the world.
We need look no further than our own backyards to appreciate the
incredible array of species and landscapes that the Refuge System
protects. The Hart Mountain National Antelope Refuge in Oregon, which
was established to protect the pronghorn antelope, conserves extensive
sagebrush habitats and is home to iconic species like the pronghorn,
bighorn sheep, and greater sage-grouse. Just a stone's throw away, the
Humboldt Bay National Wildlife Refuge in northern California protects a
mosaic of mudflats, eelgrass beds, salt marsh, and other habitats. This
diverse, connected landscape provides vital habitat to hundreds of
species of shorebirds, mammals, fish, and marine invertebrates. Across
the country, Virginia's Chincoteague National Wildlife Refuge has been
designated a Globally Important Bird Area for the variety of migratory
waterfowl, shorebirds, and other birds it supports.
It's not only fish and wildlife that seek refuge in these special
places: so too do people. With more than 100 wildlife refuges within an
hour's drive of major cities, the Refuge System provides access to
nature for the more than 80 percent of Americans who live in and around
cities. For those looking to hunt, fish, hike, bird, or simply enjoy
the solitude of nature, the Refuge System provides abundant, high-
quality opportunities for all Americans to get outside. National
wildlife refuges also play an important role in supporting local
communities. It is estimated that annual visits to the Refuge System
generate more than $3.2 billion for local economies and support 41,000
jobs. Further, by protecting and restoring wildlife habitat, national
wildlife refuges help protect coastal communities from storms, reduce
wildfire risk, improve air and water quality, protect cultural
resources, and more.
The bottom line: protecting public lands and waters where fish and
wildlife can thrive helps people thrive too.
Addressing Conservation Threats

As the scale of the Refuge System has evolved over the past
century, so too have the threats facing our nation's fish and wildlife.
Climate change poses a profound and growing threat to America's
fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats. Climate change impacts,
including increasing land and water temperatures, rising seas,
increasingly frequent and severe storms, catastrophic wildfires, and
extended droughts, are occurring more often, and causing more damage
than any time in recorded human history. These impacts are driving
transformational changes in ecosystems, impacting when and where food,
water, and shelter are available to wildlife. Plants and animals vary
in their ability to respond to these impacts, with many already facing
increased risk of extinction as ecosystems change faster than species
can adapt.
Over the past few decades, national wildlife refuges have begun to
experience the effects of climate change while also continuing to
contend with other stressors like habitat loss, disease, and invasive
species. At Kenai National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska, warmer and drier
conditions have brought more beetle infestation and fire disturbance to
spruce forests, which can no longer regenerate. A savannah grassland is
replacing these forests, altering the region's historic ecosystem. At
Colorado's Arapaho National Wildlife Refuge, small mammals like the
pika are moving higher and higher up the mountains to beat the heat.
Rising seas are eroding important nesting habitat for the endangered
loggerhead sea turtle at Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge in South
Carolina and for nesting birds at Breton National Wildlife Refuge in
Louisiana.
Taken together, these stressors are driving major losses in
biodiversity and making it harder for the Refuge System to achieve its
conservation mission. At the same time, the Refuge System is becoming
an integral component for addressing those very threats. As fish,
wildlife, and plant populations shift to contend with the climate
change and other stressors, the Refuge System's healthy, interconnected
ecosystems are vital for building and supporting species resilience.
Addressing these contemporary challenges and seizing on the
opportunity to increase the resilience of wildlife and ecosystems to
conservation threats requires a modern approach.
Over the past decade, the Refuge System's responsibilities have
grown, reflecting the importance of these public lands and their unique
conservation mission to Americans. The Refuge System has added multiple
new refuge units, millions of acres of marine national monuments, and
new initiatives like the Urban Wildlife Conservation Program.
Visitation to national wildlife refuges has grown almost 47 percent
since Fiscal Year (FY) 2011, with the Refuge System hosting a record-
breaking 68 million visits in FY 2023.
At the same time, funding to support the Service's stewardship of
these important conservation lands and the services that they provide
for the public has lagged. When adjusted for inflation, annual budgets
coupled with rising fixed costs have resulted in a dramatic decrease in
the Refuge System's operational capacity. This erosion of human
capacity greatly reduces the Refuge System's ability to achieve its
conservation mission at a time when conserving and restoring America's
fish, wildlife, and plant resources is more important than ever. The
Service's FY 2025 budget request includes $602.3 million in funding for
the Refuge System, which would help rebuild capacity to conserve
species and habitats and to connect visitors with nature.
Another way that the Service seeks to address modern-day
conservation challenges and opportunities is to equip refuge managers
with improved tools and guidance for achieving the Refuge System's
conservation mission in a changing world. The Service's BIDEH proposal
is one such tool.

BIDEH

Over the course of the Refuge System's history, Congress has given
the Service many tools to respond to the conservation challenges of the
moment. The BIDEH mandate is perhaps the most innovative of these
tools.
The BIDEH mandate borrows key terminology from conservation biology
and emphasizes the need for the Service to consider how best to
maintain the ecological integrity of the Refuge System in administering
its individual units. This includes protecting the broad array of fish,
wildlife, and habitat resources found on refuges and associated
ecosystems. It brings a management focus to maintaining biodiversity
across multiple scales and recognizes the need to identify and develop
comprehensive strategies to address threats. The BIDEH mandate also
demonstrates clear congressional intent that the Service should apply
the latest science to maintain the ecological integrity of individual
refuges and the System. The inclusion of this ecological mandate
remains one of the most unique and distinctive features of the
Improvement Act.
In 2001, the Service issued a policy (601 FW 3) that provided
internal direction for agency implementation of the BIDEH mandate. The
policy defined key terms and described the relationship between
individual refuge purposes, the Refuge System mission, and maintaining
ecological integrity. It provided refuge managers with guidance for
maintaining existing levels of ecological integrity and determining
when and how to restore ecological integrity, as well as guidance for
addressing external threats to refuge ecosystems.
When we adopted this policy in 2001, we did not anticipate the
extent of climate change impacts on national wildlife refuge ecosystems
or the need to clarify in regulation our interpretation of, and
authority to implement, the BIDEH mandate. More than two decades later,
we have a need to provide guidance that assists refuge managers in
better addressing these threats through the improved implementation of
the BIDEH mandate.
BIDEH Proposal

On February 2, 2024, the Service published a proposal in the
Federal Register to revise the existing BIDEH policy and implement a
new rule that continues to guide the management of national wildlife
refuges to maintain ecological integrity, as envisioned by Congress
almost three decades ago. The BIDEH proposal codifies and standardizes
the processes that many refuge managers already follow in making
management decisions related to ecological integrity, and it provides
critical clarification for balancing the many existing considerations
and legal requirements affecting refuges.
With this proposal, the Service seeks to provide a more consistent,
transparent, and science-based approach for upholding ecological
integrity at individual refuges and across the Refuge System. We seek
to codify our continued commitment to managing refuge ecosystems as
components of larger landscapes and seascapes, particularly in the face
of a changing climate. We also seek to emphasize that managing the
Refuge System through a landscape-scale lens necessitates strong
collaboration and coordination with partners and stakeholders at all
levels. This proposal does not depart from managing refuges to achieve
their individual conservation purposes; rather, it reinforces our
commitment to protecting and enhancing biodiversity to support
individual refuge purposes and the system's broader mission.
Our BIDEH proposal endeavors to achieve these goals by providing
refuge managers with a framework that they can use to evaluate and
implement management actions to connect habitats, protect vulnerable
and migratory species, sustain ecological functions, increase
resilience, incorporate Indigenous knowledge, and adapt to climate
change. The updated policy and new regulations accomplish these
objectives in several ways.
Regulatory Standard
The BIDEH proposal provides, for the first time, a clear regulatory
standard directing refuge managers to ensure ecological integrity. This
proposed standard promotes management of the Refuge System as an
ecologically interconnected network of lands and waters, supporting the
Refuge System mission and individual refuge purposes. The proposal
empowers refuge managers to holistically conserve refuge ecosystems;
promote natural processes; and address the contemporary threats of
climate change and other stressors.
It also instructs refuge managers to use their professional
judgment and the best available science to ensure that management
actions benefit wildlife conservation by contributing to ecological
integrity. This mandate reinforces the importance of using the latest
science to inform refuge management, with the intent of bolstering
science-based management actions to combat climate change and
biodiversity loss and promote ecological integrity.
Definitions
Both the proposed regulations and policy revisions include updated
definitions for ``biological integrity'', ``diversity'', and
``environmental health'' that reflect the climate reality facing
national wildlife refuges. In the 2001 BIDEH policy, the definitions
for ``biological integrity'' and ``environmental health'' both
reference ``historic conditions.'' Under that policy, historic
conditions serve as a benchmark for maintaining and restoring
ecological integrity, guiding refuge managers to tailor management
activities on refuges to meet that historic condition.
While the new BIDEH proposal acknowledges the importance of
historic conditions as a reference point, the revised definitions for
each of these three key terms explicitly recognize the impacts of
climate change and other stressors on refuge ecosystems. This change
acknowledges that in many cases, sustaining historic conditions to
maintain ecological integrity on national wildlife refuges may no
longer be possible.
Management Directives
The proposal also features several key management directives for
maintaining ecological integrity across the Refuge System, providing a
framework through which refuge managers can determine and implement
management actions in a consistent way to meet refuge purposes, ensure
ecological integrity, and fulfill the Refuge System mission. These
directives are based on five key principles for managing refuges and
ecosystems and they emphasize the key themes of addressing climate
change, using the best available science, and empowering refuge
managers:

1.  The proposed regulations empower refuge managers to address
climate change impacts on wildlife and habitats using
climate mitigation and adaptation strategies. This
directive provides refuge managers with the flexibility to
use different strategies to address climate impacts on
species and habitats at their individual refuge that meet
the proposed regulatory standard.

2.  The proposed regulations direct refuge managers to conserve and
connect habitats, emphasizing the importance of maintaining
ecological connectivity to support biodiversity. In doing
so, this directive prioritizes the use of natural processes
to meet refuge habitat management and planning goals, but
recognizes that in some cases, other strategies may be
necessary to meet these goals.

3.  The proposed regulations codify the Service's ability to
supplement natural processes to achieve wildlife management
goals when habitat conditions and natural processes are
insufficient. While the proposal prioritizes the use of
natural processes to manage wildlife populations, this
directive and the accompanying policy update clearly
provide refuge managers with the flexibility to use
additional management tools to meet conservation goals.

4.  The proposed regulations integrate another mandate of the
Improvement Act, one that can be a key component to
ensuring the ecological integrity of some refuges: that the
Service uphold and, where necessary, acquire water rights,
in accordance with all relevant local, state, and federal
laws. The inclusion of this directive in the BIDEH proposal
emphasizes the importance of exercising refuge water
rights, in accordance with federal and state water laws, to
meet refuge purposes and uphold ecological integrity.
Securing water resources for wildlife refuges is especially
important today, as climate change drives changes in water
availability for wildlife.

5.  The proposed regulations direct refuge managers to promote and
maintain healthy soil, air, and water, recognizing the
fundamental importance of non-living components of an
ecosystem.

Impacts to Certain Management Activities
The BIDEH proposal also provides guidance for certain management
activities and uses that have a particular propensity to affect
ecological integrity. Specifically, the proposal addresses agricultural
uses, predator control, conservation translocations, use of genetically
engineered organisms (GEOs), invasive species management, pesticide
use, and mosquito control.
We have heard concerns about this section of the proposal,
including from Members of Congress. We recognize that some of our
partners and stakeholders are concerned about how the guidance we
provide for these management practices could limit public uses of the
Refuge System. It is important to emphasize that this proposed rule
does not supersede any of our other statutory obligations under the
Improvement Act related to public uses and coordination with partners.
The proposal does not supersede the Improvement Act's requirement
that the Service provide opportunities for wildlife-dependent
recreational uses of the Refuge System. Hunting, fishing, wildlife
observation, photography, environmental education, and interpretation
remain the priority public uses of the Refuge System, and this proposal
would not reduce opportunities for those uses.
The proposal does not supersede the requirements that the Service
cooperate and collaborate with Federal agencies and State fish and
wildlife agencies in managing national wildlife refuges, nor does it
undermine the requirement that the Service coordinate with adjacent
landowners.
The proposal does not alter the Improvement Act's statutory
construct with respect to Alaska, which defers to the Alaska National
Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) in times of conflict between
the two laws.
Further, the proposal does not ban the use of any of the management
practices discussed above on national wildlife refuges. As we state
throughout the BIDEH proposal, we recognize that relying on natural
processes alone may not always be sufficient to address the challenges
facing national wildlife refuges. In some cases, refuge managers may
deem it necessary to use tools like cooperative agriculture or native
predator control to fulfill refuge purposes, meet the Refuge System's
mission, and ensure ecological integrity. We appreciate that each
refuge is different and recognize that the judicious application of
each of these management tools can, in certain cases, reap benefits for
wildlife and refuge neighbors and visitors.
However, given the threats facing refuge ecosystems and the
potential for these management activities to further impact those
ecosystems, it is important to provide increased clarity and guidance
for when, why, and how we apply these management practices. In all
cases, we seek to emphasize the importance of using the best available
science to inform decision-making and to ensure that ecological
integrity remains a key consideration, along with individual refuge
purposes, in making management decisions.
The core tenets of this guidance are not new. The proposal requires
that these management activities are implemented consistent with the
proposed management directives, meaning that they are subject to the
principle that the Service defers to natural processes and favors
management that mimics natural processes. This requirement is
consistent with existing Service policy on Cooperative Agriculture and
other refuge policies. For instance, the Service's policy on
Cooperative Agricultural Use (620 FW 2) states that cooperative
agriculture is only used as a habitat management tool where wildlife
refuges cannot meet management objectives through natural processes.
Although we direct a default position for each of these management
practices, these positions are largely consistent with existing Service
policies and with the Refuge System's approach to permitting uses of
national wildlife refuges. The regulatory standard provides refuge
managers significant flexibility to implement these management
activities as conservation tools on their refuge on a case-by-case
basis, in accordance with the best available science. This flexibility
will be increasingly important to support climate resilience in our
land management practices.
The proposal also reiterates existing requirements to evaluate the
necessity for and potential impacts of these proposed management
activities on ecological integrity, in accordance with the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Refuge managers already conduct NEPA,
compatibility determinations, and refuge planning when deciding which
management tools to use, and they should already be incorporating
ecological integrity considerations into those procedures. This
proposal does not change those processes or require a brand-new process
for decision-making.
Ultimately, we believe that standardizing and clarifying the
existing processes that refuge managers are required to follow in
making decisions regarding best management practices and their
influence on ecological integrity, will decrease workload, provide
consistency, improve transparency to the public, and facilitate
science-based decision-making.
Coordination with Partners and Stakeholders
Finally, the proposal emphasizes the need to collaborate with State
and Tribal partners, adjacent landowners, and other stakeholders to
ensure ecological integrity. National wildlife refuges are part of a
larger tapestry of lands and waters, and achieving landscape-scale
conservation necessitates close partnerships and coordination with
partners and stakeholders. This proposal underscores our commitment to
cooperate and coordinate with States, Tribes, and private landowners,
all of whom are critical partners in our shared efforts to secure our
nation's wildlife heritage.
Next Steps
The Service's BIDEH proposal is available for public comment
through May 6, 2024, and we appreciate the robust public engagement in
the proposal to date. The public comment period provides an important
forum for the Service to solicit feedback from our partners,
stakeholders, and the public on our proposed actions, and we are
actively working to ensure that all interested parties have an
opportunity to share their feedback on this important proposal.
In response to several requests for an extension of the public
comment period, including from members of this Committee, the Service
extended the initial 30-day public comment period by 60 days. During
this extended public comment period, we are continuing to explore
additional opportunities to share information and answer questions
about the proposal with any interested parties, including Tribes,
States, sportspeople's organizations, and conservation organizations.
We look forward to reviewing all comments once the comment period
closes and using that input to guide our path forward.
Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, the Service appreciates the subcommittee holding this
oversight hearing and your interest in the Refuge System. We look
forward to continuing to work with you to achieve the Refuge System's
mission and secure a future that is prosperous for fish and wildlife
for the continuing benefit of the American people who we serve. Thank
you again for the opportunity to appear before you today, and I would
be happy to respond to any questions that you or other Members of the
Subcommittee may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Deputy Director Guertin, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service

Mr. Guertin did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. Mr. Guertin: In your testimony, you indicated that none
of the activities, including agriculture and predator control, that are
occurring now would end under the proposed BIDEH rule. Basically,
nothing will change. That is encouraging. Can the Service commit that
all of those activities that are not at risk now, will also continue to
be allowed at those refuges into the future under the ``new lens'' that
you referenced in response to the Committee's questions? In other
words, if agriculture, predator control, and trapping are happening
now, will those activities still be occurring under this proposed rule
5 or 10 years down the road?

Question 2. Mr. Guertin: Your testimony on behalf of the Service
suggested that nothing will change under this BIDEH rule. If that is in
fact true, and it is simply business as usual, why is the Service
advancing this rule that has generated such significant concern from
your most strident conservation partners and advocates, and on the flip
side, generated praise from a number of organizations that openly
oppose predator management, GMOs, and active habitat management?

Question 3. Mr. Guertin: With this rule, the Service is attempting
to manage refuges to an established baseline of ``historic
conditions''--an entirely subjective term--which in this case
references conditions ``prior to substantial anthropogenic change.''

3a) How far back into history will the Service be looking to
establish this baseline?

3b) What constitutes a substantial anthropogenic change?

3c) What will the new historic baseline condition be to evaluate
change on the refuges?

Question 4. Mr. Guertin: In the Service's opinion who has the
primary management responsibility for fish and wildlife species that
have not been placed under federal protection? Would the Service take
actions to moderate methods or means of take on refuges if the federal
government decides that state regulations related to hunting or
trapping threaten BIDEH?

Question 5. Mr. Guertin: The Service's definition of predator
control--``actions or programs with the intent or potential to alter
predator-prey population dynamics on a refuge by reducing a population
of native predators through lethal or nonlethal methods . . .''--
appears to describe the very essence of species management. What are
some of the specific activities that the Service would restrict?

Question 6. Mr. Guertin: According to your testimony, ``In some
cases, refuge managers may deem it necessary to use tools like
cooperative agriculture or native predator control to fulfill refuge
purposes, meet the Refuge System's mission, and ensure ecological
integrity.'' Does the Service believe that these tools are currently
being used in cases where they are not necessary? ``For instance, the
Service's policy on Cooperative Agricultural Use (620 FW 2) states that
cooperative agriculture is only used as a habitat management tool where
wildlife refuges cannot meet management objectives through natural
processes.'' So why does the Service, in this rule, feel the need to
explicitly prohibit these practices unless conditions are met?

Question 7. Mr. Guertin: how many biologists does each refuge have?
Does every refuge have a biologist? How many refuges do not have a
biologist on staff? I've heard countless times that the Service is a
science driven agency, so given the paucity of biologists within each
refuge, how can the refuge system possibly implement the BIDEH policy?

Question 8. Mr. Guertin, what partners or specific individuals were
consulted--in the Director's office, Assistant Director of Refuge's
office, and staff who drafted--in the thought process and ultimate
development of the draft rule and proposed refuge manual chapter
changes?

Question 9. Mr. Guertin, as you know, a number of refuges were
purchased in large part with federal duck stamp revenue. Were leading
waterfowl hunting organizations consulted in the development of this
proposal?

Question 10. Regulations often take the form of ``prohibited unless
allowed'' or ``allowed unless prohibited''. That is a choice every
administration and agency make; the former sends a strong message that
an activity is viewed unfavorably and thus that activity requires more
justification. Would you say that agriculture and farming are widely
accepted and valuable practice and livelihood? Would you also agree
that cooperative farming is a valuable wildlife management tool that
has been practiced successfully for over a century in this country?
Assuming you agree with both of these sentiments, why then would you
draft a rule that prohibits such a widely utilized and effect tool,
requiring refuge managers to expend the extra effort and time to
justify it? You are sending a clear message to your staff with this
rule when you state that certain activities are prohibited.

Questions Submitted by Representative Carl

Question 1. Mr. Guertin are you familiar with the US Fish and
Wildlife Service Programmatic Environmental Assessment, that was
published in 2020, for use of genetically engineered agricultural crops
for natural resource management on national wildlife refuges in the
southeastern United States? How does the Fish and Wildlife Service
reconcile the ultimate finding of the EA, along with the countless
scientific citations used to support said findings, that GECs are a
helpful management tool in refuges, with the direction the Service is
trying to take the refuge system a mere four years later?

Link here: https://ecos.fws.gov/ServCat/downloadfile/171732

Questions Submitted by Representative Kustoff

Question 1. We have heard from countless conservation groups, the
farming community, refuge managers and the states, that they do not
support this rule as drafted. Who exactly is advocating for this rule
and why have you decided to choose their interests over those partners
in conservation that have long stood beside the refuges in support of
collaborative, active conservation?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. And it is my pleasure to recognize
Mr. Staunton from my district.
I am happy you are here, and you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARC STAUNTON, OWNER, STAUNTON FARMS, MALIN,
OREGON

Mr. Staunton. Full Committee Chair Westerman, Chairman
Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for convening this critical hearing and allowing me
to present my testimony.
My name is Marc Staunton. I am a fourth-generation farmer
from the Klamath Basin, specifically residing near Malin,
Oregon. My family has been involved in the Klamath Reclamation
Project since 1929, cultivating a diverse array of crops
including potatoes, onions, garlic, small grains, and alfalfa
hay. Additionally, I serve as the President of the Board of
Directors of the Klamath Project Drought Response Agency, on
the Board of Directors of the Water Users Association, and the
Klamath County School Board.
My focus today centers on the apprehensions regarding the
negative consequences of the proposed rule and policy update
regarding the National Wildlife System biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health, as published by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service on February 2, 2024, commonly
referred to as the BIDEH rule.
I strongly believe that done correctly, conservation and
agriculture go hand in hand, and that belief is based on life
experiences that follow.
In the late 1990s through the 2000s, leased land farming
was under continuous attack by environmental groups wanting to
remove agricultural activities from the refuge complex. To
create more durable and productive wildlife habitat, an idea to
return farming units back to the natural wetlands for a period
was developed by local university staff, the Tule Lake Refuge
Team, and innovative farmers, members of my family
specifically, who were willing to try new concepts.
After 2 years of flooding, the wetland was drained and the
farming began to cultivate the soil for crop production. There
was noticeable improvements in soil tilth and overall health.
Testing conducted by the university had shown that the multi-
year wetlands had significantly decreased the populations of
nematode in the field.
Additionally, other soil-borne diseases detrimental to crop
production, such as alien white rot or potato verticillium
wilt, had been greatly reduced.
The practice of walking wetland had become a cornerstone of
our family's business strategy, particularly in producing and
packing premium organic and conventional potatoes from the
leased lands. This approach involved a rotation between natural
wetlands and working lands, which we continue whenever
possible. Recognizing the value of this method, we expanded our
rotation onto hundreds of acres of private land near Tule Lake
Refuge Complex.
We have managed to compete against much larger businesses
by prioritizing the development of production processes that
are genuinely sustainable, measurable, and repeatable. This
strategy has provided us with distinct advantages in delivering
truly healthy produce to our customers. More recently, we have
begun exploring multi-species management as a means to ensure
more consistent water availability for our walking wetlands.
The current draft of the BIDEH rule may have numerous
unforeseen and negative consequences, both today and in the
future. Elimination of agriculture on refuge lands in our basin
would severely impact local government, irrigation districts,
communities, and farm balance sheets. Even though the Kuchel
Act authorizes agriculture in the Klamath Refuge System, the
vague nature of the BIDEH language opens the door for legal and
judicial interpretation.
Moreover, the proposed rule undermines the principles of
local control and inhibits innovation by enforcing top-down
mandates that neglect regional nuances and challenges. By
coming from a place of ``no, unless,'' the rule impedes the
ingenuity of creative minds and the experience of agriculture
as a purpose within the ecosystem.
Agriculture has and will continue to play a critical role
in the idea, adoption, and implementation of projects that meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purpose, and ensure
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health. The
heavy hand of government and looming threat of more litigation
will not create a healthier, holistic ecosystem for our refuge.
We are a community of local people embracing our role in
the ecosystem, understanding the distinct challenges, and
developing the solutions as unique as our landscape. That is a
working lands approach, and that is what I believe will
continue to bring real, lasting benefits to our refuge, our
wildlife, our food supply, our community, and our country.
Thank you for your attention, and I am available for any
questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Staunton follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marc Staunton, Staunton Farms

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for this important hearing and for allowing me
the honor of testifying before this Subcommittee. My testimony today
focuses on my concerns about negative impacts of the Proposed Rule and
Policy Updates Regarding National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological
Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health published by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) on February 2, 2024 (Proposed BIDEH
Rule).
My Background

My name is Marc Staunton. I am a fourth generation Klamath Basin
farmer. More specifically, since 1928, my family has lived on and
farmed land served by the Klamath Reclamation Project (Project), a U.S.
Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) project authorized in 1905. My wife
and I and our four children live in Klamath County, Oregon, near the
town of Malin, close to the Oregon-California border. I am the
President of the Board of Directors of the Klamath Project Drought
Response Agency, an intergovernmental agency that designs and
administers programs to align water supply and demand in the Project
area, and a board alternate member of the Klamath Water Users
Association (KWUA). I am also the current Chair of the Klamath County
School Board.
After receiving my bachelor's degree in business marketing from
Azusa Pacific University, and following my great-grandfather's career
path, I settled back into our farming operation with my grandfather,
two uncles, and my father. Since then, our family has worked to
transition the business toward the future. Currently, my uncle, three
other family members, and I make up the farming partnership that
oversees and manages Staunton Farms. We grow a wide variety of
potatoes, onions, garlic, small grains, and alfalfa hay, and have
produced other crops through time. I was raised outside Tulelake,
California, near the property homesteaded by my great-grandfather and
great-grandmother. We continue to farm that land, and other property
that we either own or lease.
Historic and Current Agricultural Operations on Project Refuges

Land that we lease includes some of the so-called ``lease lands''
located in Tule Lake National Wildlife Refuge (NWR). This land is also
within Tulelake Irrigation District (TID) and part of the Project. The
lease lands are ancient lake bottom, covered in a natural wetland
habitat and duck manure, resulting in extremely high-quality,
productive farm ground. My perspective regarding farming on national
wildlife refuge land is based on this experience, but I believe my
experience and our operation have much in common with farming on other
refuges across the country.
The Project lease lands occupy land that was ceded to the United
States for purposes of reclamation through irrigation legislation
enacted by California and Oregon in 1905. Over time, land was reclaimed
and developed for irrigation. Reclaimed land was initially leased to
producers as the irrigation infrastructure was developed. The next step
was that the land would be opened to homesteading under public land
laws. Preferences in the homesteading program were given to veterans of
World Wars I and II. My great-grandfather, Edward Staunton, was one of
these homesteaders.
In the 1950s and early 1960s, there was a public policy debate over
whether then-remaining leased lands would be opened for homesteading
versus continuing to be leased. This was resolved in the Kuchel Act,
which disallowed further homesteading while providing for continued
leasing of these reclaimed lands for commercial agriculture.
The lease land program today is operated by Reclamation, with
administrative control remaining with USFWS. Generally speaking, the
leasing of these lands for commercial farming is based on a bidding
process, where farmers bid for a parcel consisting of individual units
in sealed bids. Leases are awarded based on the highest offer per acre.
A lessee receives a one-year lease with the right to renew for four
additional years, making for a maximum five-year term. However, in
recent years, the right to renew may be longer; for example, when a
grower is operating with organic certification.
The Upper Klamath Basin is the most important migratory area for
waterfowl in North America. The Klamath Basin represents the bottleneck
through which the entire Pacific Flyway must pass. Birds from Alaska,
the Yukon, the Canadian Prairies, and Boreal Forest all filter down
through the Klamath Basin and then disperse south to the Pacific Ocean,
Mexico, and U.S. Southwest, only to return the following spring, headed
back north. Eighty percent of the waterfowl in the Pacific Flyway have
historically used the Klamath Basin at some point during their annual
migrations.
Moreover, nine-tenths of the waterfowl that travel through the
Klamath Basin concentrate on Tule Lake and Lower Klamath NWRs, the two
principal wildlife refuges in the Refuge Complex, some of which have
also historically been farmed, while most is reserved for year-round
waterfowl habitat and storage. Established by executive orders in 1908
and 1928, respectively, and later confirmed in the Kuchel Act, the
Refuges are reserved for the ``major purpose of waterfowl management,
but with full consideration to optimum agricultural use that is
consistent therewith.'' The Kuchel Act limits the acreage of row crops
produced on the Project. Traditional lease land farming in the Tule
Lake NWR would consist of a maximum allotment of 33 percent of a farm
unit be in ``row crop'' and 66 percent in grains. No matter how large
or small a farm operation is, the ratio of grain to row crop cannot
increase above that threshold. Even with Kuchel Act management
throughout the 1990s, lease land farmers were under continuous attack
by environmental groups wanting to remove agricultural activities from
the Refuge Complex. To create more durable and productive wildlife
habitat and to deal with the spread of nematode populations along
USFWS-operated cooperative farming units, an idea to return farm units
back to natural wetlands for a period of time was developed by local
university staff, the Tule Lake Refuge team, and innovative farmers--
and members of my family specifically--who were willing to try new
concepts. After two years of flooding, the wetland was drained and the
farmer began to cultivate the soil for crop production. Testing done by
the university revealed the multiyear wetland had dramatically reduced
the populations of nematode in the field. Along with that, other soil
diseases harmful to crop production had also been radically reduced as
well as dramatically improving soil tilth and health.
This practice is known as ``walking wetlands'' and we actively
continue that practice where possible, and subject to water
availability. I have also pursued walking wetlands on private land, and
overall walking wetlands have gained notoriety outside the Project and
the Klamath Basin. More broadly, lease land farming has been a model of
innovative farm management and operations in partnership with wildlife
that provides lessons for other areas.
In 2008, in recognition of the growing competing needs for water in
the Klamath Basin, refuge managers partnered with Ducks Unlimited to
come up with a strategic, biologically-sound, scientific approach to
meeting refuge purposes. That 2008 plan--as further reconfirmed in the
refuges' 2016 Comprehensive Conservation Plan or CCP--is based on the
fundamental premise that food--not habitat--is the limiting resource
for migrating ducks, geese, swans, and other waterfowl. To achieve the
goals identified in that plan, there was a need for more food
associated with both wetlands and farmed areas within the refuge. As
refuge managers quickly recognized, farmers were the answer to both
these problems.
Through the period of 2006 to 2016, the walking wetlands program
and flooding continued with tremendous sustainability, repeatedly
resulting in suppressed populations of soil pathogens to crops,
enhanced soil fertility and tilth, reduced farming inputs, and boosted
quantity and quality of yields. For the refuge, continual rotation of
wetlands and cropland provided vibrant healthy habitat which supported
90 percent of some waterborne species total refuge populations but
impacting only 4 percent of total refuge wetlands.
Recently, the walking wetlands program has experienced major
setbacks due to extremely low water deliveries to TID, but when water
delivery has been allowed, we continue to see the same positive
outcomes. The value continues to be reflected in the approximate
doubling of lease revenues which followed flooding cycles in the
commercial lease lands. According to the USFWS's website, as of 2007,
21 percent of Tule Lake NWR agricultural lease lands had undergone a
wetland cycle. These lands accounted for 37 percent of the total lease
revenues to the government.
A similar situation occurred on portions of the refuges that were
then being farmed by refuge staff--that is, lands outside the 22,000
acres reserved for leasing under the Kuchel Act. Despite intentionally
being managed for agricultural purposes to grow food for birds, these
areas were not producing enough of that food to meet refuge objectives.
Plantings of barley and other grains often failed to mature or produced
low yields.
To make sure these lands grew the food necessary to support the
flyway, refuge management started entering into cooperative agreements,
whereby a farmer provides all the seed, fertilizer, equipment, fuel,
and labor in exchange for access to the land. The farmer is allowed to
harvest three-quarters of the crop, the remaining one-fourth being left
standing in the field for the benefit of wildlife. Not only has crop
rotation, modern equipment, and access to market made a huge impact of
bioenergetics but more so, the expertise of legitimate farmers who have
a good understanding of raising crops has dramatically improved the
volume of feed available to wildlife. To illustrate, in 2023, Staunton
Farms left unharvested 123 acres of organic barley and 190 acres of
organic cereal rye as part of our cooperative lease is USFWS. Taking
the approximate 2.5 ton per acre yield we recorded on the harvested
portions of those fields, the crop that was left equates to just over
1,500,000 pounds of grain left wholly for bird food and habitat, solely
from a small portion of ours and neighbors' waste grain in the basin.
This is another win-win solution that helped federal managers meet
the refuges' authorized purposes.
My Family's Experience on the Refuge

I strongly believe that, done correctly, conservation and
agriculture go hand in hand, and that belief is based on life
experience. For example, it always fascinates me to watch as a freshly
harvested field of potatoes is flooded. Waterfowl glean the nutrient-
dense crops left behind by the harvester, and the leftover nutrients in
the soil help stimulate the growth of native tule plants resulting in
the potato field becoming a vibrate wetland in less than a year. Any
time that our goal of feeding 330 million Americans has a symbiotic
relationship with the local ecosystem, I believe we are headed in the
right direction.
And, for my family and others, lease land farming is an integral
part of our overall business and farm planning. It has provided an
opportunity for new farmers to pick up their first field, business
ventures to expand when markets require, and in our case build a
customer base that relies on the extremely high-quality products the
lease land soil grows.
In addition, as mentioned above, for our family, the practice of
walking wetlands has also become an integral part of our business
strategy of producing and packaging premium organic potatoes on lease
lands. We felt there was so much value in this approach of natural
wetland and working land rotation that we developed hundreds of acres
of private land off the Tule Lake Refuge Complex within Tule Lake Basin
to expand this rotation. We were able to compete with much larger, low-
cost producers because of our undeniable quality and market
performance. Furthermore, it was important to us to focus on production
that was truly sustainable, measurable, and repeatable and felt it gave
us an edge in delivering truly healthy produce to our customers.
Our farming community has experienced the benefit and satisfaction
of farming these uniquely situated lands, but we have also experienced
many difficulties along the way. Multiple legal challenges, intense
pesticide scrutiny, and operational changes have made it not for the
faint of heart to continue to invest in leasing this land.
Additionally, producers in the Klamath Basin annually contribute
uncalculated economic value in the form of losses of production to the
wildlife of the Pacific Flyway who cannot see the lines between private
land and refuge lands; the birds feed and reside in all lands of the
basin, whether publicly or privately owned. The grains, alfalfa, and
crops and habitat that contribute to migratory bird feed and rest is a
major continuation to the success of the flyway.
The Proposed Rule as Drafted Is Unworkable

This brings me to the potential crippling effect of the Proposed
BIDEH Rule if it is implemented as proposed. At the outset of this part
of the discussion, I will note that I am aware of the comment letter
dated April 4, 2024, submitted to USFWS by TID, KWUA, and Klamath
Drainage District on the Proposed BIDEH Rule (KWUA Letter). The KWUA
Letter discusses the history and regulatory structure related to the
lease lands. I understand that the KWUA Letter has been offered for the
record of this hearing and refer you to the KWUA Letter for more detail
on the issues it discusses.
The Proposed BIDEH Rule states: ``We prohibit the use of
agricultural practices unless they are determined necessary to meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health, and where we cannot
achieve refuge management objectives through natural processes.'' There
is a similar limitation for use of chemical pest controls.
I am very concerned about the impacts of this rule on our refuge
lease lands. If agricultural use were prohibited on lease lands, there
would be very major negative impacts on my family, my community, and
the environment. The KWUA Letter refers to the $30 million in crop
value provided on Project lease lands and hundreds of jobs that are
supported. The economic multiplier for agricultural crop value
identified by Oregon State University is approximately two (dollars for
each dollar of crop value). A more concerning economic factor would be
the dramatic alteration of competitive private land in the basin.
Eliminating 22,000 acres of current crop production would advance the
all-to-common threat of consolidation to small or beginning farmers who
have difficulty competing for access to land.
There would also be new costs for the federal government. TID's
contract with Reclamation provides for diversion and delivery of water
to the lease lands and requires Reclamation to pay for the cost of
irrigation water delivery and drainage. Currently, in the lease
contracts, Reclamation passes these costs through to lease land
growers. Also, lease land growers pay rent, known as ``lease
revenues,'' to the government. The more valuable the lease lands are
for farming, the higher the amount of lease revenues farmers are
willing to pay. Net lease revenues (gross lease revenues less the cost
of administering the leasing program) provide money for various
purposes. TID is entitled to 10 percent of net lease revenues. Counties
are entitled to up to 25 percent of net lease revenues. The remaining
net lease revenues go to the federal treasury and are accounted for in
the Reclamation Fund. If the value of lease lands for farming is
diminished or eliminated, there would be a reduction in the number of
payments to all of these current recipients.
Even though the case can be made that the Kuchel Act mandates
agriculture in our Klamath refuge system, the vague nature of the BIDEH
language opens the door for legal and judicial interpretation. I do not
know if every individual in the USFWS would conclude farming to meet
criteria required by the proposed regulation, particularly if USFWS
does not consider agriculture to be a purpose of our local refuges. I
do know that lease land farming, and various practices associated with
lease land farming, have been targeted in litigation brought by groups
that are opposed to agriculture. I am concerned about how the Proposed
BIDEH Rule would be used by those parties in the next lawsuit.
The BIDEH language would remove local control and innovation. I
cannot stress enough how devastating this would be. With all due
respect, folks in Washington, D.C., do not--nor could they be expected
to--understand how and what I do in my part of the country.
Thinking about our relationship with our local USFWS office, we
have built an understanding of each other's needs, what resources each
can bring to the table, and challenges each of us must deal with. By
creating a presumption that agriculture is prohibited on refuges--
unless determined to be ``necessary'' to achieve four separate, vague
criteria--the Proposed BIDEH Rule proposes to fundamentally alter the
historical relationship between farmers and wildlife in the Tule Lake
and Lower Klamath NWRs, and in so doing, fundamentally undermine the
natural capacity of these areas. As a result, agriculture would always
be coming from a defensive position, which internally will change our
ability to freely create and innovate for the best outcomes of our
collective environment.
This cannot be allowed to happen. Beyond all the concerns I have
discussed above, recent events speak for themselves: there have been
three years in the history of Tule Lake lease land operations when
producers were not allowed to farm the Tule Lake Refuge Complex because
of water curtailments. In each of those years, the refuge
``bioenergetics'' model dropped radically. Fields lay bare or weeds
infested fields and there was little to no wildlife or agricultural
benefit throughout the system. This could be the same for the Lower
Klamath Refuge Complex that became a wasteland of noxious weeds and
invasive insects due to lack of irrigation water.
Conclusion

My personal opinion is that agriculture has played a critical role
in the idea, adoption, and implementation of projects that meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health. The heavy hand of
government and new fodder for more litigation will not create a
healthier, holistic ecosystem for your refuge systems. A community of
local people, living with the land and ecosystem, understanding the
unique challenges, developing the solutions as unique as the landscape
are what a working land approach looks like and what I believe will
continue to bring real, lasting benefits to our wildlife, our refuges,
our food supply, our community, and our country.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today, and I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Staunton. I now recognize Mr.
Wielicki for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID WIELICKI, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SOUTH
CAROLINA WATERFOWL ASSOCIATION, PINEWOOD, SOUTH CAROLINA

Mr. Wielicki. Good morning, Chairman Westerman, Chairman
Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. My name is David Wielicki, and I am the CEO of
the South Carolina Waterfowl Association, an organization I
founded in 1986 with a mission to enhance and perpetuate South
Carolina's wildlife heritage through education and wildlife
habitat conservation.
My career as a waterfowl biologist spans 40 years working
on waterfowl and their habitats. My management experience
includes the design, construction, and management of over
10,000 acres of waterfowl impoundments in eight different
states.
I have the utmost respect for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service refuge employees who have dedicated their careers to
conservation.
Additionally, I have vigorously avoided testifying before
Congress during my entire 40-year career.
That said, I am extremely concerned about the draft BIDEH
rule, that it will remove authority from the on-the-ground
managers who are best positioned to make management decisions
on our refuges. If that occurs, it will result in
extraordinarily negative consequences for habitat species like
waterfowl, other migratory birds, and species of greatest
conservation need.
My testimony is focused on the need to retain the ability
for refuge managers to utilize active management approaches to
meet the needs of waterfowl, shorebirds, and other species. To
highlight that need, I would like to quote from an excerpt from
the June 2020 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Programmatic
Environmental Assessment for Use of Genetically Engineered
Agricultural Crops for Natural Resource Management on National
Wildlife Refuges in the Southeastern United States.
On Page 15, under the ``Climate Change'' heading, it reads,
in part: ``Loss of physical wetland area and degradation due to
exotic species expansions resulting from climate changes will
likely require increased management intensity, such as
increased agricultural production on the remaining refuges to
meet the needs of wildlife at their current levels.'' This
excerpt perfectly captures the range of issues facing migratory
birds and the challenge of managing in a context of habitat
loss and climate change.
The landscapes upon which waterfowl and other wildlife
depend are trending toward continued loss of habitat, with
remaining habitat lacking necessary requisites for sustained
populations. Many habitats found on refuges today are the
result of direct and very intentional manipulation of nature.
To the general public, that wetland on a refuge is just that, a
wetland. But in reality there are miles of dikes, water control
structures, and pumps all installed to harness and manage
nature for the benefit of waterfowl and other migratory birds.
National Wildlife Refuges are not national parks. Their
purposes, management, and founding goals are very different,
and more often require active management. Refuges have
historically benefited from active and intentional management
to ensure they meet the stated refuge purpose. In numerous
cases, this necessitates the use of cooperative agriculture to
provide an efficient means to supply ducks with the critical,
carbohydrate-rich food resources they need during the migration
and wintering period.
Duck biologists use the term ``duck energy days'' when
quantifying available food resources. Because of reduced U.S.
rice acreage, more efficient harvesting technology, and less
post-harvest flooding in the Mississippi alluvial valley, there
are far fewer duck energy days available on the broader
landscape. This means that refuges must shoulder more of the
load to provide these resources. While moist soil management is
of critical importance to ducks, the reality is at current
staffing and infrastructure levels it is very difficult, if not
impossible, to fully implement a robust moist soil management
program to meet all the foraging needs of ducks.
In these cases, cooperative farming can provide managers
with the opportunity to provide ample foraging resources with
far less staff-managed acres and resources. As an example,
research conducted by waterfowl scientists in Mississippi
demonstrated that 1 acre of unharvested flooded rice provides
the same number of duck energy days as 21 acres of flooded,
moist soil vegetation.
In closing, it is critical that these refuges continue to
be managed consistent with the needs of ducks, geese, and
migratory birds, first and foremost. That was their founding
purpose. I say this also not meaning to diminish the great deal
of other wildlife management objectives that can and should be
accomplished at the same time.
Thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Wielicki follows:]
Prepared Statement of David J. Wielicki, Chief Executive Officer, South
Carolina Waterfowl Association

Good afternoon Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the Subcommittee. My name is David Wielicki and I am the Chief
Executive Officer of the South Carolina Waterfowl Association, an
organization that I founded in 1986 with the mission to enhance and
perpetuate South Carolina's wildlife heritage through education and
wildlife habitat conservation.
My career as a waterfowl biologist spans forty years, working on
waterfowl and their habitat across North America. My career has allowed
me to foster and pass on my passion for ducks, their habitat and the
rich tradition of waterfowl hunting through the establishment of the
nation's leading wildlife education center and the creation and annual
management of thousands of acres of waterfowl habitat. Ducks and duck
hunting have dominated my professional career and are an important part
of my family heritage.
I come before the committee today with my professional and personal
observations about the needs of ducks in a changing world as it relates
to the proposed rule and policy updates commonly known as the
biological, integrity, diversity, and environmental health (BIDEH). The
BIDEH proposal represents a marked shift in how the National Wildlife
Refuge System (NWRS) has managed these important lands and waters over
the last century. I am concerned the prohibitions that would be
established by BIDEH unless an undefined and unclear allowance criteria
is met, have the potential to undermine nearly a century of work to
promote biodiversity and wildlife populations. More specifically, I am
concerned that the BIDEH proposal restricts the tools of refuge
managers at a time when we should be seeking new and innovative ways to
address today's conservation challenges and changing ecosystems.
Today's world is one where habitat is ever changing and where
sustaining abundant waterfowl and wildlife populations we all desire is
an ever-increasing challenge. There are myriad indications that the
landscapes upon which waterfowl depend is trending towards continued
loss of habitat and the remaining habitat lacking the necessary
requisites for sustained population growth.
One need only look at the changes in important landscapes for
waterfowl, shorebirds, and waterbirds. For example, agricultural
practices along the Louisiana gulf coast have changed, much to the
detriment of waterfowl and wildlife. Where rice once dominated and
provided significant food resources for wintering waterfowl,
shorebirds, and waterbirds, sugar cane now is the dominant crop
providing nominal value. Post harvest flooding of agricultural fields
in the Mississippi Alluvial Valley once provided very substantial
habitat for foraging waterfowl but the practice is far less common
today as producers pursue higher agronomic performance. Water scarcity
in the west has also had consequences on refuges in the Central Valley
of California and critical habitats like Lower Klamath National
Wildlife Refuge along with other wetland areas of the intermountain
west. Finally, all waterfowl biologists understand the ongoing and
persistent loss of wetlands and upland nesting cover in the Prairie
Pothole Region--the breadbasket of North American breeding duck
populations.
I point these examples out as I believe it is important to
understand and recognize both the scale and magnitude of habitat
concerns across the whole of the annual cycle of waterfowl, shorebird,
and waterbird populations. From north to south, and east to west, there
are key stressors on the habitat which we should be conscious of. While
the relatively recent published scientific paper dubbed the ``3
billion'' bird report documented waterfowl and other wetland dependent
wildlife faring far better than other bird groups, there are clear
indications that those populations face some significant headwinds over
ongoing habitat loss and degradation.
As this is the case, our job as waterfowl managers gets more
difficult. As habitat is lost or its functions and values are degraded,
how do we manage to ensure waterfowl, migratory birds and other species
can continue to flourish?
My experience in South Carolina and beyond has often wrestled with
this challenge. Santee National Wildlife Refuge, a jewel of Atlantic
Flyway refuges, was acquired and managed for the benefit of waterfowl,
migratory birds and other wildlife in 1942. Back in the 1970s the
refuge annually wintered more than 150,000 ducks. This number declined
to less than 5,000 ducks by 1998. Now to be fair, migrations have
changed the Service staff complement has been drastically reduced (from
11 to 4 full time staff at Santee NWR), infrastructure is failing and
operations and management capacity has declined drastically due to
regular staff turnover. It is important to be mindful of the regular
staff turnover given the reliance on refuge staff to implement the many
requirements found in the draft BIDEH policy.
As a waterfowl association that works closely with private
landowners to secure and deliver on-the-ground conservation, I am proud
of the work that we have done to restore and enhance habitat for
waterfowl, shorebirds, and an abundance of other species near Santee
NWR. However, private landowners cannot do this work in a vacuum. Put
simply, SCWA and our private landowner partners cannot conduct
conservation efforts at the scale that is necessary to meet modern day
conservation challenges without a well functioning refuge system. With
this in mind, it is critical that refuge managers have the tools and
flexibility necessary to complement the efforts of SCWA, private
landowners, and our other conservation partners.
The current refuges within the National Wildlife Refuge system
require more capacity simply to achieve the directives they now have.
Is it wise to place additional requirements, as found in the draft
BIDEH policy, on refuge staff? Especially in the changing world
described earlier, managers should have the greatest amount of
flexibility and tools at their disposal to manage habitat, especially
for waterfowl and other migratory birds.
I recognize that there has been ongoing debate and even litigation
over the use of agriculture on refuges and that this is one of the
central issues contained in the Service's BIDEH proposed rule. I am
sure that many people imagine refuges as parcels of nature and that
agriculture may be antithetical to what they perceive as nature. The
reality is agricultural practices have occurred on refuges since the
1930's.
I think it is important to note that, at least for refuges in the
lower 48, the overwhelming majority of refuges are found in the context
of significant landscape change. Hydrology has been drastically altered
and invasive species are present. With the exception of wilderness
areas in the NWRS, many habitats found on refuges today are the result
of direct and very intentional manipulation of nature. Extensive
networks of impoundments, dams, reservoirs, dikes, water control
infrastructure and the like. To the general public, that wetland on a
refuge is just that--a wetland. But in reality, there are miles of
dikes, numerous water control structures and pumps all installed to
harness and manage nature for the benefit of waterfowl and other
migratory birds. National Wildlife Refuges are not National Parks.
There is a reason the organic acts for these national treasures differ.
Refuges have historically benefited from active and intentional
management to ensure they meet the stated refuge purpose. In numerous
cases, this necessitates the use of cooperative agriculture to provide
an efficient means to supply ducks with the critical food resources
they need. Duck biologists have frequently used the term ``duck energy
days'' or ``duck use days'' to identify foraging resources both on a
site-specific basis or at larger regional scales. As noted earlier,
because of less rice in places like Louisiana and Texas and less post-
harvest flooding in the Mississippi Alluvial Valley, there are far
fewer ``duck energy days'' available on the broader landscape. This
means that refuges must shoulder more of the load to provide these
resources. Many of these resources are efficiently provided by certain
agricultural crops that supply the carbohydrate-rich diet necessary to
fuel much needed energy to survive winter months and to accumulate fat
reserves for their long and arduous migrations.
While natural moist soil management is often the best scenario for
impoundment management and is of critical importance to ducks, the
reality is, at current staffing levels and with existing
infrastructure, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to fully
implement a robust moist soil management program to meet all the
foraging needs of ducks. In these cases, cooperative farming can
provide managers with the opportunity to provide ample foraging
resources with far less staff and resources. While perhaps not
``natural'' as some in the general public perceive, it is a necessary
and vital tool to sustaining staging and wintering ducks and to fulfill
the primary purposes of many refuges. As an example, research from
waterfowl researchers in Mississippi, one acre of unharvested rice
provides the same number of ``duck energy days'' as 21 acres of moist
soil vegetation.
I think it is also important to remember that the majority of
refuges across the country were acquired with Migratory Bird
Conservation Fund dollars. The primary revenue source of the Fund is
the sale of duck stamps, with the majority of duck stamp buyers being
duck hunters. These refuges were acquired using, at least in part,
funding from duck hunters and were chartered by Congress to be managed
for the benefit of waterfowl and other migratory birds. That being the
case, I think it is critical that these refuges continue to be managed
consistent with the needs of ducks, geese and migratory birds, first
and foremost. That was their founding purpose. While there are a great
deal of other objectives that can and should be realized on refuges,
our priority should be to ensure the promise is kept to waterfowl
hunters, to the original charter by Congress by doing what is best to
maximize the waterfowl and migratory bird habitat on refuges. As any
wildlife biologist recognizes, the wetland and upland habitat
conservation work focused on waterfowl enhances biodiversity through
improving habitat for a myriad of other fish, plant, and wildlife
species while simultaneously bolstering climate resiliency.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this perspective on this
important issue related to the future management of our National
Wildlife Refuges.
Citations

State of the Birds Report (AKA 3 Billion Birds Report):

state-of-the-birds-2022-spreads.pdf (stateofthebirds.org)
USFWS Programmatic EA for GEC Use in Agriculture:

Draft Programmatic Environmental Assessment for Use of Genetically
Engineered Agricultural Crops for Natural Resource Management on
National Wildlife Refuges in the Southeastern United States (fws.gov)

USFWS Status and Trends of Wetlands in the Conterminous United States
2009-2019:

Status and Trends of Wetlands in the Conterminous United States 2009 to
2019/FWS.gov

USFWS Farming for Waterfowl on National Wildlife Refuges in the
Southeast Region (Report):

Farming for Waterfowl on National Wildlife Refuge in the Southeast
Region (fws.gov)

Lower Mississippi Valley Joint Venture MAV Waterfowl Stepdown State
Summaries:

MAV+Waterfowl+Stepdown+Aug+2015+FINAL+12-2-15.pdf (squarespace.com)

MAV_waterfowl_state_summaries 2015_3-19-2019 (squarespace.com)

Hagy, H., R. Wilson, J. Stanton, and Z. Cravens. 2022. Waterfowl
Population and Energy Objectives for National Wildlife Refuges in the
Southeastern United States. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Version
1.4.:

https://linkprotect.cudasvc.com/
url?a=https%3a%2f%2fecos.fws.gov%2fServCat%2f
Reference%2fProfile%2f144611&c=E,1,KYvHX0BRQrkj5vI6TfNgxGQs0YfAthPOZuk
973-lcUUfROEHaxwbVjhHmiTo6UmXjeTEvuxdAGPc42X63j-ASrsldNJlU-zwbpOusv
Y4&typo=1

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Wielicki. I now recognize Mr.
Haskett for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GEOFFREY HASKETT, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL WILDLIFE
REFUGE ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Haskett. Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Chairman
Westerman, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee. I am Geoffrey Haskett, President of the National
Wildlife Refuge Association.
I would like to point out that, although the refuge
association is in Washington, DC, I actually live in Grants
Pass, Oregon. So, I am also one of your constituents, as well.
And to Ranking Member Huffman, I want to let you know that
I didn't grow up in your district, but I did grow up in San
Mateo, which is a district over. So, some significant
connections there, as well.
The Refuge Association is a non-profit exclusively focused
on protecting, promoting, and enhancing the National Wildlife
Refuge System. We are pleased to see the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service proposed regulatory and policy revisions to maintain
and improve the refuge system's biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health.
This proposal largely codifies existing processes that the
Service has followed since the implementation of the National
Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997, which mandated
that the BIDEH of the refuge system be maintained.
Codifying and updating the decades-old BIDEH policy to
reflect modern conservation challenges, including climate
change, is timely and essential. The Refuge Association
strongly supports this proposal and the efforts of the Service
to address the dual threats of climate change and biodiversity
loss by codifying and clarifying existing processes and legal
requirements for ensuring the ecological integrity of the
refuge system.
We also note that this proposal is still open for public
comment, and there are many diverse stakeholders who are
currently providing input. We believe it is important to allow
the Service to complete its public comment period and have the
opportunity to make adjustments accordingly before considering
any next steps.
It is important to recognize that implementing BIDEH
successfully has been stymied by over a decade of a severe lack
of funding and resources for the refuge system. Any discussion
about the refuge system must consider the reality that steadily
increasing funding needs, paired with insufficient budgets, has
led to a refuge system that is quickly eroding in habitat
management and an ability even to keep our refuges open.
The refuge system's limited staffing capacity has several
negative impacts on the health of the refuge system. For
example, only 27 percent of the threatened and endangered
populations occurring on refuges are monitored due to limited
capacity. The Service these days can only successfully control
7 percent of the lands infested with non-native species, which
has increased 30 percent since 2005; 60 percent of the refuge
units require a new comprehensive conservation plan or
revision, many of which were finalized before the issuance of
the original BIDEH policy in 2001.
The refuge system saw its highest funding way back in 2010,
with an appropriation at that time of $503 million. Today, that
number is worth approximately $765 million, yet current funding
has only increased by 4.7 percent to $527 million, which is
only $5.50 per land acre. When accounting for total land and
water acres, the refuge system budgets a mere $0.62 an acre.
Considering the level of inflation, fixed costs, and
increased needs of refuge systems since 2010, the refuge system
has been forced to do more with less every year. The failure to
offset the impacts of inflation and account for fixed costs has
resulted in a refuge system that has long been strained under
the weight of critically low staffing levels and lost capacity.
This situation is completely unsustainable.
The number of full-time employees, or FTEs, already a
fraction of the other comparable Federal land agencies, is
approximately 2,500 FTEs and has decreased by 16 percent since
2010. No refuges are fully staffed, and more than half of
refuges have zero staff on site. Multiple refuges are closed to
the public and are completely unmanaged. Staff must manage
multiple wildlife refuge units, often traveling over vast
distances, sometimes over 100 miles per day.
Refuges should not have to make hard decisions every year
about how to operate under this long-standing funding crisis.
The insufficient funding capacity impacts are felt system-wide,
impacting conservation planning, wildlife and habitat
management, visitor services, law enforcement, and maintenance.
Details of those impacts are included in my written testimony.
The Association believes the system needs at least $2.2
billion in annual appropriations to effectively fulfill its
conservation mission. The President's 2025 budget request of
$602 million is an important step towards that goal. We also
support the permanent authorization in the Great American
Outdoors Act, and increasing the allocation of legacy
restoration funds.
While we are only representing the interests and
perspectives of the Refuge Association before the Committee
today, we also chair the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge
Enhancement, or CARE, since its founding in 1995. CARE is a
national coalition of 24 wildlife, sporting, scientific, and
conservation organizations that span the political spectrum
that came together for one shared goal: adequate funding for
the National Wildlife Refuge System.
The Refuge Association urges Congress to prioritize the
refuge system and address these over-arching funding challenges
to ensure that the Service is equipped to effectively manage
the wildlife, habitat, programs, and visitorship that rely on
the health and integrity of the refuge system. Strong
investments must be made today so these protected areas are
available tomorrow for shifting conservation needs.
I would like to submit a supporting document for the record
from the Coalition of Record Friends and Advocates.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss the issues
impacting the National Wildlife Refuge System before this
Subcommittee.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Haskett follows:]
Prepared Statement of Geoffrey L. Haskett, President, National Wildlife
Refuge Association

Good afternoon, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the Committee. I am Geoffrey Haskett, President of the National
Wildlife Refuge Association (Refuge Association). Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you to discuss the National Wildlife
Refuge System (Refuge System).
The Refuge Association is a non-profit exclusively focused on
protecting, promoting, and enhancing the National Wildlife Refuge
System. As the nation's only set of federal lands dedicated to the
conservation and management of America's native wildlife, it is the
world's largest and most diverse network of conservation lands and
waters, encompassing more than 850 million acres of unique habitats
that our native wildlife species depend on. Our national wildlife
refuges are essential for protecting biodiversity and climate-resilient
habitats, providing community-driven conservation, and expanding
wildlife-dependent recreational opportunities nationwide.
We are pleased to see the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS)
propose regulatory and policy revisions to maintain and improve the
Refuge System's Biological Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental
Health (BIDEH). This proposal largely codifies existing BIDEH processes
that the USFWS has followed since the implementation of the National
Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997, which mandated that the
BIDEH of the Refuge System be maintained. The BIDEH mandate is an
important and unique directive and is an essential element of the
Refuge System mission itself.
The goal of the proposal is to provide an updated, consistent
framework for how BIDEH should be considered in management decisions,
and untether this framework from achieving historical conditions as the
end goal for refuge management. This proposal recognizes the cascading
and often irreversible effects of climate change and other human
activities (anthropogenic stressors) on wildlife and their habitats,
and the complex, contemporary challenges facing refuge managers as a
result. Codifying and updating the decades-old BIDEH policy to reflect
these modern conservation challenges is timely and essential.
The Refuge Association strongly supports the BIDEH proposal and the
efforts of the USFWS to address the dual threats of climate change and
biodiversity loss by codifying and clarifying existing processes and
legal requirements for ensuring the BIDEH of the Refuge System--the
best tool we have to combat the worsening climate and biodiversity
crises on a national scale. This proposal will support the USFWS'
ability to conserve imperiled species and diverse wildlife populations
on national wildlife refuges across the country and continue this good
work that they are already doing into the future for the benefit of the
American public.
We also note that this proposal is still open for public comment,
and many diverse stakeholders are currently providing input. While we
appreciate the opportunity to provide our perspective before the
Committee today, we believe it is important to allow the USFWS to
complete its public comment period and have the opportunity to make
adjustments accordingly before considering any next steps.
In considering the mandate to ensure BIDEH under the Improvement
Act, it is important to recognize that the ability to implement
management activities to ensure BIDEH successfully has been stymied by
over a decade of a severe lack of funding and resources. Any discussion
about the Refuge System must consider the reality that steadily
increasing funding needs paired with insufficient budgets has led to a
Refuge System that is quickly eroding in habitat management and an
ability even to keep refuges open. Understanding these impacts is
necessary to begin addressing the significant challenges facing our
native wildlife and ensure the health and integrity of the Refuge
System well into the future.
USFWS' limited staffing capacity has several negative impacts on
the ecological health of the Refuge System. For example, only 27% of
the threatened and endangered populations occurring on refuges are
monitored due to limited capacity. This leads to compromised adaptive
management capability, inability to manage invasive species, the
destruction of native habitat, and the potential loss of more species.
With its current resources, USFWS can only successfully control 7% of
the lands infested with non-native species, which has increased 30%
since 2005. Importantly, 60% of refuge units require a new
Comprehensive Conservation Plan or revision, many of which were
finalized before the issuance of the original BIDEH policy in 2001.
Limited capacity is hampering these efforts and severely limits
landscape-level planning and adaptability to changing conditions.
Significant investments must be made today to begin working towards
better outcomes for our native wildlife. USFWS has done excellent work
to deploy creative solutions and new partnerships to manage the Refuge
System as well as possible with their existing resources. But USFWS
should not have to make hard decisions every year about how to operate
under this long-standing funding crisis. The insufficient funding and
capacity impacts are felt System-wide, impacting not just conservation
planning and wildlife and habitat management, but also visitor
services, law enforcement, and maintenance. Congress must provide
adequate resources to effectively administer the Refuge System.
The $503 million appropriated to the Refuge System in fiscal year
(FY) 2010, when the Refuge System relatively saw its highest funding
and staffing levels, is worth approximately $765 million today. Yet
current funding sits at $527 million, or $0.62 per acre. Considering
the level of inflation and increased needs of the Refuge System since
FY2010, the Refuge System budget has effectively decreased, and USFWS
has been forced to do more with less every single year. The failure to
offset the impacts of inflation has resulted in a Refuge System that
has long been strained under the weight of critically low staffing
levels and lost capacity. Rising fixed costs are also eating into any
increases in appropriations. It costs the Refuge System an estimated $3
million for every one percent raise in payroll costs. Without base
increases in the budget to cover these fixed costs, several much-needed
positions are eliminated every year. This situation is completely
unsustainable.
National wildlife refuges are important recreational and tourism
destinations in communities across the United States, providing
families and everyday Americans access to some of the nation's best
opportunities for wildlife observation, sustainable hunting and
fishing, photography, and environmental education for people of all
ages and backgrounds. Since 2010 the Refuge System has added 21 new
refuge units, hundreds of millions of acres of marine national
monuments, opened 6 million acres for hunting and fishing, and
visitation has grown to over 67 million annual visitors--an increase of
36% since FY2010. This generates over 41,000 jobs and provides more
than $3.2 billion in economic output each year. It has also added new
services, such as the Urban Wildlife Conservation Program, which was
launched in 2012 and seeks to address inequalities in recreational
access and conservation participation. While these additions have
enhanced the Refuge System and benefited the communities around these
refuges, this growth has also put more pressure on the already stressed
and underfunded Refuge System.
The number of full-time employees (FTEs)--already a fraction of the
other comparable federal land agencies--has decreased by 16% since
FY2010. This has made it difficult for the Refuge System to manage its
vast network of lands and waters and to fulfill its mission of
conserving wildlife and habitats. No refuges are fully staffed, and
more than half of refuges have zero staff on site. While not all
refuges need on-site staffing, many refuges and refuge complexes have
been de-staffed or understaffed significantly. Multiple refuges are
closed to the public and are completely unmanaged. Many employees must
manage multiple wildlife refuge units, sometimes traveling over vast
distances, hundreds of miles per day.
Visitor Services staff has decreased by 25% since FY10, yet the
number of visits has steadily increased by an average of 3.8% annually.
Sadly, nearly all of the Refuge System's 125 visitor facilities operate
on limited hours, with some centers completely closed, and none would
function without volunteers. However, many volunteer programs have been
cut back or eliminated due to a lack of supervision from professional
FTEs or necessary infrastructure. In 2023, there were 48% fewer
volunteers than in 2016. As an example of visitor center impacts,
Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge in New Mexico, renowned for
its birding opportunities, receives 142,000 visitors annually but can
only serve fewer than 1% due to curtailed visitor center hours.
A nationwide study conducted by the International Association of
Chiefs of Police in 2005 indicated that the Refuge System only has 20%
of the recommended 1,074 Federal Wildlife Officers (FWOs) needed to
provide adequate public safety and resource protection. As of February
2024, the Refuge System has the lowest number of FWOs in over 10 years
with 221 officers, while simultaneously seeing its highest visitation
and crime rates in its history. Currently, seven states have no
officers stationed within their boundaries (CT, DE, IA, MI, NH, OH,
VT), and nine states have just one officer (GA, Guam, HI, IN, KY, PA,
PR, RI, WY).
In 2022 alone, officers responded to a total of 10,854 criminal
incidents on Refuge System lands. There have been 1,384 significant
incidents in the last four years--an average of 1 per day. There have
been 1,605 arson or vandalism cases since 2019. Since 2016, the USFWS
has sustained $1.7 million dollars in property loss due to theft or
damage. However, USFWS does not currently have the authority to collect
civil damages for repairs and restoration. We applaud the bipartisan
Refuge System Protection Act, introduced by Congressmen Mike Thompson
(D-CA) and Rob Wittman (R-VA), which would help address these issues
and grant authority to the USFWS to collect civil damages to repair and
restore damaged wildlife refuges.
The Refuge System also has a large deferred maintenance backlog of
$2.65 billion, with most structures near or past the end of their
maximum useful life spans, such as buildings, roads, bridges, and
trails. Under current appropriations, supplemented by the Great
American Outdoors Act (GAOA), deferred maintenance costs are projected
to reach $28 billion by FY2050. Additional funding is necessary to
address this backlog, or assets will continue to degrade well beyond
their recommended life spans. This could jeopardize visitor access,
safety, climate resilience, and wildlife conservation efforts, as well
as double or triple long-term maintenance costs over the next 20 years.
We support the permanent authorization of GAOA and increasing the
allocation of GAOA funds to USFWS from 5% to at least 15% so it can
begin to address its deferred maintenance backlog.
Congress must recognize and understand the Refuge System's budget
realities to begin addressing the significant challenges facing our
native wildlife and habitats and ensure the health and integrity of the
Refuge System for future generations. To achieve a healthy and
adequately staffed Refuge System, the Refuge Association believes it
needs at least $2.2 billion in annual appropriations to effectively
fulfill its conservation mission, provide opportunities for wildlife-
dependent recreation, and connect communities to nature. The
President's FY2025 Budget Request of $602 million is an important step
towards that goal.
While we are only representing the interests and perspectives of
the Refuge Association before the Committee today, we would like to
highlight that we have chaired the Cooperative Alliance for Refuge
Enhancement, or CARE, since its founding in 1995. CARE is a national
coalition of 24 wildlife, sporting, scientific, and conservation
organizations that span the political spectrum. Our organizations came
together for one shared goal: adequate funding for the National
Wildlife Refuge System. While every member of CARE has a different
interest in the Refuge System, each organization understands the value
of the habitat and wildlife that make the Refuge System unique. CARE
brings together these disparate groups around shared values and their
love of wildlife to advocate for increased funding for the Refuge
System--lands where wildlife and humans can thrive. We hope the CARE
coalition illustrates that sufficient funding for the Refuge System is
and should be a shared bipartisan goal.
The Refuge Association urges Congress to prioritize the Refuge
System and address these overarching funding challenges to ensure that
the USFWS is equipped to effectively manage the wildlife, habitat,
programs, and visitorship that rely on the health and integrity of the
Refuge System. Strong investments must be made today so these protected
areas are available tomorrow for shifting conservation needs.
Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss the issues impacting
the National Wildlife Refuge System before the Committee.

______

*****

The following document was submitted as a supplement to Mr.
Haskett's testimony.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Haskett, and a belated welcome
from my district.
Mr. Haskett. You didn't know, so thank you.
Mr. Bentz. I now recognize Mr. Batcheller for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GORDON R. BATCHELLER, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY,
NORTHEAST ASSOCIATION OF FISH & WILDLIFE AGENCIES, REPRESENTING
THE ASSOCIATION OF FISH & WILDLIFE AGENCIES, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Batcheller. Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking
Member Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. I am very
honored to be here this morning. My name is Gordon Batcheller,
I am a certified wildlife biologist. Today, I am representing
the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, the voice of
state fish and wildlife agencies.
The states exercise primary authority for management of
fish and wildlife within their borders, including on national
wildlife refuges. We do appreciate the work of the Service to
update policies relating to biological integrity, but we are
deeply concerned about much of the proposal.
We worked with the Service on the review of drafts.
Regrettably, most of our input is not reflected in the official
proposals being considered today. The Service did not address
our primary concerns, which are the inclusion of the concept of
``predator control,'' which infringes on state jurisdiction and
threatens the conservation of wildlife; restrictions on widely-
accepted wildlife management tools such as conservation-based
farming; a lack of consideration for state fish and wildlife
agencies' roles and authorities; rigid rules that threaten to
overburden refuge managers, delaying timely conservation
measures; vague definitions. While our written testimony covers
these issues in great detail, I focus today on the flawed
proposals related to predation.
Predation is a behavior, not a taxonomic term. Thus, the
restrictions in the proposal could apply to wildlife that
employs predation as part of their life history, which is most
species. The management of predation helps rare wildlife and
other animals of management concern.
Consider the following examples: on the Archie Carr Refuge
in Florida, removal of raccoons is vital to protecting rare
nesting sea turtles; on Maine's coastal islands, removal of
mink, river otter, and common ravens is essential to protecting
nesting seabirds like the Atlantic puffin; conserving big game
populations in Alaska by managing predation is central to
subsistence lifestyles and food security; the lethal removal of
mountain lions on the Hart Mountain National Wildlife Refuge in
Oregon is required to restore bighorn sheep. There are
countless other examples within the refuge system in all parts
of the country that underscore the importance of active
wildlife management, including predator control, for the
conservation of many species.
The Service also proposes to unilaterally regulate hunting
and trapping on refuges if it labels an activity inconsistent
with biological integrity, regardless of existing approvals or
refuge purpose. This flies in the face of state authority.
The Service proposes to prohibit widely accepted wildlife
conservation practices unless managers produce mountains of
paperwork. These changes are administratively onerous at best,
and a disaster for the well-being of wildlife at worst.
Instead, the Service should flip the script and allow those
practices to continue unless there is some ecological and
scientific basis not to do so, and with the concurrence of the
state fish and wildlife agency. By requiring managers to
determine that there are no feasible methods to address
specific and urgent conservation needs prior to predator
control, the proposed rule would severely hamper timely actions
and jeopardize the conservation of wildlife.
Finally, those who recall the highly contentious 2016
predator control rule in Alaska observed that this proposed
rule attempts to reinstate virtually the same rule, which was
rejected by Congress under the Congressional Review Act.
However, rather than just reinstate this rule for Alaska, it
enacts similar provisions across all 50 states and applies it,
therefore, even more broadly.
I must stress that we are very concerned that the
requirements to justify widely accepted conservation measures
will be insurmountable and jeopardize wildlife populations,
including rare species. When coupled with the equally onerous
restrictions targeting conservation farming practices, which
are vitally important to wildlife, the BIDEH proposals under
consideration today are unacceptable to state fish and wildlife
agencies.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. The
Association does look forward to continuing to work with the
Service and other conservation partners to ensure that sensible
conservation practices are in place throughout the refuge
system. Thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Batcheller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gordon R. Batcheller, Executive Secretary,
Northeast Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies, Inc.
Representing
the Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies, Washington, DC

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today.
I am Gordon Batcheller, a Certified Wildlife Biologist. I am here
today to represent the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies
(AFWA); all 50 states are members as well as Guam, U.S. Virgin Islands,
Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia. AFWA is the voice of state
fish and wildlife agencies. Prior to my current position, I was Chief
of Wildlife for New York State.
Our mission is to protect state agency authority to conserve and
manage fish and wildlife within their borders. These agencies exercise
primary statutory authority for management of fish and wildlife as
public trust resources within their borders, including on lands and
waters in the National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS).
We appreciate the efforts of the Service to modernize regulations
and policy relating to ecological health within the NWRS, but we are
deeply concerned by the justification and substance of key parts of the
proposed rule and accompanying policy updates. Due to the importance
and impact of this proposed rule on management of fish and wildlife
species across the NWRS and adjacent habitats, its failure to account
for the judicially and statutorily established primacy of state
authority to manage wildlife, the increased administrative burden and
limited flexibility with which it would restrict managers, and the
fundamental lack of scientific basis for various aspects of the
proposal, we offer the following testimony for your urgent
consideration. We hope the result will be significant revisions that
transform the proposed rule into one that allows refuge managers to use
the well-established and successful wildlife and habitat management
tools to secure the health of habitats and abundant species across the
NWRS.

While the Association made the most of the opportunity to engage
with the Service on the review of the draft policy and rule, the vast
majority of our substantive input was ignored. As a result, we feel
that the proposed rule requires significant revisions if the Department
and the Service intend to proceed with this rulemaking. In our view the
changes made based on our initial input were minimal, and did not
address the most concerning elements of the proposed rule,
specifically:

Inclusion of the concept of ``predator control'', which
infringes on state jurisdiction and suffers from the lack
of any workable scientific definition for ``predators''

Restrictions on commonly used and widely accepted wildlife
management tools such as cooperative agricultural practices

A pervasive lack of consideration for state fish and
wildlife agencies' roles and authorities

Rigid processes that threaten to overburden refuge
mangers, erode cooperative conservation efforts, and delay
timely decisions

Vague, ambiguous definitions that could be applied
inconsistently or leveraged to restrict compatible and
priority uses of NWRS lands and waters

The National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act (NWRSAA) as
amended by the National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act (NWRSIA)
at Section 668(dd)(a)(4) assigns the Secretary 14 responsibilities in
administering the System. Among these, at Section 668(dd)(4)(B), the
Act directs the USFWS to ``ensure that the biological integrity,
diversity and environmental health of the System are maintained for the
benefit of present and future generations of Americans.'' However,
there are 13 other statutory responsibilities assigned to the Secretary
and the Act does not prioritize those responsibilities but simply lists
them.\1\ The Association supports the concept of BIDEH within the
system, just as we support the 13 other priorities. With this rule it
appears that the USFWS in elevating this single aspect of administering
refuges over all others, and if this is the case, we do not believe it
is in the best interest of the management and goals of the NWRS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Likewise, House Committee Report 105-106 (NWRSIA) does not
assign a priority to these 14 responsibilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Predator Control

As we shared repeatedly with the Service, inclusion of restrictions
on ``predator control'' is fundamentally flawed on multiple levels and
as such should be stricken from future iterations of the rule. Because
``predator'' is not a scientific classification (and the Service wisely
does not attempt to define ``predator'' in the proposed rule), this
proposed restriction could ensnare any native species that employs
predation as part of their life history (which is most species),
creating a jurisdictional conflict over the management, method, and
means of take for species that state fish and wildlife agencies hold in
trust for the benefit of the public. State agencies exercise primary
statutory authority for management of species within their borders
across all types of land, including those within the NWRS. Indeed, 43
CFR 24.4(e) states:

``. . . in recognition of the existing jurisdictional
relationship between the States and the Federal Government,
Congress, in the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration
Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 668dd), has explicitly stated that
nothing therein shall be construed as affecting the authority
of the several States to manage fish and resident wildlife
found on units of the system. Thus, Congress has directed that,
to the maximum extent practicable, such public uses shall be
consistent with State laws and regulations. Units of the
National Wildlife Refuge System, therefore, shall be managed,
to the extent practicable and compatible with the purposes for
which they were established, in accordance with State laws and
regulations, comprehensive plans for fish and wildlife
developed by the States, and Regional Resource Plans developed
by the Fish and Wildlife Service in cooperation with the
States.''

This conflict is exacerbated by the proposed exceptions to predator
control, which include ``[c]ompatible, refuge-approved recreational
hunting and fishing opportunities that do not compromise maintaining
biological integrity, diversity and environmental health [(BIDEH)] on
the refuge.'' By including this as an exception to predator control,
the Service is explicitly stating its assumed authority to regulate
methods and means of take on refuges at any time if it categorizes an
activity as predator control, regardless of existing approval or the
purpose for which a refuge or unit was established. The National
Wildlife Improvement Act of 1997 clearly and plainly requires that when
conflict arises between the NWRS mission and the established refuge
purpose, the purpose of the unit itself should take precedence over the
NWRS mission.
The proposed definition of predator control--``. . . actions or
programs with the intent or potential to alter predator-prey population
dynamics on a refuge by reducing a population of native predators
through lethal or nonlethal methods . . .''--appears to describe a
substantial portion of management for harvested and non-harvested
species alike. Claiming authority to potentially influence the
management of countless species will create conflicts with state
authorities and disregard individual refuge purposes by subordinating
those purposes secondary to the overarching principles of BIDEH.
Additionally, refuge managers are already entrusted with the
responsibility to maintain population levels based on what the best
available science demonstrates is necessary for the health and
abundance of the full range of species that rely upon a refuge for
habitat, subject to the specific purposes of that refuge. Under these
existing rules and guidance, BIDEH is already being considered and
served. By requiring managers to determine that there is no other
feasible method to address specific species or habitat issues prior to
utilizing ``predator control,'' the proposed rule would severely hamper
timely management decisions and open a broad window for wasteful
litigation. State agency concerns are by no means limited to the
prohibitions on ``predator control'', as various aspects of these
principles apply to several potentially harmful policy proposals.

Consider just a few specific case studies that demonstrate the
importance of active management ``predator control'' to enhance the
conservation status of wildlife:

The trapping of raccoons on Archie Carr National Wildlife
Refuge in Florida is vitally important to reduce predation of
sea turtle eggs and hatchlings.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
Archie_Carr_CCP.pdf

Conserving big game populations in Alaska by managing predation
is central to subsistence lifestyles, and food security.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.adfg.alaska.gov/static/research/programs/
intensivemanagement/pdfs/intensive_ management_protocol.pdf

At the Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge,
predation on western snowy plovers and California clapper rails
by red foxes prompted the initiation of a predator management
program targeting red foxes, skunks, and raccoons, resulting in
improved nesting success.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://westernsnowyplover.org/pdfs/WSP%20Final%20RP%2010-1-
07.pdf

Radiotelemetry at Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon
showed predators, primarily coyotes, were severely limiting the
survival of sandhill crane young or ``colts,'' leading to
initiation of a predator control program. With the exception of
a drought year, crane productivity improved during the first 4
years of the control program.\5\ Similarly, on the Mississippi
Sandhill Crane National Wildlife Refuge, removal of coyotes is
critical to improving the nesting success of highly vulnerable
and rare Mississippi Sandhill Cranes.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1217&context=nacwgproc
\6\ https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
Mississippi_Sandhill_Crane_NWR_CCP.pdf

The lethal removal of mink and river otter within the Maine
Coastal Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex is vitally
important to protecting nesting seabirds.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
REFUGE%20ISLANDS%20March%2020 22.pdf

The lethal removal of Mountain lions on the Hart Mountain
National Wildlife Refuge in Oregon is required to improve the
conservation status of big horn sheep.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/APHIS-2022-0002-0003

There are countless other examples within the Refuge System, in
all parts of the Country, that underscore the importance of
active management, ``predator control,'' for the conservation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of many species.

Finally, those who recall the highly contentious 2016 predator
control rule in Alaska, observe that this proposed rule appears
to be an attempt to reinstate that same rule, which was
rejected by Congress under the Congressional Review Act due to
the leadership of Alaska's Congressman Don Young.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://naturalresources.house.gov/uploadedfiles/
hj_res_69_one_pager_final.pdf

However, rather than just reinstate this rule for Alaska, it enacts
similar provisions across all 50 states, and applies it more broadly
with the proposed definition including ``potential to alter predator/
prey dynamics[.]''
Restrictions on Agricultural Use and Practices

As drafted, the rule also prohibits certain well established and
widely accepted wildlife and habitat management practices, unless the
refuge manager takes a series of laborious steps. The proposed
restrictions on agricultural practices are contrary to the very purpose
for which many refuges were established: to manage habitat to benefit
migratory birds, particularly waterfowl. As such, we are aware that
farming is effectively used throughout the NWRS where needed and
recognized in the North American Waterfowl Management Plan. We are
concerned that, under the proposed revisions agricultural uses,
waterfowl production, and a variety of other cooperative habitat
management activities may be unavailable on refuges that are managed
for waterfowl hunting opportunities and other refuge-specific purposes.
We strongly recommend that upon revision, this proposed rule should not
place excessive burdens on managers and Refuges that have successfully
employed these practices.
Roles and Authorities of State Fish and Wildlife Agencies

State fish and wildlife agency management allows for the practical
and efficient use of resources to manage the broad diversity of species
and habitats across the country, many of which require geographic or
species-specific solutions that could not be fulfilled by a one-size
fits all approach. While we respect the USFWS's responsibilities to
manage refuges in coordination with the states, we strongly disagree
with the approach of this proposed rule and the problems it will create
for the individual state-USFWS partnerships within the refuge system as
well as research and management of wildlife and habitat on refuges as a
whole. Denying or curtailing the ability of state agency resource
managers to use these tools (agriculture, hunting seasons and
regulations, etc.) would not only undermine state management authority,
but it would also severely limit federal agencies' pursuit of
cooperative management strategies.
While a complete review of well-established state authority is
unnecessary, a long line of case law that began in the nineteenth
century and created the jurisdictional backdrop for federal legislation
from the Lacey Act to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and beyond, has
consistently held that, absent a clear exercise and/or delegation of
congressional power through the Supremacy, Property, or Commerce
Clauses of the U.S. Constitution, states retain control over wildlife
to manage in trust for the benefit of the people of the states. The
primacy that the proposed rule places on BIDEH would diminish all other
refuge purposes and infringe on states' authority to manage the methods
and means of take for species within their borders that have not been
placed under federal protection. If finalized, the proposed rule would
enable drastic federal overreach by establishing a flawed basis through
which USFWS could attempt to eliminate methods and means of hunting
that the USFWS determines are not compatible with BIDEH.
Even though the proposed rule is silent regarding trapping on
refuges, it is clear that unnecessarily restrictive or duplicative
regulations on methods and means of take may be imposed should the
USFWS decide it is necessary to maintain BIDEH. Regulated trapping of
furbearers for a variety of purposes is necessary and provides numerous
societal benefits, ranging from damage and population control,
protection of endangered species, reintroductions and necessary
supporting research, and protection of sensitive habitats. Further,
trapping is a unique activity that deepens Americans' connection with
nature and understanding of the outdoors and its flora and fauna. In
many rural communities, self-sufficiency is core to the public's
activities, of which trapping is included with complementary,
sustainable uses of natural resources such as angling, hunting,
gardening, and other uses. State and federal wildlife agencies,
including the USFWS, use trapping as a cost-effective method (compared
to hunting or chemical control) to manage wildlife. Trapping helps
protect endangered species and migratory birds, restore species in
decline, prevent and reduce property damage, and control destructive
invasive species.
Under this co-management structure, trapping regulations in the
NWRS usually reflect those made by the state agency with management
authority over the relevant species, meaning any lawful trapper on
refuge lands must adhere to applicable state regulations and permit
stipulations, as well as possess the applicable licenses. The BIDEH
rule should not provide any vehicle by which the USFWS may attempt to
impose restrictions on trapping or any methods and means of take for
state managed species.
Another area of consideration relates to ``conservation
translocations'' as defined in 29.3(b). We strongly recommend USFWS
clarify that these translocations must comply with state regulations
such as those relating to the health of the individual or disease
quarantining for transport across state lines, or even transport within
the state.
In 3.10(c)(3) the proposed rule states that USFWS ``conserve[s] and
manage[s] fish and wildlife populations to meet refuge population
objectives, sustain ecosystems, and, where appropriate, restore or
recover imperiled species.'' We strongly recommend inclusion of
language to recognize state authority in species management decisions.
Under management activities and uses, the proposed rule states that
``Proposed activities and uses will be evaluated in compliance with the
National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 4321 et seq.) and
other legal requirements, as applicable.'' We strongly suggest
including references to 43 CFR Sec. 24.4(e) and the Fish and Wildlife
Coordination Act to document the importance of state coordination.
Administrative Burden

As we have touched on previously, but further stress here, the
proposed rule would establish overly rigid processes that will
overburden refuge managers, restrict use of widely accepted wildlife
management practices, and delay timely decisions. We are concerned that
the desire to create a ``high bar'' to justify widely accepted wildlife
and habitat management practices may create unnecessary barriers,
generate more opportunities for procedural inconsistencies between
refuges and regions, and hamper NWRS staff that are already stretched
thin. We encourage the Service to recognize and continue to employ
well-founded, supported, and justified management actions and
activities currently employed on the NWRS. Further, decision making at
the local level will be difficult for individual refuge managers if
they must consider factors that are outside of their control.
For example, the proposed policy for conservation translocations in
601 FW 3.13B(2)(a) includes the requirement for translocations to
undergo scientific peer review, and refers to 3.14C for the criteria of
``us[ing] novel, precedent-setting methods or models,'' or being ``of
high ecological risk or controversy . . . likely to change prevailing
practices, or . . . likely to affect policy decisions of significant
environmental impact.'' This opens up significant room for
interpretation. It is not clear how the carve-out for activities that
have undergone peer review within the past 10 years with no substantial
changes in scientific knowledge or relevant circumstances will be
applied, whether refuge by refuge or programmatically.
The rule also establishes prohibitions on several commonly
administered, widely accepted and successful wildlife management
practices, such as the use of agriculture, unless specifically
approved. For these activities, that are already successfully utilized
by its managers, we suggest the rule should instead take the approach
of ``allowed until prohibited'' vs. ``prohibited unless justified'' as
currently drafted. Again, Agricultural Use and Predator Control
revisions should not place excessive burdens on managers and Refuges
who have successfully employed these practices.
Vague and Otherwise Flawed Definitions

The proposed rule is rife with vague, ambiguous definitions that
could be leveraged to restrict multiple-use of NWRS lands and waters.
In a number of instances, from ``predator'' to ``historical
conditions'' to ``natural processes'', we previously communicated to
the USFWS that these terms were vague and would benefit from being
better defined, clarified, or omitted.
Where the proposed rule references the ``best available science,''
USFWS should explicitly state that this includes consideration of
science from on-the-ground managers, whether state, federal or tribal.
Additionally, the term and use of ``historic conditions'' throughout
the definitions remains vague, as well as ``natural processes''
throughout the definition, management principles, and management
activities and uses; all natural processes occur under some level of
human influence and have for thousands of years. The term ``historic
conditions'' is defined as referencing conditions ``prior to
substantial anthropogenic changes''. This definition is subjective, as
humans have always been part of the ecosystem. We understand that the
USFWS is drafting these policies based on the reality that pre-European
contact conditions are not an attainable baseline for the NWRS. Moving
away from the current baseline requires the establishment of a new
baseline to measure effects to the refuge. The policy and definition do
not define the new historic baseline condition. As the proposed
planning policy decentralizes decision making, the proposed BIDEH
policy needs to provide more direction to refuge managers to best
understand what a substantial change is, whether the changes are
anthropogenic in nature, and whether those anthropogenic changes are
under local control (e.g. climate change impacts from carbon emissions
elsewhere). We request that the USFWS explain what the new historic
baseline condition will be to evaluate change on the refuges and how
this aligns with previous conversations regarding historic human use.
We also recommend amending the definition of ``natural processes'' to
state that it encompasses interactions that would reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of substantial human influence.
The definition of ``Anthropogenic change''--``Environmental change
that humans cause or influence, either directly or indirectly,'' is too
broad and could include nearly any type of change as currently written.
We recommend removing the term ``indirectly'' at the end of the
definition to limit the scope of the change. Decision making at the
local level will be difficult for the individual refuge managers if
they must consider factors that are outside of their control. If the
intent of the policy is to keep the decision making at the local level,
then the policy must focus on issues that the individual refuge
managers can control. Refuge managers simply cannot control the output
of emissions that may affect their refuge. Requiring refuge managers to
mitigate these emissions could result in undue burden on refuge
management.
Including genetic differences in living organisms is a broad term
that could mean anything from a genetic difference between individuals,
genetic differences between populations, or other unknown advances in
genetic science not yet contemplated. The more traditional definition
of diversity focuses on species diversity which is the number of
different species present in an ecosystem and the relative abundance of
each of those species. Based on the proposed definition, we are
concerned that there is no historic reference to serve as a baseline
for measuring these genetic changes as proposed in the regulations and
policy. The Alaska Native Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) uses
the broader term natural diversity in the purposes of each refuge
created by Title III of ANILCA. We request this definition be reworded
to align more closely with the definition of species diversity,
particularly as ANILCA remains the prevailing statute in Alaska. The
definition of mosquito control in (d)(7) could also be expanded to
include control of other biting arthropods that transmit disease (such
as ticks) or pose a threat to conservation goals, for the greatest
flexibility in this regulation.
Administrative Structuring/Priority

Finally, we are concerned that if an activity, such as the use of
prescribed fire, was challenged because it would impact a directive,
such as air quality, the directive to address air quality would prevail
over the necessary and effective habitat management activity--
prescribed fire. Another example is the inclusion of ``soil
compaction'' as a directive. If an activity, such as a timber sale or
forest practice like thinning were challenged due to its contribution
toward the directive, which is to prevent soil compaction--which would
prevail? Without clarification, such endless questions, challenges, and
litigation could effectively hamstring any reasonable management
practice which would prevent the NWRS from achieving its mission.
Therefore, if this is not the intent of the rule, to have directives
supersede individual refuge actions, it should be clarified. If this is
the intent, and our concerns are legitimate, then we encourage the
Service to reconsider this approach.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. The Association
looks forward to continuing to work with the Service, the Department,
and other federal and private partners to ensure co-management of the
NWRS provides healthy habitats, abundant wildlife populations, and
accessible recreation opportunities for all.

______

Mr. Bentz. I thank the witnesses for their testimony. I
will now recognize Members for 5 minutes each for questions.
Chair Westerman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, and again, thank
you to the witnesses for your testimony today.
I was taught that there is something called the scientific
method, where you put a theory up, and you test that theory,
and the more times you prove that that works, then you say we
have some science here. Mr. Guertin, you and others talked
about climate resiliency, and it seems that your scientific
theory is that if you stop management on refuges it is going to
give you more wildlife, biodiversity, more quantity and quality
of wildlife. But the observations I have had, where you
actually do management, seems to show that it is just the
opposite of what the Fish and Wildlife Service is proposing.
Now, when we talk about climate resiliency, does that
affect only public lands, or does that affect private lands, as
well?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Chairman. We are
talking about a proposed rule here, which would guide----
Mr. Westerman. Well, it is an easy question. Climate
resiliency affects private lands, just like it does public
lands.
Mr. Guertin. Yes, it does, sir.
Mr. Westerman. There is a saying in Arkansas, ``No rice, no
ducks.'' And the rice is not grown on public lands, it is grown
on private lands. And we have seen farming practices change,
where you have zero leveling and you don't have the flooded
fields like you used to. But at the same time, I have seen
private landowners go out and intensively manage their land for
duck habitat. And guess what? The land is resilient. The ducks
are there. It is not all Ag, but Ag plays a huge part in it.
I have seen on fish and wildlife refuges in my district,
where management practices have been put in place, the wildlife
has flourished, including Ag management practices. So, it seems
like, in the name of science, Fish and Wildlife is pushing
false science and trying to make it to where we can have this
utopia, where you just do what the Federal Government seems to
be wanting to do with all public lands, and that is putting an
imaginary fence around it and say we are going to let it be a
wilderness area, and everything is going to be OK. And we know
that doesn't work.
One particular thing I am very concerned about is when we
talk about predation. Feral hogs are essentially invasive
predators. How would you address the feral hog program under
this new rule?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Chairman. We are
continuing to do a lot of feral hog control on the refuge
system. We don't believe this proposed regulation would change
any of that. We evaluate the impacts these invasive species
have on the refuge system in accordance with our established
policies, procedures.
Mr. Westerman. So, what is the difference in a feral hog
eating turkey eggs and a raccoon eating turkey eggs?
Mr. Guertin. Just definitional, sir, that the feral hogs
are generally viewed as causing a lot of disruption to crops,
and a lot of the other critters would go after animals and
young chicks.
Mr. Westerman. You don't think feral hogs go after turkey
eggs?
Mr. Guertin. Oh, of course, they do. But we categorize them
as more of an invasive species.
Mr. Westerman. But it is going to be OK to let the raccoon
population explode and eat turkey eggs, but not the feral hogs.
Mr. Guertin. No, sir. We continue to look at predation on
the refuge system. Last year, we trapped out over 4,000 animals
on 69 refuges, as other witnesses have talked about. We view it
as a----
Mr. Westerman. It seems like a very, very low number. I
have to move on.
Mr. Guertin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Batcheller, you mentioned something, and
I think, if we have done something right about conservation in
this country, we have given state wildlife agencies authority
over all the wildlife, whether on private lands, public lands.
They regulate that.
We have a proposed bill called the American Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act, where we actually not only give state
wildlife agencies authority over the management of the
wildlife, since the wildlife doesn't recognize boundaries, but
it would allow something called Good Neighbor Authority, where
wildlife agencies could go in and do management on the Federal
land because the management is obviously not being done right
now. A couple of questions on that.
But I will point out in Arkansas, the Arkansas Game and
Fish Commission has wildlife management areas that, if you want
to hunt on one of them, a lot of them you have to get permits
because the demand to hunt on these managed properties is so
high, you see people hardly going to U.S. Fish and Wildlife
areas because they are not being managed correctly.
How would this rule prohibit, if the Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act passes, how would it prohibit state agencies
from doing a good job of managing the Federal lands?
Mr. Batcheller. I appreciate your question.
I think the principle that you are bringing forward and
underscoring is that we need to manage wildlife at a landscape
scale: public, Federal, public, state, and private. If we want
to address the needs of wildlife throughout this country,
address climate change, meet the needs of constituents, solve
wildlife problems, it has to be done at a landscape scale
cooperatively with all partners.
And I am pleased to highlight that the National Wildlife
Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997 recognizes that core
principle of landscape conservation, and today the states and
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service do work very assertively to
identify landscape conservation practices that make sense for
the United States.
So, I think the core principle you are bringing forward is
the necessity of a landscape approach, all in, for wildlife
throughout the country.
Mr. Westerman. You are exactly right. And that is not an
original idea. There was a guy named Teddy Roosevelt that was
proposing that 120 or 130 years ago. And that model worked
pretty well until we decided to stop managing appropriately.
And I was going to yield back my time, but I see it is
going in the opposite direction. So, Mr. Chair, thank you for
your indulgence.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now recognize the
Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Guertin, it has been suggested that this rulemaking is
a sea change in policy. It has created all sorts of
apprehension and speculation about a Pandora's box of
litigation, the termination of all sorts of existing
activities, including cooperative farming. So, I want to ask
you a few questions.
Under existing law, is the Fish and Wildlife Service
already required to ensure biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health of the refuge system?
Mr. Guertin. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Huffman. And does the Fish and Wildlife Service believe
it already operates and has always operated in accordance with
the same refuge system-wide principles for maintaining BIDEH,
as we call it, represented in these proposed regulations? You
have always operated under these principles?
Mr. Guertin. Yes, Congressman. They are called out in the
Refuge Improvement Act and codified in our 2001 policy.
Mr. Huffman. So, am I correct that the purpose of this
proposed rule is to clarify management directives as they
relate to your existing authority to carry out BIDEH in the
refuges?
Mr. Guertin. Yes, Congressman. The purpose of the proposed
rule is to clarify and provide guidance and modernize the
guidance.
Mr. Huffman. Does the proposed rule affect hunting or
fishing in the refuge system?
Mr. Guertin. No, Congressman. Hunting and fishing are
called out in the Refuge Improvement Act as one of the six
priority mandates or uses on the National Wildlife Refuge
System.
Mr. Huffman. How about cooperative agriculture or water
rights programs, do you anticipate any changes to these things
if the rule is finalized in its current form?
Mr. Guertin. Congressman, it is a proposed rule. But no, I
don't see major changes. We continue to recognize agriculture
as contributing to our ability to manage for waterfowl,
particularly----
Mr. Huffman. Where it serves a refuge purpose. And it is a
win-win.
Mr. Guertin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Huffman. So, the millet farming in Arkansas that Mr.
Westerman supports, and that we all support because of the
habitat values it is creating, that continues without any
change, right?
Mr. Guertin. Again, not pre-determining the outcome of the
regulatory process here, I have to say that, per the lawyers.
Mr. Huffman. OK.
Mr. Guertin. Just clarify that. Yes, these types of
agricultural processes contribute to wildlife objectives, and
we recognize they contribute to our mission, as well.
Mr. Huffman. The organic potato farming that Mr. Staunton
talked about in the Klamath refuge that seems to have great
effects on soil health and other values, there is nothing in
this proposed regulation that would end that?
Mr. Guertin. No, sir. We recognize that would continue, as
well, in the Klamath. We recognize the Kuchel Act calls out
agriculture as a priority use. And we also have a Crab Orchard
National Wildlife Refuge, similar authorizing language. So,
there are actually two refuge units that have a legal mandate
for agriculture.
Mr. Huffman. And it has been suggested in the Chairman's
opening that a whole new complete NEPA process would be
required for things like cooperative agriculture in the case of
the millet farming, the Klamath organic potato farming, other
cooperative farming that is providing that win-win benefit in
the refuge system. Would each of these folks have to start over
again with a new NEPA process?
Mr. Guertin. No, Congressman. If there is an existing
cooperative agricultural agreement, say, that was signed last
year for a 5-year period, the next time we will look at that is
4 years from now, and we will look at it in the lens of the
revised version of the BIDEH. But we are not creating any new
processes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Guertin. I know you are in the
middle of a public comment process, and I can't take you into
more detail because you can't be pre-decisional about that
pending rulemaking, but I appreciate those answers to
demystify, frankly, some of the misguided concerns that we are
hearing about this rulemaking.
And Mr. Haskett, I would like to come back to you regarding
what this Committee should be talking about if we cared about
the refuge system, the actual issues our refuges are facing.
What is the biggest challenge facing the refuge system today?
Mr. Haskett. Thank you for that question. The biggest
challenge is lack of funding and resources to efficiently
manage the National Wildlife Refuge System. As I mentioned,
severe underfunding and understaffing for decades. The refuge
system needs 7,000 FTEs to manage its current resources at a
minimum capacity. But as I said, they only have 2,500 FTEs
across the entire system. So, it is funding and lack of it for
the refuge system.
Mr. Huffman. Yes. How does that shortfall affect how the
refuges can be used and enjoyed by Americans?
We have 67 million folks that now visit our refuge system.
How are they impacted?
Mr. Haskett. That is 67 million annual visitors. That is an
increase of 36 percent since 2010. But visitor services staff
has decreased by 25 percent during that same period of time,
yet the number of visits has steadily increased by an average
of about 4 percent annually.
My specific examples, Bosque del Apache in New Mexico,
renowned for birding opportunities, receives 142,000 visitors
annually. We only serve fewer than 1 percent due to curtailed
visitor center hours. I can give a whole bunch of examples. I
am not sure you want me to take the time.
Mr. Huffman. Does that critical staffing shortage limit the
ability of the refuge managers to take advantage of friends
groups and other resources that might be offered up?
I mean, if you don't have staff to oversee and implement
that, what good is it?
Mr. Haskett. Yes, there are 200 friends groups across the
country that support refuges, and there are many, many
volunteers. In the past, volunteers have been able to make up
for significant shortfalls that refuges have been dealing with.
But what has happened now is, because the staffing is so low,
some refuges have gone from 20 people to 2, some refuges have
zero. There is no one to supervise the volunteers, so it causes
a problem even taking advantage of that.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Haskett.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Guertin, the Kuchel Act suggests, I think it states
that the land in the refuges is dedicated to the major purpose
of waterfowl conservation, but with full consideration to
optimum agricultural use.
So, is it the Agency's position that one of the purposes of
refuges is agricultural use?
Mr. Guertin. Chairman, for the Klamath Basin refuges, yes,
it is authorized in the Kuchel Act, and we recognize that.
Mr. Bentz. There is some concern that has been expressed
that it would be relegated to a use, as opposed to a purpose.
So, I am asking for the clarification from you that we don't
need to be worried about that, that it is indeed, under the
Kuchel Act, a purpose. I just want to make sure the record is
clear on that.
Mr. Guertin. That is my understanding, Chairman Bentz, and
it has been a long-standing traditional use, as well. And as
other witnesses have pointed out, we very effectively partner
with producers in that geography and work with them to achieve
a lot of habitat objectives, as well as energy sources for
waterfowl in the basin.
Mr. Bentz. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Staunton, your written testimony and your testimony
today discusses your farming and innovative practices you have
undertaken on the wildlife refuges in the Klamath. I have been
out there. I have actually seen them. And it is amazing, that
if we had water in the refuges, that would be helpful for the
ducks. But, of course, that has been taken by NMFS and others
for use in stream, and thus the refuges have been damaged.
But that aside, my question to you is, what is the proposed
regulation that we are looking at today of concern to you? What
part of it is of greatest concern to you?
Mr. Staunton. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I am
happy to report first that we do have water back on the Tule
Lake National Wildlife Refuge this winter and on the lower
National Wildlife Refuge. We have been working really hard at
achieving that in this winter. We are full again, so that is a
win.
We have a great relationship working with the Tule Lake
National Wildlife Refuge staff, and we are able to express all
of our needs and concerns from year to year, whether that is
times when we have extremely limited water or times that we
have abundance, and we can expand our thinking and what we can
achieve on refuge.
My concern with this rule stems back to what you asked
about purpose versus use. And I think that is really an
important part for us is that we feel that, although our
relationship right now is very strong with our local staff, we
don't know what may happen 10 years from now. There may be a
new refuge manager that comes in, and his directive is that we
start with no agriculture, because that is the way the rule
reads.
So, our position changes materially, and that risk is
something that would then have to go probably to a judicial
system or a legal system to tell us what happens there. And all
that uncertainty, what happens on the ground is we don't do
anything. So, there is no agriculture activity, nothing
happens.
I guess my point would be if agriculture seems like a very
important factor to refuge system management, the rules should
reflect that.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, and thank you for being here.
Mr. Guertin, back to you for a second. The Service appears
to be attempting to manage refuges to and establish baseline of
``historic conditions,'' a fairly subjective term, but perhaps
you can throw some light on it. It goes on to say, ``prior to
substantial human anthropogenic change.''
In your opinion, how far back in history will we go to
establish such a baseline? And this issue comes up in other
places, too.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you Chairman, it is an excellent
question. The point I want to make, though, is the previous
version of the BIDEH policy actually had a mandate or a
requirement for us to manage the refuge system to a historic
condition. That is unrealistic.
We all know how heavily we have done a lot of proactive
work on the refuge system. The proposal vision is that we will
manage to modern or future threats out there. We have no vision
or mandate to try to restore the refuge system to pre-Columbian
or hundreds-of-years-ago conditions. We are trying to
acknowledge there are a lot of, as other witnesses have pointed
out, water control structures, levees, dikes. We use a lot of
fire on the refuge system for a tool. Recognize those as a
given, and manage toward the emerging threats of the system, as
well. So, just a point of clarification. That is not the goal
of the proposal, to go back in time. It is to project forward.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I yield back, and I recognize Congresswoman Peltola for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
A number of issues I want to talk specifically with you
about Mr. Guertin, but I really appreciate the comments of Mr.
Batcheller regarding Alaska and the ungulate population and
food security issues.
In 2016, the Fish and Wildlife Service finalized a rule
titled, ``Non-Subsistence Take of Wildlife and Public
Participation and Closure Procedures on National Wildlife
Refuges in Alaska,'' and I want to note there has been talk
about people who visit refuges. Many Alaskans live on refuges.
We had lived there as long as we can remember, and then it
became a refuge in the 1960s. So, this is not a choice, this is
not us going out of our way to visit, this is where we live.
And this rule that occurred in 2016 gave refuge managers in
Alaska control over predator management on those lands, often
without any consultation with the people who have lived there.
And my understanding is this action has not had any kind of
tribal consultation or outreach with the Alaska Native
Corporations. This is a big concern to me, as well.
But back to the point. The finalized rule of 2016 was
overturned in 2017 using the Congressional Review Act, and it
was under House Joint Resolution 69, which was sponsored by my
predecessor, Congressman Don Young, and it disapproved of that
rule using the Congressional Review Act. Under the CRA,
agencies are not permitted to reissue rules substantially
similar to the one that was overturned.
And we recognize this rule isn't exactly the same as the
one overturned, the proposed rule. This proposed rule has a
national focus, not just Alaska. While it addresses predator
control, it also addresses other issues that the Service says
have been impacted by climate change and anthropogenic
activities. However, this rule has the same result in Alaska,
which would be predator control would fall to refuge managers,
rather than the state and the people who live closest to the
resources and have always lived there.
Please explain how the Fish and Wildlife Service justifies
the part of this rule that would once again put refuge managers
in charge of predator management in Alaska, which would violate
the Congressional Review Act.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman.
Yes, we acknowledge that the 2016 predator rule for Alaska
was revoked under Congressional Review Act authorities in 2017.
The position of the Fish and Wildlife Service, after working
very closely with our Solicitor's Office and attorneys in the
Department of the Interior, is that there were significant
differences in the approach and the authorities and foundations
of this proposed BIDEH rule going forward, and you mentioned
several of those yourself, such as application to an entire
system of refuges, addressing not just predator control but a
suite of ecological functions that could impact the refuge
system, including grazing, pesticides use, et cetera.
Mrs. Peltola. Pesticides in Alaska?
Mr. Guertin. Oh, nationwide, ma'am, nationwide.
Mrs. Peltola. OK, thank you.
Mr. Guertin. So, that is our position on this. I hear you
loud and clear. There is a lot of consternation about what does
this mean in relation to the CRA, so that is why we are
conducting this robust public outreach right now is to solicit
that feedback. And I want to reassure you it is a huge priority
for our director, Martha Williams, who I know you met with
yesterday, to make sure we are engaging with tribal partners in
Alaska.
Our regional director is hosting a couple of listening
sessions and consultations over the next couple of weeks to
make sure we get those all-important voices there. But we
commit to you this is going to be all about hearing those
voices and making sure that we keep this comment period open
for the appropriate amount of time to get that feedback.
But thank you for your questions.
Mrs. Peltola. All right. Can I follow up, Mr. Chair?
OK, and I do understand that the Service feels that the
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health
policies should be updated to meet current challenges, in
particular concerning climate change. However, this rule
doesn't align with the congressional mandates, and supersedes
Alaska's expressed management authority by prohibiting state-
authorized predator control in the refuge system.
And I think it is worth noting here, as well, that if we
are talking about biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health, we have to recognize that human beings
are part of the environment, and human beings' food security
issues should be part of your consideration. And if we have
ungulates that have been really low in abundance, abnormally
low in abundance because of hoof rot and other things, the last
thing we need are more wolves and bears really decimating those
herds and that critical food source. And I think most herds of
caribou in Alaska are just a tiny fraction of what they should
be.
Mr. Graves [presiding]. If we could, try to wrap up,
please.
Mrs. Peltola. OK. Many game management units are very low
in moose numbers.
Anyway, I am very unhappy about this rule, especially when
it comes to cultural practices and rites of passage and
undermining the ability of people to exercise those.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Graves. You bet. Mr. Guertin, if you could, reply to
that on the record, please, in writing. That would be helpful.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your feedback, Congresswoman. We are glad to
follow up with you on that. We recognize ANILCA and other
statutes are----
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Guertin. If you could just
provide that in writing, that would be great.
I recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Carl, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of you for
being here today. I realize your time is valuable.
The proposed ``biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health'' rule has me deeply concerned, and I am
hearing similar worries from the constituents back home,
particularly the farm community in Alabama.
I want to acknowledge that Jimmy Parnell, the President of
the Alabama Farm Federation, has submitted comments on the
proposed BIDEH rule. His insight reflects the concerns and the
perspectives of these Alabama farmers, highlighting the
importance of the consideration of what their needs and
challenges are in shaping this rule.
Mr. Staunton, is that the way it is pronounced? Did I get
close enough? That was our conversation back here, trying to
figure out how to pronounce it correctly.
Mr. Staunton. That is close enough.
Mr. Carl. It is close enough? Good. Well, mine is pretty
simple, as you can tell. Thank you for joining us here today.
The main concern we are facing is the potential impact of
this rule on the Alabama farmers who rely on the genetic
engineered crops. These crops are crucial for reducing
pesticide use, promoting sustainable practices, and ensuring
higher yields.
A question to you: How can we ensure that any policy change
that supports our farmers' need for sustaining agriculture will
also address environmental goals effectively?
Mr. Staunton. Thank you for the question.
Like I mentioned before, working with your local wildlife
refuges is the cornerstone of any working lands project. And in
our situation, we have been able to have a very strong
relationship with the local office.
The concern that I would have, again, is that a solicitor
in Washington, DC or somebody making policy from far away may
have a directive of saying that GMO or crop production on those
lands is not a purpose or doesn't fulfill that need, when maybe
the local level has a different perspective. So, we would just
like to recognize that agriculture is a purpose on those lands,
and that we could work at the local level to continue to do
that.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. That is all I have.
Mr. Graves. Would you yield to me real quick?
Mr. Carl. I would love to yield to you, sir.
Mr. Graves. I just want to make note that I think that was
the first time in my life I have heard someone from Alabama
concerned about the proper pronunciation. I just wanted to
reflect just a minute.
I yield back.
Mr. Carl. I take offense to that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. LaMalfa [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. We will
now recognize Mr. Mullin.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you all for
your testimony today.
My district encompasses part of the San Francisco Bay, and
we are very fortunate to have the Don Edwards National Wildlife
Refuge in our very own backyard. Just last month, I had the
opportunity to tour the refuge with Secretary Haaland. And
while enjoying a walk along the beautiful Bay trail, we learned
about how critical this habitat is for millions of migratory
birds that stop over each year.
So, Mr. Guertin, could you provide a little more context or
examples for how the proposed rule would improve your agency's
management of this important habitat?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. The
vision of the BIDEH proposal is to manage, as best we can, the
natural ecological functions of the refuge system to promote
habitat so we can support healthy populations of small game
species, other animals, fisheries resources, and provide
hunters, anglers, and wildlife watchers these opportunities.
We believe the proposal will allow us to continue that
work, provide more transparency, provide more accountability,
consistency. The goal is population enhancement, habitat
enhancement. So, doing this kind of work in conjunction with
other partners on the landscape can give us those crucial
habitats that we need, which will then turn back into economic
drivers for local communities, as well.
Mr. Mullin. I appreciate that answer.
My district in California is surrounded by water bordered
not only by the Bay, but by the Pacific Ocean on the other side
of the district. I am closely monitoring the threats posed by
sea level rise and climate change. The aforementioned Don
Edwards National Wildlife Refuge has tidal marshes that will
play an important role in protecting communities in my district
from rising sea levels, but the refuge itself is threatened, as
well.
Based on our discussion here today, I am concerned that
climate change will only increase the need for more funding to
protect these ecosystems, yet funding for the National Wildlife
Refuge System has been nearly stagnant since 2010. The question
is for Mr. Haskett.
Thank you for being here, sir. Could you discuss how
climate change may increase the need for additional funding to
protect the refuge system?
Mr. Haskett. You weren't here before, but I grew up in San
Mateo, California, playing on all those lands that are the
refuge now.
Climate change is probably the largest, most expensive
danger looming for the refuge system coming up, and everything
the Fish and Wildlife Service needs to do needs to look at
climate through any kind of future work needs, through that
climate change lens. And it is things like there are going to
be marsh lands, there is going to be open water, there are
going to be buildings that are going to no longer be there. We
have had a building and a refuge here in the East Coast
recently that slid into the ocean because of erosion and
different changes from climate change. So, the San Francisco
Bay certainly is one of those places that will be majorly
affected.
I did want to mention, too, that I talked before about not
being able to keep volunteers and that kind of thing. Well, Don
Edwards just lost their volunteer coordinator at San Francisco
Bay National Wildlife Refuge, which is going to make it even
more difficult. So, definitely some problems out that way.
Mr. Mullin. I yield back.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Mullin. Just a side note. I
knew your dad back in the day in the legislature, and he was a
great guy.
And as a Northern California farmer, I have a solution for
the sea level rise. Just keep it in land behind the new dams we
can build, and on the farms down in the Central Valley, and not
let it run down the Klamath River or out the Delta, and we
could do our part. Anyway, I know you would appreciate that.
Let me now recognize my colleague from Wyoming, Ms.
Hageman, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On February 2, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service proposed
to update their approach to managing the biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health, or BIDEH policy, on lands
in the National Wildlife Refuge System. As it currently stands,
cooperative agricultural practices, such as grazing and haying
are allowed to take place on refuge landscapes as long as the
Fish and Wildlife Service cannot meet its resource management
objectives through the maintenance, management, or mimicking of
natural ecosystem processes or functions.
There are many ways that current agricultural practices
help with land management, including through benefiting
habitats that are vulnerable to catastrophic wildfires, which
we in the West bear the brunt of. However, the policy change in
this proposed rule wouldn't allow managers to make management
decisions based off the needs of the individual refuge. Rather,
the Fish and Wildlife Service is taking a drastic step to
prohibit essential uses of lands that have been permitted for
years, all in the name of so-called climate change.
Mr. Guertin, does every refuge have a biologist?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman.
My understanding is that all of our staff refuges have at
least one biologist on board of their cadre.
Ms. Hageman. Are there any refuges that do not have a
biologist on staff?
Mr. Guertin. To the best of my knowledge, I don't believe
so. But we can follow up for you for the record, just to give
you certainty.
Ms. Hageman. If you would, I would appreciate that.
Mr. Guertin. Yes, Congresswoman.
Ms. Hageman. The burden that this proposed rule is placing
on each individual refuge will be enormous. And it seems to me
the Fish and Wildlife Service is trying to expedite
considerable changes to the management of national wildlife
refuges without fully weighing all of the practical costs.
Mr. Guertin, do you happen to know how many acres of farm
and ranch land our country is losing each day?
Mr. Guertin. Not a specific number. No, Congresswoman.
Ms. Hageman. Studies estimate that it is about 175 acres
per hour, according to the College of Agriculture and Life
Sciences at Virginia Tech. And this is land that we need to
feed our nation, and it is being lost to things like
development, sprawl, non-use fire, and, in many states, massive
fields of solar panels.
Do you believe that the Service has a responsibility, as
one of the agencies managing Federal lands, to help keep
working lands in production and maintain uses like the managed
grazing projects on refuge lands?
Mr. Guertin. Yes, Congresswoman, we believe that is
inherent in our mission, and also believe the proposed BIDEH
policy would continue that type of work to move on.
I have statistics right here, we work on 110 refuges and
have over 1,700 agreements with farmers that are ongoing right
now. We are working with another 1,700 co-operators and
allowing grazing on 1.9 million acres of the refuge system to
help us achieve our habitat restoration goals. And we believe
our proposal is just putting a new lens on that work going
forward.
But we recognize the contribution to our mission, and
recognize that it is an important tool in our toolbox.
Ms. Hageman. And I am glad to have that statement on the
record as we move forward.
Mr. Wielicki, you have worked to restore duck habitat
across the country. What do you believe would be the outcome of
a major reduction or elimination in the use of agriculture on
refuges?
Mr. Wielicki. Thank you for the question. It is a very good
question.
I am very concerned about the number of duck energy days
that are on the landscape. For example, it takes only 1 acre of
flooded rice to provide the duck energy days that are provided
on 20 acres of flooded, moist soil vegetation. So, agriculture
can provide a lot of energy for waterfowl.
We are losing flooded acres in the Mississippi alluvial
valley. Ag research has shown in that area that when you flood
your rice field, it actually reduces your following soybean
output by about 14 bushels per acre. So, a lot of farmers are
not willing to flood anymore.
Harvesting techniques have greatly improved. There is not
as much waste grain on the landscape, so refuges need to do
more.
There was a study completed by the Fish and Wildlife
Service in the southeast region looking at waterfowl population
and energy objectives on national wildlife refuges. They
currently provide 475 million duck energy days, of which 223
million, 47 percent, are provided with agriculture. And they
want to provide another 140 million duck energy days. In order
to accomplish that, agriculture would be the most efficient
technique to complete that.
Ms. Hageman. So, it is fair to say that there is a
symbiotic relationship between duck habitat and agriculture
production.
Mr. Guertin. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, I appreciate it.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. LaMalfa. The gentlelady yields back. My colleague on
the other side of the aisle, you don't wish to ask any
questions here?
Ms. Hoyle. No.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, all right. Thank you.
I will toss it to Mr. Graves from Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Educated you are. All right, here we go.
Thank you all for being here. Mr. Guertin, I want to follow
up on some of the conversations that you had with Mrs. Peltola
earlier. CRAs are somewhat of a rarity. I think there have been
38 attempts this year, 9 of them have been vetoed by the
President. None have been signed. Yet, there was a CRA that
did, I believe, put substantial restrictions on your ability to
draft a new rule.
Earlier, you were saying that you thought that there were
not significant changes, and then you said that there were
significant changes when Mrs. Peltola raised the concern about
the CRA.
I am just curious. In the existing rule, how many times is
``predator'' or ``prohibition'' mentioned in the existing
policy?
Mr. Guertin. Off the top of my head, I don't have a
definitive answer for you.
Mr. Graves. You want the answer? You want it?
Mr. Guertin. A couple of times.
Mr. Graves. All right. So, ``predator'' is mentioned once,
``prohibition'' none. In the new one, it is all over the place.
And I think showing that your efforts to try to kind of strike
that balance, I think that this is substantially different than
what is in place today, which I think is contrary to some of
the testimony that you made a few minutes ago. I want to come
back to you, but real quick over to Mr. Batcheller.
Mr. Batcheller, I know that the Association was engaged for
participation to some degree to provide comments. But do you
feel that the concerns of the Association were actually
incorporated into the draft?
Mr. Batcheller. Thanks for the question, and I appreciate
the issue. I just want to underscore, we really enjoy a
productive working relationship with the Fish and Wildlife
Service at all levels, all divisions, in many issues facing
wildlife conservation in the United States. We really value
those relationships, and we did appreciate being brought into
the discussions at a pre-decisional stage.
But as I underscored earlier and in the written testimony,
much of our concern or concerns were not addressed in the
proposed rule now before.
Mr. Graves. And that is what I read from your testimony and
surmised there.
And, specifically, you talked about some of the burdens on
your refuge managers as a result of this. Could you expand upon
that briefly? I have a couple of other questions I want to try
to get out.
Mr. Batcheller. Sure. Well, I have been in government a
long time, and I have done policy a lot. I have written and
analyzed regulations and legislation, so I have a fairly good
eye for the tone of a policy proposal. And I think it is very
fair to say, without exaggeration, that this particular policy
proposal has a lot of noes in it, a lot of prohibitions.
But there are allowances based on certain analysis that a
refuge biologist or manager could do, and I imagine myself as
that biologist in a refuge unit going through that process of
analysis, and it is onerous.
Mr. Graves. Yes.
Mr. Batcheller. And time consuming. And earlier today, in
testimony we have heard about the needs for refuge funding to
be robust, et cetera. We are very concerned that the onerous
restrictions and requirements on refuge personnel to explain
biological integrity in light of commonly-accepted management
practices is basically a budget cut, because the staff are
going to be shackled to----
Mr. Graves. Because you are putting additional burden, you
don't have the resources to carry it out. So, suffice to say
that you don't think that the overall cost of the bureaucracy
caused doesn't justify any perceived benefits. Is that----
Mr. Batcheller. We need our biologists----
Mr. Graves. Could you just give me a yes or no on that one?
Is that safe?
Mr. Batcheller. We need our biologists in the field, eyes
on wildlife with their binoculars, not at their desk, doing
onerous paperwork.
Mr. Graves. OK, thank you very much.
Mr. Guertin, I want to come back to you. I know that in
regard to engagement of stakeholders, we just heard the
International Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies say
that they didn't feel like their comments or input were really
considered. I understand the Humane Society issued a positive
press release, and that is impressive.
What about groups like Ducks Unlimited? Did you engage any
of the sportsmen's groups in this?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Our practice that is codified in our internal service
regulations is that when we are working on proposals like this
we reach out to state fish and game and tribal fish and game
agencies only. We don't engage with the advocacy groups or the
NGOs.
Mr. Graves. So, Humane Society was not brought in to any
meetings or anything like that?
Mr. Guertin. No, sir, not----
Mr. Graves. There were no discussions or----
Mr. Guertin. Until we proposed the rule back on February 2,
that is the first they should have heard about it.
Mr. Graves. OK, I would love to make sure we probe that a
little bit more. Thank you.
So, you don't think that other stakeholders, user groups
like Ducks Unlimited, or other sportsmen's groups, are
appropriate to engage on this?
Mr. Guertin. Oh, we think absolutely. But we engage with
them when we roll the proposed regulation out per our
established policies. We just work closely on the development
of it with state fish and game and the tribes.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Chairman, I am over time, but I let Mrs.
Peltola go 45 seconds. Can I just slide in one more here?
Mr. LaMalfa. Slide a little more.
Mr. Graves. All right, thank you.
Mr. Guertin, nutria, why do you like nutria so much?
Mr. Guertin. I have no personal opinion on nutria, nor does
the Agency. But we have been working very aggressively to
eradicate them in the Chesapeake Bay. We are working very
closely also in----
Mr. Graves. I am just having trouble understanding why you
would want to go through a full NEPA analysis on nutria
eradication or efforts to control, whenever all they do is
actually contribute to climate change, if that is your goal
here, because they destroy vegetation, which then causes
greater emissions, and actually causes erosion and other
incredible problems in Louisiana. I just don't understand why
you would carry out policies to protect nutria and allow for
the population growth that is entirely contrary to what we have
done here to the interests of Louisiana and California. I think
this is absolutely ridiculous.
I yield back.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right. Thank you, Mr. Graves.
It looks like I am it. So, thank you, panelists. I do have
something I would like to submit to the record here. It is
comments submitted to the Administration by three counties in
my neighborhood, Modoc, Siskiyou, and Klamath, on the proposed
BIDEH rule that we are discussing. I ask unanimous consent that
we insert that into the record.
And since I am chairing, without objection.

[The information follows:]

COUNTY OF SISKIYOU
COUNTY OF MODOC
KLAMATH COUNTY

April 5, 2024

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Public Comments Processing

Re: Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106: Proposed Rule; National Wildlife
Refuge System: Biological Integrity, Diversity, and
Environmental Health

To Whom it May Concern:

The three counties of Modoc and Siskiyou, California and Klamath,
Oregon (Tri-Counties), are writing this letter to provide comments and
express our concerns regarding the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services
Proposed Rule; National Wildlife Refuge System: Biological Integrity,
Diversity and Environmental Health.

The lease lands within the Klamath Basin National Wildlife Refuge
Complex and throughout northern California and southern Oregon have
played and continue to play a vital role in the multi-generational
farming and ranching legacies of Siskiyou, Modoc (California), and
Klamath (Oregon) Counties, and enable agricultural operators to produce
valuable crops that are critical to the Counties' small economies.
However, farming the lease lands within the Counties is a continuous
struggle.

Farmers have weathered restrictions on water supplies for years,
have faced several lawsuits, and now are challenged with a proposed
rule from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) which in
addition to other concerns, would seek to ``prohibit the use of
agricultural practices unless they are determined necessary to meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health, and where we [the
Service] cannot achieve refuge management objectives through natural
processes.''

In 1905, the states of Oregon and California ceded the lands under
Lower Klamath and Tule Lakes to the United States. During the same
year, the U.S. Secretary of Interior directed the U.S. Reclamation
Service (now the Bureau of Reclamation) to reclaim the lands beneath
both lakes for the primary purpose of homesteading. In 1932, areas
within the refuge were designated as sumps and reserved for flood
control and drainage to protect developed homestead lands from
flooding. Areas outside the sump, but within the refuge boundary, were
leased by Reclamation for agricultural use and additional flood
control. In addition to providing flood control, the reserved sump
areas also preserved existing wetland habitats for wildlife.

In the early 1960s, Congress was faced with whether to dedicate the
land to homesteading or waterfowl production. To answer this question,
the Kuchel Act (Public Law 88-567) was passed in 1964. The Kuchel Act
defines the purposes of the Lower Klamath and Tule Lake NWR's. The
refuges are dedicated to wildlife conservation and the lands are
administered for the major purpose of waterfowl management, but with
full consideration to optimum agricultural use (USFWS 1998).

Reclamation administers a Lease Land Program under a Cooperative
Agreement with the Service, on the Klamath Refuge National Wildlife
Refuge Complex. The primary objective of the Lease Land Program is to
comply with the law and provide a commercial farming program with
benefits for wildlife. In addition, there are livestock grazing and hay
farming activities on the Modoc Refuge in Modoc County and similar
agricultural practices on other refuges in our area.

The legislative history of the Kuchel Act supports the
interpretation that Congress mandated that agriculture continue on
lease lands for generations to come. As detailed in 16 USC 695n: Leases
of Lower Klamath and Tulelake National Wildlife Refuge reserved lands;
management of other reserved public lands for waterfowl purposes, the
Secretary is required to continue the present pattern of lease lands
within the Klamath Basin. Farming on the lease lands no doubt is
beneficial to wildlife, as the production of cereal grains and other
wildlife-friendly agricultural produce provides vital food sources for
waterfowl during migration.

As detailed in the April 4, 2024, joint letter from the Tulelake
Irrigation District, Klamath Drainage District, and Klamath Water Users
Association ``In recent informal discussions, Service personnel have
indicated that they do not believe the proposed rule/policies would
apply to the lease lands or would not lead to management changes.''
Consistent with the joint letter, while we agree that the Service's
proposal should be irrelevant to the Kuchel Act, the use of Kuchel Act
lands for agriculture practices are required to be considered and
approved in compatibility and consistency determinations. The Tri-
Counties want to reiterate that the proposed rule/policies cannot be
adopted for Kuchel Act lands.

The legislative language is also critically important to the
Counties as it recognizes that this continued pattern of leasing is
important for revenue to impoverished Counties dependent on such
revenue. For decades, the Counties have relied, and continue to rely,
on the lease lands as an important aspect of the regional economy. The
lands contain rich soil, ideal for crops like grain, alfalfa, potatoes,
grass hay, onions, and horseradish. The lease lands contain 17,302
acres within the Tule Lake NWR and 5,526 acres within the Lower Klamath
NWR, for a total of 22,828 acres throughout our areas devoted to
agriculture. The Counties receive payments from the leasing of these
lands, as outlined in Section 3 of the 1964 Kuchel Act. The total
amount between the three counties averages between $450,000 to $500,000
per year. If agriculture on the lease lands were to be terminated, the
impact would be felt through vital services provided by the County to
its constituents.

It is also necessary for us to be clear with respect to the
pesticide program that is allowed on the lease lands. This program is
highly regulated by the U.S. Department of the Interior. Pesticides are
utilized as a last resort under an integrated pest management plan.
Specific pesticides are only approved for use after a federal team
conducts stringent risk assessments. This assessment includes
evaluation and analysis of toxicity data, proposed use of the
pesticide, environmental conditions, degradation rates, solubility, and
availability of other cultural, biological, or less toxic alternatives.
There is also an established no-spray zone within 300 feet of sumps and
50 feet within any water bodies within the refuges. In addition, there
has been tremendous efforts to increase acreage of organic crops on the
lease lands. In 2000, only 38 acres were farmed organically, but by
2017, 13,571 acres (59.5%) of the total lease land acreage was farmed
organically.

In summary, the language included in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service's February 1, 2024, proposed rule is far too broad, ignores the
authorities of Congressional determinations and the Kuchel Act, and
would have profound impacts on local farming communities and the
counties that represent them.

Sincerely,

Brandon A. Criss, District
1                             Ned Coe, District I
Siskiyou County Board of
Supervisors                   Modoc County Board of Supervisors

Michael N. Kobseff,
District 3                    Geri Byrne, District V
Siskiyou County Board of
Supervisors                   Modoc County Board of Supervisors

Derrick DeGroot
Klamath County
Commissioners

______

Mr. LaMalfa. So, a lot of ground I could cover here. First,
a couple of notes from the portion that I was able to hear in
between having to run in and out of the room. Sorry about that.
Mr. Wielicki, as a personal aside, I liked hearing in your
comments about when there is less rice grown it has a big
impact on waterfowl, as I am a rice grower in Northern
California. But that is not just a whole self-centered deal, it
is indeed a region-wide issue, as it is in the southern states,
of how important that is. As you know, in 2022, about half the
rice acreage in California was taken out because the water
supply was shifted elsewhere for that. So, instead of a half-
million acres, we had about a quarter-million acres. And the
devastation was visited upon that northern Sacramento Valley
area as the folks up in Klamath have been feeling for a long
time.
So, if you were lucky enough to be in the state water
system, then you did OK, but the Federal water, we can go on
and on about water allocation, and the wisdom with which water
is stored, contributed greatly to the devastation of that and
the resulting effects.
Mr. Haskett, you were talking quite a bit about levels of
funding, and I will come back to the water, as well. If you
don't have a water supply, you can have all the funding in the
world and the devastation we have seen up in the Klamath Basin,
the waterfowl that was so prevalent last year was grasshoppers
instead of ducks. And I had never heard of up there before. So,
it is indeed a situation where the resource needs to be made
available as we are seeing happen in that area.
I would like to throw it to Mr. Staunton for a moment on
how that is looking here with the allocation that is being
requested up there. My understanding is that three counties
have also submitted a letter asking for 100 percent allocation,
as the lake seems to be doing quite well in water levels. Would
you care to emphasize that?
Mr. Staunton. Thank you for the question, Chair. I will not
speak directly to the allocation, because we don't know it yet.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes.
Mr. Staunton. We are hearing that maybe later this month.
But to speak to the impacts, the Tule Lake and lower Klamath
National Wildlife Refuge was drained in 2020, and it was
totally dry for 2 years. And in that time, we lost multi-
species, including suckerfish that were native to that habitat,
as well as all the migratory birds that use that as part of
their Pacific Flyway.
We have been working very hard at trying to get water back
out onto that landscape, and I am happy to report that there is
water moving back out there today, but it has come with a major
cost. And as you mentioned, one of those costs was a
grasshopper infestation last year. It was to biblical
proportions of grasshoppers that were growing in these dry
regions of the refuge.
Mr. LaMalfa. Like you had never seen, right?
Mr. Staunton. Like you have never seen.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. Talk about, I am going to pronounce it
wrong, the Kuchel Act, Kuchel Act. What?
Voice. The Kuchel Act.
Mr. LaMalfa. Kuchel, sorry about that, which requires
farmers to use a certain amount of their leased lands to grow
grain and generate food for wildlife.
Discuss that a little bit, please, on the Act and the
congressional intent being clear that agriculture has to be
allowed on the Tule Lake and lower Klamath refuges. Can you
talk about the existence of that rule, how it will
fundamentally change the partnerships you have had with the
local refuge?
Mr. Staunton. Thank you for the question. Yes, the Kuchel
Act was started in 1964, and it basically authorized as a co-
purpose of the refuge agriculture use.
Our concern with this rule is that there have been
challenges made to the use of that land as being agriculture
purpose by a lot of different environmental groups who would
like to see us not out there farming on the refuge. So, I think
this rule could potentially open the door for continued
litigation by those groups that would like to see our purpose
removed.
Thank you for the question.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, it is really going to make it a lot of
uncertainty as to how you are supposed to even manage and grow
on the land.
Mr. Staunton. It will give an unknown about how lawyers may
interpret this proposed BIDEH language.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes, so it is not settled at all.
Mr. Staunton. I would like to believe that the Kuchel Act
has authorized a co-purpose on the refuge, but that has been
challenged in many different courts' cases. And those were
provided as reference.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right, thank you.
Mr. Guertin, as we are talking about these grasshopper
infestations, what can be done to help by the Fish and
Wildlife?
And are they actually coming from the refuges themselves,
or how are they affecting it? It is devastating to the
surrounding agriculture that is still there. What can you say
about what can be done and the source?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Mr. Chairman. I
have seen some photos of these grasshoppers. It is quite
frightening. I can imagine what they are doing to the landscape
out there.
I think the bigger solution is getting more water onto the
refuge. That will tamp down their ability to grow out there.
Also, while we don't have authority over them necessarily,
we can certainly help out the local partners there to reach out
to other local groups about some type of mechanical or spraying
treatments or things like that.
But we would be glad to follow up with your office here in
California with some options going forward.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right. I hear a lot of it being blamed on
climate change and all that wide discussion here constantly.
What is the target, Mr. Guertin? What is the level of
CO
2
in our atmosphere, percentage-wise?
Mr. Guertin. Off the top of my head, I will be honest, I
cannot recite that for you right now, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LaMalfa. Anybody else on the panel want to take a crack
at that?
Mr. Haskett?
Don't have a number? OK, well, I do like to remind folks
that when we constantly talk about CO
2
and such,
which is essential to plant life, that it is only 0.04 percent
of our atmosphere.
With that, I have run way over my time, but I appreciate
the indulgence, and thanks so much to our panelists and all
those in the audience for coming here today.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and the
Members, when we had them here, for their questions.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. Eastern Time next Monday, April 15, Tax Day. The hearing
record will be held open for 10 business days for these
responses.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record documents
received by the Committee. These documents include comments
from the Family Farm Alliance, the State of Utah Department of
Natural Resources, the Wyoming Game and Fish Department, the
Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies, and others.
Without objection.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:25 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Bentz

American Explortion & Mining Association

Spokane Valley, WA

March 4, 2024

Shannon Estenoz, Assist. Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks
Katherine Harrigan, Div. of Natural Resources and Conservation
Planning,
National Wildlife Refuge System
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Public Comments Processing

Dear Ms. Harrigan and Assistant Secretary Estenoz:

The American Exploration & Mining Association (``AEMA'')
appreciates the opportunity to share our concerns and comments on the
proposed rule and proposed policy updates of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (``FWS''), National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological
Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health (individually, the
``Proposed Rule'' and ``Proposed Service Manual Update,'' and
collectively ``BIDEH Updates'').\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological Integrity,
Diversity, and Environmental Health, 89 Fed. Reg. 7345 (Feb. 2, 2024)
(Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106, RIN 1018-BG78) (hereinafter
``Proposed Rule'').

AEMA is a 129-year-old, 1,800-member national trade association
representing the minerals industry with members residing in 46 U.S.
states, 7 Canadian provinces or territories and ten other countries.
AEMA is the recognized national voice for exploration, the junior
mining sector, and maintaining access to public lands, and represents
the entire mining life cycle, from exploration to reclamation and
closure. More than 80 percent of our members are small businesses or
individuals who work for small businesses. Our members have extensive
first-hand experience with exploring for mineral deposits, finding and
developing mineral deposits, permitting exploration and mining
projects, operating mines, reclaiming mine sites, and ensuring that
exploration and mining projects comply with all applicable federal and
state environmental laws and regulations. Indeed, AEMA's members
operate their respective exploration and mining activities in a
responsible manner through a wide range of social and environmental
conditions across the United States, and their operations are subject
to extensive environmental evaluations at the project level to ensure
resource protection through federal and state permitting actions.
Moreover, our members extract the minerals necessary for renewable
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
energy, electric vehicles, and modern technology.

AEMA acknowledges that the FWS has a statutory mandate to manage
current National Wildlife Refuge System lands (``System Lands'') in a
way that maintains the biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health (``BIDEH'').\2\ However, AEMA has concerns that,
if adopted as-is, the BIDEH Updates may have complex and far-reaching
effects--that have not been fully evaluated--on our member mining
companies, as well as various other sectors of the economy such as
ranching, on both public and private lands. AEMA is concerned that such
effects may be contrary to the statutes governing the National Wildlife
Refuge System, public lands, and mining, and may additionally frustrate
the Biden administration's goals for promoting a renewable energy
transition sourced with domestic minerals. Specifically, AEMA is
concerned that the potential ramifications of the BIDEH Updates
include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(B).

1.  blanketly applying BIDEH policies to an array of lands that the
public does not understand to be a part of the National
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wildlife Refuge System, including conservation easements;

2.  impeding the exploration and development--on public and currently
private land--of minerals that are essential for modern
technology, including renewable energy and medical devices,
through new acquisitions to the National Wildlife Refuge
System;

3.  effecting mineral withdrawals of public lands without complying
with the statutory and regulatory processes for such
withdrawals;

4.  interfering in matters outside of the statutory scope of the
National Wildlife Refuge System, including interfering in
the planning and regulatory processes of other federal
agencies and tribal, state, and local governments with
respect to both public and private property; and

5.  conflicting with the multiple-use mandate imposed by statute on
public lands, as well as several other statutes that
prioritize mineral development.

Further details and explanations as to AEMA's concerns and requests
for clarification are included below.

I. SWEEPING AND UNIFORM APPLICATION OF BIDEH TO NEW LANDS

The BIDEH Updates blanketly and surreptitiously apply BIDEH
policies to an array of lands that the public does not understand to be
a part of the National Wildlife Refuge System, including conservation
easements. AEMA is dually concerned that: (1) this application of BIDEH
to land interests such as conservation easements is misleading to the
public and obscures the public's ability to impact the full and true
impacts of the BIDEH Updates; and (2) a one-size-fits-all approach
ignores the unique needs of individual areas, including biological
needs as well as the needs of local communities, local economies, and
local governments, and consequently will degrade public relations.

The statute, Proposed Rule, Proposed Service Manual Update, and
other FWS manuals and handbooks use varying terminologies to describe
the lands to which BIDEH concepts apply, and use varying definitions of
those terms. This variation is likely to cause confusion, and may also
leave the public feeling deceived because it subsumes a broader array
of lands into the BIDEH umbrella than at first meet the eye--including
conservation areas and conservation easements managed by the FWS, the
designation and acquisition of which FWS has recently prioritized.\3\
This is a far broader application of BIDEH than what the public would
commonly understand to be the National Wildlife Refuge System.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ For example, the FWS established the Bear River Watershed
Conservation Area in 2013, which approves the purchase of up to 920,000
acres of conservation easements in a 4.5-million-acre area of Idaho,
Wyoming, and Utah, and 30 acres of conservation easements were added in
2016 as a ``unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System.'' See 81 Fed.
Reg. 93951 (Dec. 22, 2016). In 2022, the FWS established the Lost Trail
Conservation Area as a unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System,
which includes 38,052 acres of conservation easements in Flathead and
Lincoln counties, Montana, and up to 100,000 acres of conservation
easements within the project boundary may be added. See 87 Fed. Reg.
62113 (Oct. 13, 2022). And in 2023, the FWS proposed the establishment
of the Missouri Headwaters Conservation Area, which is a 5.7-million-
acre area in Montana that approves the purchase of up to 250,000 acres
of conservation easements. See Proposed Missouri Headwaters
Conservation Area, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (last visited Feb. 29,
2024), https://www.fws.gov/project/proposed-missouri-headwaters-
conservation-area.

The statute applies BIDEH to the administration of ``the System.''
\4\ The Proposed Rule applies BIDEH to ``national wildlife refuges,
both individually and as a network,'' and to ``refuge ecosystems and
all their components across processes across multiple spatial scales.''
\5\ The Proposed Service Manual Update applies its BIDEH management
directives to ``to all Refuge System units.'' \6\ The statute and
current regulations define ``refuge'' as ``a designated area of land,
water, or an interest in land or water within the System, but does not
include Coordination Areas.'' \7\ The ``System,'' in turn, is defined
as ``the National Wildlife Refuge System designated under [16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(1)],'' \8\ which broadly includes ``the various
categories of areas that are administered by the Secretary for the
conservation of fish and wildlife, including species that are
threatened with extinction, all lands, waters, and interests therein
administered by the Secretary as wildlife refuges, areas for the
protection and conservation of fish and wildlife that are threatened
with extinction, wildlife ranges, game ranges, wildlife management
areas, or waterfowl production areas.'' \9\ The FWS's Conservation
Easement Handbook clarifies that the FWS considers ``conservation
easements'' to be ``subject to the same laws, regulations, and policies
as any other real property that is part of the National Wildlife Refuge
System.'' \10\ Further, the FWS Strategic Growth Policy expressly
includes ``conservation areas'' in its use of the term ``refuge.'' \11\
And the FWS webpage on conservation areas states that conservation
areas are a ``a type of national wildlife refuge that consists
primarily or entirely of conservation easements on private lands.''
\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(B).
\5\ Proposed Rule, at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3 and Sec. 29.3(a).
\6\ Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.2.
\7\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668ee(11); see also 50 CFR Sec. 25.12.
\8\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668ee(14).

\9\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(1); see also 50 CFR Sec. 25.12
(``National Wildlife Refuge System, and System mean all lands, waters,
and interests therein administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service as wildlife refuges, wildlife ranges, wildlife management
areas, waterfowl production areas, coordination areas, and other areas
for the protection and conservation of fish and wildlife including
those that are threatened with extinction . . .'')

\10\ Conservation Easement Handbook (Supplements 601 FW 6
(Administration of National Wildlife Refuge System Conservation
Easements), at 9, NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM, U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE
SERVICE (October 2022), https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/policy/
files/ConservationEasementHandbook.pdf (hereinafter Conservation
Easement Handbook).

\11\ See Strategic Growth Policy, 602 FW 2, U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE
SERVICE (Sept. 4, 2014), https://www.fws.gov/policy-library/602fw5.

\12\ Conservation Area, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, https://
www.fws.gov/glossary/conservation-area (last visited Feb. 29, 2024).

Piecing those terms and definitions together, the BIDEH Updates
would apply BIDEH to all lands in the System, which includes not only
what the public commonly understands to be a ``refuge,'' but also all
``other areas'' managed by the FWS ``for the protection and
conservation of fish and wildlife,'' which already includes millions of
acres of conservation areas and conservation easements. The FWS has
already designated 13 conservation areas,\13\ and has recently
prioritized adding more, such as: (i) the Lost Trail Conservation Area
that was added in 2022 as a unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System
and includes 38,052 acres of conservation easements in Flathead and
Lincoln counties, Montana, and up to 100,000 acres of conservation
easements within the project boundary may be added; \14\ and (ii) the
overwhelmingly large, 5.7-million-acre Missouri Headwaters Conservation
Area in Montana that was proposed in 2023 and would allow the purchase
of up to 250,000 acres of conservation easements.\15\ It is concerning
that the BIDEH updates could lead to the FWS's application of BIDEH to
millions of acres of current, currently proposed, and future FWS
conservation areas and conservation easements. This is a much farther-
reaching application of BIDEH than what the public commonly understands
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
to be a FWS refuge.

\13\ Conservation Area, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, https://
www.fws.gov/glossary/conservation-area (last visited Feb. 29, 2024).

\14\ See 87 Fed. Reg. 62113 (Oct. 13, 2022).

\15\ See also supra note 3.

While AEMA acknowledges that FWS has a statutory mandate to manage
System Lands in a way that maintains BIDEH,\16\ AEMA is concerned that
the BIDEH Updates may deceive the public by roping in far more areas
than what the public understands to be refuges. If the public does not
fully understand where and how the BIDEH Updates would apply, then the
public is unable to fully evaluate and meaningfully participate in the
rulemaking process, which process is mandated to involve and
meaningfully consider the public's input. AEMA is further concerned
that a blanket, nationwide application of BIDEH ignores the unique
needs of individual areas, including biological needs as well as the
needs of local communities, local economies, and local governments.
Such a one-size-fits-all approach that takes away any local autonomy is
likely to degrade trust between FWS and the local communities and local
businesses companies who will be impacted the most by these policies.
Moreover, AEMA is concerned that, when further examining how the BIDEH
Updates plan to utilize BIDEH in the name of protecting System Lands,
such broad application will significantly impede land uses such as
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
mining and ranching, as discussed in more detail in the section below.

\16\ See 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(B).

II. IMPEDING EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF IMPORTANT MINERALS THROUGH
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EXPANSION OF THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM

Not only do the BIDEH Updates implicitly apply BIDEH to a broad new
array of lands that may not be commonly understood as National Wildlife
Refuges, they also promote the addition of new lands to the System.
AEMA acknowledges that FWS has a statutory mandate to manage System
Lands in a way that maintains BIDEH,\17\ and AEMA understands this
mandate with respect to what is commonly understood to include System
Lands. But the BIDEH Updates push this mandate beyond the bounds of the
statutory intent in affecting lands arguably outside the System and/or
in emphasizing the addition of new lands to the System.

\17\ See 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(B).

Specifically, the Proposed Rule promotes the expansion of the
National Wildlife Refuge System through ``acquir[ing] lands when
necessary to . . . ensure biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health'' and ``connect habitat.'' \18\ The Proposed
Rule's repeated references to ``connectivity,'' \19\ ``connect[ing]
habitat,'' \20\ and conservation ``across multiple spatial scales,''
\21\ together with its instructions to pursue ``appropriate actions''
to address ``threats to refuge resources [that] arise outside refuge
boundaries,'' \22\ further indicate the FWS's intent to link currently
separate National Wildlife Refuge System lands with each other by
acquiring and adding the intervening lands to the System.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(2).
\19\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(b).
\20\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(2).
\21\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(a).
\22\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(5) (emphasis
added).

The Proposed Service Manual Update is even more replete with
instructions to acquire and add new lands to the National Wildlife
Refuge System. Specifically, it instructs the FWS to: promote
``ecological connectivity'' by ``acquir[ing] lands to . . . ensure
BIDEH''; \23\ ``take a proactive approach'' to ``acquiring'' lands for
``enhancing the BIDEH of the Refuge System at all spatial scales'';
\24\ create ``connected, and intact habitats,'' ``habitat corridors,
linkages, or contiguous blocks''; \25\ ``maximize the size of
contiguous habitat, restore and maintain connectivity between blocks of
habitats, and protect wildlife corridors''; \26\ and ``acquire
additional lands to establish wildlife corridors that improve
connectivity and allow species movement from one habitat to another in
support of BIDEH.'' \27\ It also charges the Chief of the Refuge System
with ``[e]nsuring that the national land acquisition strategy for the
Refuge System is designed to enhance the BIDEH of the Refuge System at
all spatial scales,'' \28\ which further implies that the FWS intends
to emphasize expansion of the Refuge System. And, like the Proposed
Rule, the Proposed Service Manual Update instructs the FWS to take
action to promote BIDEH not only on established ``refuges'' but also
``associated ecosystems,'' \29\ ``across multiple spatial scales,''
\30\ and address ``events occurring off refuge lands'' \31\ and
``outside refuge boundaries.'' \32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B).
\24\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B) (emphasis
added).
\25\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B).
\26\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.11(B)(2) (emphasis
added).
\27\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B).
\28\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.7, Table 3-1
(emphasis added).
\29\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.5(C).
\30\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.6(A)(1).
\31\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15(A).
\32\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.19(E) (instructing
the FWS to pursue ``appropriate action'' to address ``threats to refuge
resources [that] arise outside refuge boundaries.'')

Although AEMA supports the protection of biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health, we oppose such a dramatic push to
expand the National Wildlife Refuge System, which will immediately halt
mineral exploration, prospecting, locating, and filing of mining claims
on lands added to the System where the minerals are federally
owned.\33\ Further, to the extent the lands newly acquired for the
System have non-federal mineral rights (e.g., conservation easements
where the minerals are reserved for the landowner), even if exploration
and development of non-federal minerals would be technically
permissible, adding them to the System will have a chilling effect on
such exploration and development by imposing more stringent limitations
on surface occupancy and other regulatory restrictions on
operations.\34\ Indeed, the FWS's Conservation Easement Handbook and
Service Manual on the Administration of National Wildlife Refuge System
Conservation Easements both instruct the FWS to, ``whenever possible,
include in the easement document authority for the Service to require
and approve a permit to access any associated subsurface minerals.''
\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ See 50 C.F.R. Sec. 27.64 (``Prospecting, locating, or filing
mining claims on national wildlife refuges is prohibited unless
otherwise provided by law.'').
\34\ See 50 C.F.R. Sec. 29.32 (addressing non-federal mineral
rights within the National Wildlife Refuge System).
\35\ See Conservation Easement Handbook, Sec. V(j); see also
Administration of National Wildlife Refuge System Conservation
Easements, 601 FW 6, at Sec. V(i), p.8Sec. , U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE
SERVICE (Oct. 27, 2022), https://www.fws.gov/policy-library/601fw6
(hereinafter ``Conservation Easement Service Manual'').

This expansion of the System is also likely to suppress mining
outside of but near System Lands. This is because mineral operations
typically need to be of a certain size to be economically feasible.
And, unlike some other types of land uses like recreation, mining
operations can't simply shift to another location--the minerals are
where the minerals are. Precluding mining on large, newly acquired
areas of the Refuge System, including large conservation areas, may
leave the remaining outside areas as legally available for mining, but
practically and economically unavailable, particularly in light of the
emphasis of the BIDEH Updates on interfering with neighboring land use
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
planning.

Such an expansion of the National Wildlife Refuge System--and
associated halting of new mineral development--is an extreme measure
that is unnecessary to protect biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health. AEMA members' mining activities are subject to a
comprehensive suite of regulations designed to protect the natural
environment, wildlife, and human health, and AEMA members are committed
to responsible mineral development and operations. Enforcing existing
environmental regulations and allowing responsible, compliant companies
to continue their lawful activities is a better-reasoned approach than
the proposed wholesale elimination of mining though expansion of System
Lands.

Moreover, expansion of the National Wildlife Refuge System with the
aim of protecting fish and wildlife against the impacts of climate
change could actually have the opposite effect by hindering the
transition to renewable energy. Mining for minerals like copper that
are designated by the U.S. Department of Energy as ``critical materials
for energy''--meaning they are deemed essential to energy technologies
and have a high-risk for supply chain disruption \36\--are necessary to
facilitate a transition to a clean energy economy. Indeed, such
minerals are commonly used in electric utility equipment, electric
vehicles, solar and wind power systems, and building construction,
among other things. Many other minerals, such as gold and silver, are
crucial in making technological advancements, such as in many
electronic devices as well as in medical equipment. Likewise, the fifty
minerals designated by the United States Geological Survey as
``critical minerals'' \37\ are important for the nation's technological
progress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ See What are Critical Materials and Critical Minerals?, U.S.
Dep't of Energy, https://www.energy.gov/cmm/what-are-critical-
materials-and-critical-minerals (last visited Jan. 10, 2024).
\37\ See 2022 Final List of Critical Minerals, 87 Fed. Reg. 10381
(Feb. 24, 2022).

Currently, the United States is heavily reliant on foreign
countries for such minerals and materials that are essential to modern
technology and the clean energy transition. This reliance on imported
materials presents the risk of uncertainty of availability and pricing
of materials necessary to meet our domestic technological needs and
environmental goals. In addition, outsourcing our nation's mineral
needs can mean that mining takes place in countries that lack similarly
rigorous environmental standards for mining as the United States, which
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
may lead to avoidable environmental degradation in those countries.

Precluding domestic production of critical materials, critical
minerals, and other important hard-rock minerals via the BIDEH Updates
would not only frustrate the goals of the Biden administration to shift
to clean energy, tackle climate change, and promote environmental
stewardship--it would also run counter to the Biden administration's
goals to invest in domestic jobs, domestic production and
manufacturing, and the U.S. economy. Specifically, Executive Order
14017, ``On America's Supply Chains,'' makes it a presidential priority
to ``revitalize and rebuild domestic manufacturing'' and ``domestic
production,'' and directs cabinet officials to develop policies to
``sustainably reshor[e] supply chains,'' ``develop[] domestic
supplies,'' and encourage domestic ``investment in critical goods and
materials.'' In addition, the Inflation Reduction Act incentivizes
electric vehicle batteries and solar and wind projects made with
domestic content or domestic supply chains.\38\ Because the BIDEH
Updates would facilitate putting both public and private lands off-
limits to mineral exploration and development, it consequently could
thwart President Biden's stated goals to strengthen domestic critical
minerals supply chains in order to lessen the Nation's dependency on
foreign minerals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ The Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-169, 136
Stat. 2001.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
III. UNAUTHORIZED MINERAL WITHDRAWALS

The effect of the BIDEH Updates would be to either preclude or
significantly hinder mining and mineral exploration on a growing area
of land, through the proposals' encouragement of adding lands to the
National Wildlife Refuge System. To the extent that such additions to
the National Wildlife Refuge System come from land that is currently
managed by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management (``BLM'') or U.S. Forest
Service (``Forest Service'') and open to mineral exploration and
development, the effect of adding such land to the National Wildlife
Refuge System is a mineral withdrawal and/or a conveyance of public
lands, both of which implicate a suite of statutory and regulatory
procedural requirements.

First, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (``FLPMA'')
requires that, when the Secretary of the Interior conveys title to
public lands, generally only the surface may be conveyed, while the
minerals and ``the right to prospect for, mine, and remove the
minerals'' must be reserved.\39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ See FLPMA Section 209, 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1719. There is a limited
exception for when the surface owner is or will be a non-Federal
entity, in which case the Secretary may convey the minerals if s/he
makes the findings that: ``(1) that there are no known mineral values
in the land, or (2) that the reservation of the mineral rights in the
United States is interfering with or precluding appropriate nonmineral
development of the land and that such development is a more beneficial
use of the land than mineral development.'' Id. This exception does not
apply to conveyances to another federal entity.

Second, minerals belonging to the United States, including those
underlying lands managed by the BLM land and Forest Service land, are
statutorily required to allow mineral exploration and mining,\40\
unless the minerals are ``withdrawn'' after, and only after, following
one of four procedural pathways:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ See 30 U.S.C. Sec. 22 (``[A]ll valuable mineral deposits in
lands belonging to the United States . . . shall be free and open to
exploration . . . .'').

1.  Administrative Withdrawals. Pursuant to FLPMA, the Secretary or
Assistant Secretary of Interior Secretary may withdraw
public lands from mining and mineral exploration, but
subject to limitations and following specific
procedures.\41\ Secretarial withdrawals must be published
in the Federal Register \42\ and cannot take effect until
after providing an ``opportunity for a public hearing.''
\43\ In addition, withdrawals proposed to last more than
twenty (20) years or comprise more than 5,000 acres in
aggregate must generally be reported to Congress prior to
taking effect.\44\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ See FLPMA Section 204, 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1714.
\42\ See FLPMA Section 204(b), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1714(b).
\43\ See FLPMA Section 204(h), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1714(h). Emergency
withdrawals are excepted from the hearing requirement. See id.
\44\ See FLPMA Section 204(c), (d), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1714(c), (d).
There is a limited exception for withdrawals necessitated by
``emergency,'' which withdrawals must still be reported to Congress
within three months after taking effect and can only last for three
years. See FLPMA Section 204(e), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1714(e).

2.  Presidential Withdrawals. The President of the United States may,
by Executive Order or Presidential Proclamation under the
authority of the Antiquities Act of 1906 withdraw public
lands from mineral exploration and to designate landmarks,
historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects of
historic or scientific interest.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Pub. L. No. 59-209, 34 Stat. 225 (June 8, 1906) (currently
codified at 54 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 320301-320303).

3.  Congressional Withdrawals. Congress may, through duly enacted
legislation, withdraw public land from mineral exploration
and mining by, for example, designating areas as Wilderness
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
areas, National Parks, or Wild and Scenic Rivers.

4.  Federal Power Act Withdrawals. The Federal Power Act provides for
withdrawals for certain hydroelectric power developments
under the authority of the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (``FERC'').

Unless withdrawn pursuant to one of the above procedures, ``all
valuable mineral deposits in lands belonging to the United States . . .
shall be free and open to exploration . . . .'' \46\ Therefore, the
BIDEH Updates should be amended to clarify that if FWS intends to
acquire into the National Wildlife Refuge System any public lands that
are currently open to mineral exploration, such acquisitions and
mineral withdrawals can only be effected after following the statutory
and regulatory procedures for mineral withdrawals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 22.

IV. INTERFERENCE IN LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL MATTERS OUTSIDE THE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
STATUTORY SCOPE OF THE NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM

AEMA acknowledges that the Secretary, through the FWS, is
statutorily tasked with managing ``the System'' in way that ensures a
number of specific goals, including but not limited to: maintenance of
the BIDEH of the System; ``effective coordination, interaction, and
cooperation with owners of land adjoining refuges and the fish and
wildlife agency of the States in which the units of the System are
located''; and ``timely and effective cooperation and collaboration
with Federal agencies and State fish and wildlife agencies during the
course of acquiring and managing refuges.'' \47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4).

But the BIDEH Updates stretch the boundaries of these statutory
authorizations and positions FWS as the aggressive landowner in the
neighborhood who will soon wear out its welcome. Specifically, the
Proposed Rule instructs FWS to pursue ``appropriate actions'' to
address ``threats to refuge resources [that] arise outside refuge
boundaries.'' \48\ The Proposed Service Manual Update likewise
instructs the FWS to take action to promote BIDEH not only on
established ``refuges'' but also ``associated ecosystems,'' \49\
``across multiple spatial scales,'' \50\ and address ``events occurring
off refuge lands'' \51\ and ``outside refuge boundaries.'' \52\ The
Proposed Service Manual Update even goes so far has to have an entire
section on actions the FWS should take to protect ``BIDEH from actions
outside of refuges'' and ``events occurring off refuge lands.'' \53\ It
instructs Refuge managers, with respect to ``events occurring off-
refuge,'' to ``regularly monitor land use proposals, changes to
adjacent lands, and external activities for their potential impacts to
the BIDEH of ecosystems that include refuges,'' and to ``engage
constructively with the broader community'' to ``encourage compatible
adjacent land uses and seek to avoid and mitigate potential adverse
impacts on refuge resources by actively participating in the planning
and regulatory processes of other Federal agencies and Tribal, State,
and local governments having jurisdiction over public or private
property affecting, or affected by, the refuge.'' \54\ While this
language might seem initially benign, the instructions continue: ``If .
. . a decision is made or is imminent that will result in unacceptable
impacts on refuge resources, we may take action within the legal
authorities available . . . \55\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(5) (emphasis
added).
\49\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.5(C).
\50\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.6(A)(1).
\51\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15(A) (emphasis
added).
\52\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.19(E) (instructing
the FWS to pursue ``appropriate action'' to address ``threats to refuge
resources [that] arise outside refuge boundaries.'')
\53\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15
\54\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15(A) (emphasis
added).
\55\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15

In other words, under the BIDEH Updates, the FWS may bring legal
action against landowners or local governments in the vicinity of
System Lands, which could be in the vicinity of tens of millions of
acres of conservation easements, conservation areas, and other property
interests that the FWS has acquired or plans to acquire for
conservation purposes. This has the potential to significantly disrupt
the FWS's relationships with landowners and local governments and
disrupt land uses like mining that are important to our nation's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
economy and the functioning of modern technology.

V. CONFLICTING WITH THE STATUTORY MULTIPLE-USE MANDATE FOR PUBLIC LANDS
AND STATUTES PRIORITIZING NATIONWIDE MINERAL DEVELOPMENT

As discussed above, the BIDEH Updates direct the FWS to acquire new
lands to add to the National Wildlife Refuge System as well as
interfere with other agencies' planning processes for lands outside of
the Refuge System. This includes ``actively participating in the
planning and regulatory processes of other Federal agencies and Tribal,
State, and local governments'' in the vicinity of National Wildlife
Refuges.\56\ Given that many System Lands, including conservation
easements, are in the vicinity of public lands managed by the BLM and
Forest Service, the directive to promote BIDEH outside of refuges and
in other agencies' planning process conflicts with the statutory
mandates for the federal government to manage public lands for
``multiple uses,'' including mining. Specifically, FLPMA makes it the
policy of the United States to manage public lands ``on the basis of
multiple use and sustained yield'' \57\ and ``in a manner which
recognizes the Nation's need for domestic sources of minerals . . .
from public lands.'' \58\ Similarly, the Multiple-Use and Sustained
Yield Act (``MUSY'') directs that the surface of national forests be
managed and developed ``for multiple use and sustained yield.'' \59\
FLPMA defines ``multiple use'' to include ``a combination of balanced
and diverse resource uses that takes into account the long-term needs
of future generations for renewable and non-renewable resources,
including . . . minerals.'' \60\ FLPMA additionally designates
``mineral exploration and production'' as a ``principal or major use''
of public lands, along with domestic livestock grazing, fish and
wildlife development and utilization, production, rights-of-way,
outdoor recreation, and timber production.\61\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\56\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15(A).
\57\ FLPMA Section 102(a)(7), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1701(a)(7).
\58\ FLPMA Section 102(a)(12), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1701(a)(12).
\59\ Multiple-Use and Sustained Yield Act of 1960, Section 2, 16
U.S.C. Sec. 529.
\60\ FLPMA Section 103(c), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1702(c).
\61\ FLPMA Section 103(l), 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1702(l).

Moreover, FLPMA and multiple other statutes emphasize that mineral
development is a national priority. Specifically, FLPMA directs that
``public lands be managed in a manner which recognizes the Nation's
need for domestic sources of minerals . . . from public lands.'' \62\
Similarly, the Mining and Minerals Policy Act of 1970 (``MMPA''),
declares that ``it is the continuing policy of the Federal Government
in the national interest to foster and encourage private enterprise in
(1) the development of economically sound and stable domestic mining,
minerals, metal and mineral reclamation industries, (2) the orderly and
economic development of domestic mineral resources, reserves, and
reclamation of metals and minerals to help assure satisfaction of
industrial, security and environmental needs . . . including all
minerals and mineral fuels including oil, gas, coal, oil shale and
uranium.'' \63\ In addition, the National Materials and Minerals
Policy, Research and Development Act of 1980 expressly directs the
Secretary of Interior to act immediately to attain the goals set forth
in the MMPA, and it calls for the Executive Office to promote goals of
the MMPA within the various departments and agencies.\64\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\62\ 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1701(a)(12).
\63\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 21(a).
\64\ See generally 30 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1601-1605.

It is difficult to see how these statutes prioritizing mineral
development nationwide--on both public and private land--and
additionally directing the BLM and Forest Service to manage public
lands for multiple-uses (which includes allowing mining and mineral
exploration) can be coalesced with the FWS's policy of BIDEH, the
restrictions on mineral exploration that implicitly come with BIDEH,
and the BIDEH Updates' elimination and/or hindering of mining by
promoting the aggressive addition of lands into the National Wildlife
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Refuge System.

CONCLUSION

AEMA acknowledges that the FWS must manage System lands to maintain
their BIDEH. However, we are concerned that the BIDEH Updates will be
used by the FWS to go beyond the agency's statutory mandate to
interfere with land uses outside of the System, aggressively add new
lands to the System, and impede exploration and mining of minerals that
are important to this nation's economy, clean energy transition, and
modern technology, and may otherwise have complex and far-reaching
effects that have not been fully evaluated by the public on multiple
sectors of the economy. AEMA accordingly requests that the Proposed
Rule and Propose Service Manual Update be amended and significantly
scaled-back.

Sincerely,

Mark Compton,
Executive Director

______

Montana Mining Association

March 4, 2024

Shannon Estenoz, Assist. Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks
Katherine Harrigan, Div. of Natural Resources and Conservation
Planning,
National Wildlife Refuge System
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Public Comments Processing

Re: Comments to Proposed Rule (50 C.F.R. 29.3) and Policy Updates (601
FW 3)

Dear Ms. Harrigan and Assistant Secretary Estenoz:

The Montana Mining Association (``MMA'') is an industry
organization representing the mining community throughout the State of
Montana. MMA's mission promotes the responsible mining of critical and
important metal and mineral resources within Montana for purposes of
furthering energy independence, combating climate change, and feeding
the supply chains of our country. This mission includes engaging with
federal agencies as they craft policies for land use and natural
resource planning, as well as advocacy at the agency and executive
level on behalf of the mining industry. In this capacity, MMA is
concerned with the United States Fish & Wildlife Service (``FWS'')'s
proposed ``biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health''
(``BIDEH'') rule and associated policy updates (together, ``Proposed
Rule and Policy''). We believe the Proposed Rule and Policy, while well
intentioned, will negatively affect the ability for existing mines to
expand and/or continue to develop, and it will stymie future mineral
exploration or development.

As a preliminary matter, we note that MMA is not opposed to
conservation. On the contrary, MMA believes that conservation and
mineral development are far from being mutually exclusive. As Congress
intended, there is room for multiple uses on public lands, without
blocking mining and without halting conservation efforts. Along these
lines, private landowners and interest-holders have shown their
ingenuity and the ability to conserve wildlife while conducting mineral
operations on their own properties. The Proposed Rule and Policy,
however, would have negative consequences for multiple use efforts. It
would effectively block mineral exploration and development on lands
managed by FWS, lands included within the agency's broadly designated
conservation areas, and lands linked or near any portion of the FWS
refuge system. Consequently, MMA is opposed to the Proposed Rule and
Policy, as drafted.
I. The Proposed Rule and Policy is overbroad.

As drafted, the Proposed Rule and Policy is overly broad and would
apply to lands and property interests which the public would not
typically consider as part of the National Wildlife Refuge System
(``NWRS'') (e.g., conservation areas and easements). In this respect,
we note that the Proposed Rule and Policy and other FWS policy manuals
use a variety of words and phrases to describe the lands and interests
subject to BIDEH management--none of which are consistent and few of
which are defined. The result of these inconsistent definitions is a
strong likelihood that the agency will apply the Proposed Rule and
Policy far beyond the original intent of Congress.

The Proposed Rule and Policy states that it would apply BIDEH to
``national wildlife refuges, both individually and as a network,'' and
to ``refuge ecosystems and all their components across processes across
multiple spatial scales.'' \1\ The associated policy manual confirms
BIDEH would be applied to ``to all Refuge System units.'' \2\ By
statute, a ``refuge'' is ``a designated area of land, water, or an
interest in land or water within the System, but does not include
Coordination Areas.'' \3\ The ``System,'' in turn, is defined as ``the
National Wildlife Refuge System designated under [16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(1)],'' \4\ which broadly includes ``the various
categories of areas that are administered by the Secretary for the
conservation of fish and wildlife, including species that are
threatened with extinction, all lands, waters, and interests therein
administered by the Secretary as wildlife refuges, areas for the
protection and conservation of fish and wildlife that are threatened
with extinction, wildlife ranges, game ranges, wildlife management
areas, or waterfowl production areas.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3 and Sec. 29.3(a) (emphasis
added).
\2\ Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.2.
\3\ 16 U.S.C.S. Sec. 668ee(11); see also 50 CFR Sec. 25.12.
\4\ 16 U.S.C.S. Sec. 668ee(14).
\5\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 668dd(a)(1); see also 50 CFR Sec. 25.12
(``National Wildlife Refuge System, and System mean all lands, waters,
and interests therein administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service as wildlife refuges, wildlife ranges, wildlife management
areas, waterfowl production areas, coordination areas, and other areas
for the protection and conservation of fish and wildlife including
those that are threatened with extinction . . .'')

Clearly, the Proposed Rule and Policy would apply to all NWRS
lands, which includes refuges and all ``other areas'' managed by the
FWS. However, based on the broad and inconsistent definitions used, it
appears conservation areas and similarly designated areas would be
encompassed as well. To this point, we note that FWS asserts that the
term ``other areas'' includes conservation areas and easements alike.
Indeed, the FWS Strategic Growth Policy expressly includes
``conservation areas'' in its use of the term ``refuge.'' \6\ Because
``conservation area'' is largely undefined in the underlying federal
laws, FWS acts as though it is not bound to a specific definition, and
would be free to interpret the phrase as narrowly or broadly as it sees
fit. This creates problems where conservation areas encompass vast
amounts of federal and public lands managed by other agencies with
conflicting policies and management plans. Despite other management
agencies and interests, the FWS Conservation Easement Handbook asserts
that ``conservation easements . . . are subject to the same laws,
regulations, and policies as any other real property that is part of
the National Wildlife Refuge System.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Strategic Growth Policy, 602 FW 2, U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE
SERVICE (Sept. 4, 2014), https://www.fws.gov/policy-library/602fw5.
\7\ Conservation Easement Handbook (Supplements 601 FW 6
(Administration of National Wildlife Refuge System Conservation
Easements), at 9, NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM, U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE
SERVICE (October 2022), https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/policy/
files/ConservationEasementHandbook.pdf (hereinafter Conservation
Easement Handbook).

The applicability of the Proposed Rule and Policy to conservation
areas and easements is concerning. For example, just this past year,
FWS proposed the establishment of the Missouri Headwaters Conservation
Area (``MHCA'') in Montana. As proposed, the MHCA would encompass
approximately 5.8 million acres comprised of county, state, federal,
and privately held interests, and would include the entirety of
Beaverhead County, the majority of Madison County, and large portions
of Jefferson, Silver Bow, and Deer Lodge Counties. If established, the
MHCA would become the largest conservation area within Montana. With
respect to the MHCA, this Proposed Rule and Policy would not only
restrict extractive activities on NWRS lands \8\ but also empower FWS
to police activities occurring on adjacent lands and, arguably, any
lands associated with the conservation area.\9\ Consequently, if the
MHCA is established, the Proposed Rule and Policy would permit FWS to
apply BIDEH concepts, directly or indirectly, to a landmass larger than
the State of Connecticut--thereby affecting the ability of existing
mines to expand or continue operations and potentially forestalling
future mineral development altogether.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B)(4) (``We avoid
resource intensive activities and uses such as logging or livestock
grazing'').
\9\ See generally Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II. The Proposed Rule and Policy would undermine critical mineral
development.

The Proposed Rule and Policy wrongfully encourages an unprecedented
expansion of the NWRS. Specifically, it promotes this expansion by
``acquir[ing] lands when necessary to . . . ensure biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health'' and ``connect
habitat.'' \10\ In this regard, the Proposed Rule and Policy's repeat
references to ``connectivity,'' \11\ ``connect[ing] habitat,'' \12\ and
conservation ``across multiple spatial scales,'' \13\ together with its
instructions to pursue ``appropriate actions'' to address ``threats to
refuge resources [that] arise outside refuge boundaries,'' \14\
demonstrate FWS's intent to link and expand the NWRS through the
acquisition of additional lands and affect adjacent properties. The
associated policy manual is even more explicit--instructing FWS to:
promote ``ecological connectivity'' by ``acquir[ing] lands to . . .
ensure BIDEH''; \15\ ``take a proactive approach'' to ``acquiring''
lands for ``enhancing the BIDEH of the Refuge System at all spatial
scales''; \16\ create ``connected, and intact habitats,'' ``habitat
corridors, linkages, or contiguous blocks''; \17\ ``maximize the size
of contiguous habitat, restore and maintain connectivity between blocks
of habitats, and protect wildlife corridors''; \18\ and ``acquire
additional lands to establish wildlife corridors that improve
connectivity and allow species movement from one habitat to another in
support of BIDEH.'' \19\ The result of these directives is a blank
check, which wrongfully allows the agency to expand its reach and
authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(2).
\11\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(b).
\12\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(2).
\13\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(a).
\14\ See Proposed Rule at 43 C.F.R. Sec. 29.3(c)(5) (emphasis
added).
\15\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B).
\16\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B) (emphasis
added).
\17\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B).
\18\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.11(B)(2) (emphasis
added).
\19\ See Proposed Service Manual Update, Sec. 3.10(B).

MMA opposes such a dramatic expansion of the NWRS. With respect to
federally owned minerals, mineral exploration, prospecting, and the
location of mining claims, these activities would be immediately halted
on newly acquired or affected lands.\20\ To the extent minerals are
privately owned (e.g., grants of surface rights or conservation
easements where landowners have specifically reserved the minerals),
even where mining is legally permissible, existing regulations would
impose restrictive burdens and chill any efforts to explore and develop
the mineral estate responsibly.\21\ Notably, FWS is instructed to exert
its authority when seeking and drafting conservation easements, by,
``whenever possible, includ[ing] in the easement document authority for
the Service to require and approve a permit to access any associated
subsurface minerals.'' \22\ Such language disrupts the general rights
of parties in split estate situations and creates unpredictability for
the application of state and local laws balancing the interests of
private ownership.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ See 50 C.F.R. Sec. 27.64 (``Prospecting, locating, or filing
mining claims on national wildlife refuges is prohibited unless
otherwise provided by law.'').
\21\ See 50 C.F.R. Sec. 29.32 (addressing non-federal mineral
rights within the National Wildlife Refuge System).
\22\ See Conservation Easement Handbook, Sec. V(j); see also
Administration of National Wildlife Refuge System Conservation
Easements, 601 FW 6, at Sec. V(i), p.8Sec. , U.S. FISH & WILDLIFE
SERVICE (Oct. 27, 2022), https://www.fws.gov/policy-library/601fw6
(hereinafter ``Conservation Easement Service Manual'').

In this regard, we note that under Montana law, when ownership of
surface and mineral estates are split, the holder of the mineral estate
must obtain approval from the surface owner before it can commence any
mineral development or disturb the property.\23\ FWS regulations
restrict the exploration, development, and production of private
minerals by mandating that such activities ``prevent damage, erosion,
pollution, or contamination to Service-administered lands, waters,
facilities, and to wildlife thereon,'' ``to the greatest extent
practicable.'' \24\ In addition to these standards, the request for
surface owner approval would trigger, at the least, an environmental
assessment under the National Environmental Policy Act.\25\ Expansion
of the NWRS is also likely to suppress mining on adjacent lands. Unlike
other types of uses (e.g., recreation, hunting, fishing, grazing, etc .
. .), mining operations cannot simply move to another location--the
minerals are where they are. As seen with the proposed MHCA, expansion
of the NWRS creates an increasing likelihood that access to mineral
interests not subject to FWS jurisdiction will be effectively blocked
by NWRS lands. Mineral and other operations which occur on checkerboard
lands or locations involving multiple interests within the same section
would be effectively blocked as well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ See MCA Sec. 82-2-303.
\24\ See 50 CFR Sec. 29.32.
\25\ See San Luis Valley Ecosystem Council v. U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, 657 F.Supp.2d 1233 (Colo. Dist. 2009).

Expansion of the NWRS--and the associated interference with mineral
and other types of development--is an extreme measure that is
ultimately unnecessary to protect BIDEH. MMA members' activities are
already subjected to a comprehensive suite of state and federal
statutes and regulations, all of which protect the natural environment,
wildlife, and human health, and these members are committed to
responsible mineral development and operations. In furtherance of these
goals, many of MMA's members engage in good samaritan cleanup efforts
and go above and beyond their legal requirements. Enforcing existing
environmental regulations and allowing responsible, compliant companies
to continue their lawful activities is better than the wholesale
elimination or obstruction of mining. Moreover, contrary to the
agency's assertions, expansion of the NWRS would actually have an
adverse effect on efforts to reduce climate change. Gold, silver, and
copper and many other minerals have been designated by the U.S.
Department of Energy as ``critical materials for energy''--i.e., they
are essential for energy technologies and have a high-risk for supply
chain disruption.\26\ These and other minerals are also essential to
fuel the country's transition to a green energy economy.\27\
Restricting mining and mineral development in areas where these
minerals are found makes it more difficult for the United States to
obtain materials necessary to develop renewable energy alternatives.
More importantly, it results in the United States outsourcing its
mineral needs to other countries (like China) which do not adhere to
the same rigorous environmental standards as MMA's membership. In this
regard, the contemplated expansion is likely to be counterproductive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ See What are Critical Materials and Critical Minerals?, U.S.
Dep't of Energy, https://www.energy.gov/cmm/what-are-critical-
materials-and-critical-minerals (last visited Jan. 10, 2024).
\27\ See 2022 Final List of Critical Minerals, 87 Fed. Reg. 10381
(Feb. 24, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
III. The Proposed Rule and Policy ignores existing local efforts to
manage BIDEH.

The Proposed Rule and Policy is a one-size-fits-all, top-down
approach for BIDEH management which ignores the role that local
stakeholders already play in management activities and their efforts to
conserve species habitat and promote BIDEH. While the Proposed Rule and
Policy extols the virtue of ``coordination'' with local stakeholders,
it incorporates an assumption that local efforts to advance BIDEH are
insufficient and require more rigid federal oversight. The Proposed
Rule and Policy fails to account for local efforts and local interests.
Using the proposed MHCA as an example--we note that public lands make
up more than sixty percent (60%) of the lands within the proposed
conservation area.\28\ As noted above, these lands are already subject
to significant state and federal regulations designed to prevent
environmental degradation. Additionally, of the remaining private
lands, we note that large portions of the conservation area are already
subject to state and private conservation easements which, arguably,
already promote BIDEH and its purposes.\29\ More broadly, Montana Fish
Wildlife & Parks has engaged, and continues to engage, in the
successful conservation and management of critical keystone species and
their habitat, and the state agency has been in constant coordination
with FWS. At best, the Proposed Rule and Policy duplicates efforts
already being undertaken locally. At worst, it amounts to a power grab
by supplanting local efforts and subverting local autonomy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ See, e.g., U.S. Fish & Wildlife Serv., Proposed Missouri
Headwaters Conservation Area Map (Sept. 15, 2023), https://www.fws.gov/
sites/default/files/documents/Landowner-Public-Meeting-09-14-2023.pdf.
\29\ Approximately 25% of Madison County and 19% of Beaverhead
County private lands are already under conservation easements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. The Proposed Rule and Policy conflicts with multiple use
requirements and federal minerals policy.

Contrary to numerous federal statutes, in which Congress has
prioritized mining and instructed agencies to promote the same, the
Proposed Rule and Policy fails to account for and allow mineral
development. In the Mining and Minerals Policy Act of 1970 (``MMPA''),
Congress declared ``it is the continuing policy of the Federal
Government in the national interest to foster and encourage private
enterprise in (1) the development of economically sound and stable
domestic mining, minerals, metal and mineral reclamation industries,
(2) the orderly and economic development of domestic mineral resources,
reserves, and reclamation of metals and minerals to help assure
satisfaction of industrial, security and environmental needs . . .
including all minerals and mineral fuels including oil, gas, coal, oil
shale and uranium''. 30 U.S.C. 21(a). Moreover, the MMPA expressly
provides the Secretary of Interior with the responsibility to carry out
MMPA policies.

Furthering Congress' mandated policy of prioritizing mineral
development, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
(``FLPMA'') establishes that it is the authority of the U.S. Department
of Interior and BLM to manage federal lands and federal mineral
interests. 43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq. Under FLPMA, ``public lands [are to]
be managed in a manner which recognizes the Nation's need for domestic
sources of minerals . . . from public lands'' in further implementation
of the MMPA. 43 U.S.C. 1701(a)(12). Additionally, the National
Materials and Minerals Policy, Research and Development Act of 1980
expressly directs the Secretary to act immediately to attain goals set
forth in the MMPA, and calls on the Executive Office to promote the
MMPA within the federal government's various departments and agencies.
See generally 30 U.S.C. 1601-1605.
The Proposed Rule and Policy fails to provide a means for mineral
development, as mandated by the above policies and statutes, and it
stands in direct conflict with mineral development. Despite the lack of
statutory authority for such restrictions, it is well understood that
mineral development is not allowed on federally owned lands within the
NWRS. The Proposed Rule and Policy further alienates the prospect of
mineral development by requiring additional analysis by the agency--
ensuring BIDEH is furthered by the action--in addition to making a
determination that a proposed action is compatible with the refuge
purpose and NWRS mission. These disparities are especially concerning
given the vast amount of federal lands included in FWP's conservation
area designations (see MHCA discussion above). Clearly, the Proposed
Rule and Policy stands to impact lands which are not typically
understood to constitute wildlife refuges--including private lands and
other public lands. These changes, therefore, put FWS in conflict with
both private ownership as well as other federal agencies trying to
advance congressional policies on public lands.
V. Conclusion.

The overbreadth, substantive deficiencies, and inherent
consequences of the Proposed Rule and Policy cause MMA serious concern.
Further, it is unnecessary. For the reasons discussed above, we ask
that FWS abandon the Proposed Rule and Policy as drafted.

Regards,

Matt Vincent,
Executive Director

______

Montana Natural Resource Coalition

March 4, 2024

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological Integrity, Diversity,
and Environmental Health (BIDEH) 50 CFR Part 29 and 601 FW 3

Dear Assistant Secretary Shannon Estenoz:

The Montana Natural Resource Coalition (MtNRC) is a network of
eighteen (18) counties who have county governmental jurisdiction over
53,814 square miles in the State of Montana. MtNRC's mission is to
inform federal agency rulemaking pertaining to land use, natural
resource planning, and advocating on behalf of our membership. Current
MtNRC members include Beaverhead, Blaine, Fergus, Garfield, Liberty,
Madison, McCone, Musselshell, Pondera, Petroleum, Phillips, Powder
River, Prairie, Richland, Roosevelt, Sweet Grass, Valley, and Wibaux
Counties.

MtNRC has already submitted comments to United States Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) on two other processes regarding refuge
management. Some of the procedural issues and other concerns we
identified relate to the current proposal, therefore we are including
those comments as part of this submittal. One thing we noted was the
failure to consult with and coordinate USFWS policy and management
development and decisions with local governments and adjacent property
owners. As for this current proposed BIDEH regulation and policy
changes our potentially affected member counties were not provided with
any advance notice.

The USFWS has decided to lump a policy revision to their manual
(601 FW 3) and inserting new BIDEH regulations into the code of federal
regulations (CFR) in a single process. Though these items correlate
they should be separate processes in order to provide utility to the
commenting public. The USFWS has not adequately demonstrated at the
unit level that climate change and anthropogenic stressors are indeed
transforming the ecological function of habitats on individual refuge
systems.

The Climate-Policy Agenda (CPA) is deficient in that it
fails to comply with the Data Quality Act standards for
scientific information, and inappropriately relies upon
top-down executive directives and international guidance
while significantly diminishing intergovernmental
coordination with political sub-divisions of the United
States.

The CPA agenda has resulted in a fragmented public record,
and diminished the role, power, and authority of State and
local governments by removing parity they have in land-use
planning.

USFWS proposed policies fail to consider interagency land
use planning conflicts and impacts to private property and
local governments by imposing the expansion of refuge
boundaries and prioritizing pre-human conditions and
ecosystem corridors.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Federal Register/Vol. 89, No. 23/Friday, February 2, 2024/
Proposed Rules--``Historical conditions means composition, structure,
and function of ecosystems that existed prior to ecological degradation
caused by anthropogenic change, based on best available scientific and
historical information.'' (all bold, emphasis ours)

The proposed Rule does not contain peer reviewed
scientific information, data, articles, and/or other
substantive, high integrity, reproducible scientific
information that would allow MtNRC county governments to
understand the need, purpose, and foreseeable impacts of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the proposed Rule.

The administrative record for the proposed Rule does not
contain examples of climate change or invasive species that
would allow MtNRC members to conclude why the BIDEH
regulations are necessary.

The BIDEH as proposed prioritizes management that would
further pressure compatible uses on individual refuges
which have long established compatible and historic use.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``This proposed language would untether current and future
management actions from sustaining historical conditions that may no
longer be possible on many refuges,'' the FWS said.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The proposed BIDEH Rule in conjunction with the Missouri
Headwaters Conservation Area and the land planning policy
changes constitute a group of concerted efforts \3\ by
USFWS which poses unassessed impacts on the state and
counties which contain or border the refuge systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ CFR 1508.1(q)(3) ``Major Federal actions tend to fall within
one of the following categories: (iii) Adoption of programs, such as a
group of concerted actions to implement a specific policy or plan;
systematic and connected agency decisions allocating agency resources
to implement a specific statutory program or executive directive.''
(emphasis ours)

Background
On September 15th of 2023 the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service (USFWS) issued a proposed rule on the Federal Register to
update planning policies, 602 FW 1-4,\4\ for the National Wildlife
Refuge System (Refuge System). The purpose of these policy updates is
stated to modernize the Refuge System's management by incorporating
landscape conservation plans and consideration of climate change and
other anthropogenic forces in refuge management. Neither landscape
conservation planning, nor climate change and other anthropogenic
forces are mentioned within the National Wildlife Refuge System
Improvement Act.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Federal Register :: National Wildlife Refuge System Planning
Policies (602 FW 1-4) for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
\5\ West Virginia v. Environmental Protection Agency, 597 U.S. ____
(2022) ``. . . We presume that `Congress intends to make major policy
decisions itself, not leave those decisions to agencies.' United States
Telecom Assn. v. FCC, 855 F. 3d 381, 419 (CADC 2017); `. . . it is
unlikely that Congress will make an `[e]xtraordinary gran[t] of
regulatory authority' through `vague language' in `a long-extant
statute.'' Ante, at 18-20 (quoting Utility Air, 573 U. S., at 324).''

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We identified in our comment on this proposed rule,

`` . . . that it is clear that USFWS and their partners desire
to apply landscape scale ecoregional planning which could reach
far outside of wildlife refuge boundaries. The fact that the
proposed policy would allow Service partners to develop
landscape plans which delineate ecoregional units outside of
refuge boundaries in order to inform refuge planning is
concerning to adjacent property owners and local governments
with special expertise and jurisdiction by law.''

On September 20th of 2023 the USFWS published the proposed Missouri
Headwaters Conservation Area, which as proposed, would authorize the
Service to facilitate the acquisition of up to 250,000 acres of
conservation easements within the 5.7-million-acre boundary. USFWS
failed to published this on the Federal Register but instead published
notice on its website starting a public scoping period on the 20th of
September. Initially the scoping period was slated to end on the 26th
of October. After another letter being issued by the Montana Attorney
General's office the window was extended to the 27th of November.

After reviewing a response to a FOIA request on this item it is
evident that USFWS and partners violated the Administrative Procedures
Act and failed to disclose maps and other information. This information
confirmed that the conservation area is indeed a Land Protection Plan
(LPP, see attachment I) making it a part of the refuge system and
therefore presumably subject to the refuge system BIDEH and land
planning policies and regulations that USFWS is promulgating.

Now USFWS is proposing the BIDEH policy into the Code of Federal
Regulations in parallel with BIDEH policy revision at 601 FW 3. This
notice was published on the Federal Register on February 2nd, 2024,
with a 30-day comment period. The Federal Register states that,

``The Service did not anticipate the extent of climate change
impacts on refuge species and habitats or the need to clarify
in regulations our interpretation of and authority to implement
the BIDEH mandate.''

This statement is made and asserted without cited references or
empirical data that shows climate change is transforming species
composition and ecological function of habitats.\6\ To the contrary the
CMR game refuge in Montana is stable and has remained largely unchanged
in ecological composition and presence of wildlife. One significant
negative impact on the refuge is the USFWS has been retiring Grazing
permits recognized in Animal Unit Months (AUMs) off the range in spite
of the long established historical compatible use under the Taylor
Grazing Act and reserved grazing districts which predate the
establishment of the CMR.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ``[I]n order to qualify as `scientific knowledge,' an inference
or assertion must be derived by the scientific method,'' ``any and all
scientific testimony or evidence admitted [must be] . . . reliable,''
``tested,'' and ``supported by appropriate validation.'' Daubert v.
Merrell Pharmaceutical, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993) (emphasis added). As
to peer review, the Supreme Court similarly explained that peer review
can be helpful but ``does not necessarily correlate with reliability''
because ``in some instances well-grounded but innovative theories will
not have been published.'' Daubert, supra, p. 593.
\7\ On December 11, 1936, President Roosevelt signed Executive
Order 7509, establishing the Fort Peck Game Range (FPGR). FPGR, the
precursor to the Charles M. Russel Wildlife Refuge (CMR), specifically
provided that lands previously withdrawn or reserved ``will be affected
hereby only insofar as may be consistent with the uses and purposes for
which such prior withdrawal or reservation was made.''; This Executive
withdrawal performed under the authority of the Picket Act of 1910 was
done ``subject to all valid existing rights'' and were ``reserved and
set apart for the conservation and development of natural wildlife
resources and for the protection and improvement of public grazing
lands and natural forage resources.''

USFWS proposed policy and regulations conflict with individual refuge
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
priorities

The USFWS asserts that climate change has had an unanticipated
impact on the refuge system. This assertion needs to be rationally
verified and documented at the unit level with full consultation with
counties and adjacent land holders. The proposed regulations prioritize
focusing on pre-human conditions within the refuge system (which
includes conservation buffers) and inappropriately leave discretion to
unit managers to alter wildlife and biodiversity targets.

FWS said,

``This proposed language would untether current and future
management actions from sustaining historical conditions that
may no longer be possible on many refuges,''

The organic act for the National Wildlife Refuge System requires
that each individual refuge is managed to fulfill the specific purpose
for which the refuge was established,

``With respect to the Refuge System, it is the policy of the
United States that--(A) each refuge shall be managed to fulfill
the mission of the System, as well as the specific purposes for
which that refuge was established . . ..'' [NWRS Improvement
Act, Section 5(a)(3)]

When there is a conflict between system goals and individual refuge
purposes, the statute provides deference to the individual priority
scheme.

``. . . ensure that the mission of the System described in
paragraph (2) and the purposes of each refuge are carried out,
except that if a conflict exists between the purposes of a
refuge and the mission of the System, the conflict shall be
resolved in a manner that first protects the purposes of the
refuge , and, to the extent practicable, that also achieves the
mission of the System; (NWRS Improvement Act Section 5
(a)(4)(D))

The proposed regulations define historical conditions,

``Historical conditions means composition, structure, and
function of ecosystems that existed prior to ecological
degradation caused by anthropogenic change, based on best
available scientific and historical information.''

The UWFWS then under the heading of diversity states,

``We evaluate diversity by referencing historical conditions,
recognizing that climate change and other anthropogenic change
are influencing refuge ecosystems.''

So USFWS is directing unit managers to focus their evaluations for
``diversity'' based on conditions prior to anthropogenic (human)
influence. The regulations also correspond to the USFWS policy
proposals last year for landscape planning goals (see attachment I).
Here is how they address Conserve and Connect Habitat in the FR,

``(2) Conserve and connect habitat. We allow for and defer to
natural processes on habitats within the Refuge System and
promote conservation, restoration, and connectivity to meet
refuge habitat objectives and landscape planning goals (the
earlier policy changes USFWS issued last year redirect their
landscape planning goals). We will avoid and minimize habitat
fragmentation to sustain biological integrity and diversity.
When natural processes cannot meet habitat objectives or
facilitate adaptation to anthropogenic change, we will use
science-based management techniques or acquire lands when
necessary to meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge
purposes, and ensure biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health.''

Therefore, if natural processes do not produce the results of
management level biodiversity and connectivity objectives the service
will acquire lands to accomplish what for all intents and purposes are
arbitrary administrative goals. The proposed regulations then
explicitly prohibit agricultural practices unless they are deemed
necessary (by whom?) to fulfill refuge purposes which under the
proposed regulations will likely be heavily mitigated,

``(6) Agricultural uses. We prohibit the use of agricultural
practices unless they are determined necessary to meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health, and
where we cannot achieve refuge management objectives through
natural processes.''

These policies conflict with statutory requirements and long-
established compatibility uses on certain refuges. USFWS has failed to
address or assess these conflicting priorities and is imposing policy
changes which will create more conflict and confusion over time.

a. Proposed policies pose conflicting and competing priorities for
refuge managers (CMR case example)

Executive order 7509 which established the CMR Game Range
recognized the existing TGA reserved districts and required the
domestic livestock grazing be administered under the TGA, the history
of the range proves domestic livestock has always enjoyed a secondary
use and by custom has long been a compatible use on the range. The
proposed regulations run counter the organic act of the refuge system
which explicitly states,

``With respect to the Refuge System, it is the policy of the
United States that--(A) each refuge shall be managed to fulfill
the mission of the System, as well as the specific purposes for
which that refuge was established . . .'' [NWRS Improvement
Act, Section 5(a)(3)]

The Act also points to specific documentation in order to determine
the purposes of each refuge,

``. . . purposes of a refuge and purposes of each refuge mean
the purposes specified in or derived from the law,
proclamation, executive order , agreement, public land order,
donation document, or administrative memorandum establishing,
authorizing, or expanding a refuge, refuge unit, or refuge
subunit.'' (Refuge Improvement Act, Section 5)

On December 11, 1936, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order
7509, establishing the Fort Peck Game Range (FPGR). FPGR, the precursor
to the Charles M. Russel Wildlife Refuge (CMR), specifically provided
that lands previously withdrawn or reserved ``will be affected hereby
only insofar as may be consistent with the uses and purposes for which
such prior withdrawal or reservation was made.''

This Executive withdrawal was performed under the authority of the
Picket Act of 1910 and was ``subject to all valid existing rights'' and
were ``reserved and set apart for the conservation and development of
natural wildlife resources and for the protection and improvement of
public grazing lands and natural forage resources.'' This order also
stated that ``the range or preserve, being within grazing districts
duly established pursuant to the provisions of the TGA as amended by
the 74th Congress, shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Secretary of the Interior, so far as it relates to the public grazing
lands and natural forage resources thereof.''

April 13, 1942, the FPGR was expanded. Executive Order 9132
reserved an additional 7,474 acres of lands around the Fort Peck Dam
and Reservoir for war department (US Army Corps of Engineers) use. The
withdrawal recognized that TGA Districts 1, 2 and 6 ``will remain under
the jurisdiction and administration of the Secretary of the Interior .
. .'' for protection of grazing lands . . . Consistent with EO 7509,
which recognized the duly established TGA grazing districts created by
Departmental Orders of July 11, 1935, and October 6, 1935.

It is important to note that E.O. 9132s recognition of TGA
districts 1, 2, and 6 was in reference to the entire game range not
just the 7,474-acre legal description in the Order. If the Order were
only referencing the 7,474-acre legal description regarding grazing
districts it would not have included district 6 which is not within the
legal description but overlays the southern portion of the game range
to the west. TGA districts 1, 2, and 6 represent the three grazing
districts duly established wherein the entirety of the Game Range
overlays, the entirety of which E.O. 7509 applies.

Though the Congress shifted management of the refuge solely to
USFWS and passed the the 1997 NWRSA to amend the 1966 act providing an
organic act for the system, the Act itself in Sec. 5 (A) recognizes the
``organic'' specific purposes for which each individual refuge was
established, and to manage each refuge for those specific purposes.
E.O. 7509 \8\ establishes the specific purposes for which the CMR was
established and still applies to the refuge under the authority of the
National Wildlife Refuge System Act.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The 9th circuit in 1983 concluded: ``The legislative history on
this point is more indicative of confusion regarding the existing
priority scheme than of an intent to change priorities. Many
legislators seemed to think E.O. 7509 had established an absolute
wildlife priority. Such confusion is not sufficient to revoke E.O.
7509. We thus hold that P.L. 94-223 did not revoke the priority scheme
for access to the resources of the Range established by E.O. 7509.''
\9\ 43 USC 1701(f) Savings provisions ``Nothing in this Act shall
be deemed to repeal any existing law by implication.''; National
Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 16 USC Sec.  668dd
(h) ``Regulations applicable to areas of the System that are in effect
on the date of enactment of this Act shall continue in effect until
modified or rescinded.''; ``It is the law of our circuit that
revocation or modification of an existing withdrawal should be express
to be effective.'' See United States v. Consolidated Mines and Smelting
Co., Ltd., 455 F.2d 432, 445-46 (9th Cir.1971); ``Repeal of a statute
or order by implication is not favored.'' Watt v. Alaska, 451 U.S. 259,
267, 101 S.Ct. 1673, 1678, 68 L.Ed.2d 80 (1981)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

In this letter we mainly address problems with the 50 CFR Part 29
and did not have the time to address the policy revision at 601 FW 3.
We hold that USFWS should not have lumped these processes into a single
notice with only 30 days to comment. The proposed CFR and policy
changes are not rationally justified from our review and should be
withdrawn. The Code of Federal Regulations are supposed to direct
agencies in a way to maintain compliance with statutory mandates and
priorities, and then policy is developed for management level staff and
personnel to assure compliance with the CFR and organic laws that
govern the system. The USFWS in issuing novel CFR into the code while
simultaneously revising their BIDEH policy in the same notice shows
disregard for the commenting public and effected landowners and
governments.

It is clear that USFWS and their partners desire to apply landscape
scale ecoregional planning which could reach far outside of wildlife
refuge boundaries. The fact that the proposed policy would allow
Service partners to develop landscape plans which delineate ecoregional
units outside of refuge boundaries in order to inform refuge planning
is concerning to adjacent property owners and local governments with
special expertise and jurisdiction by law.
The policy changes proposed appear to remove emphasis regarding the
requirements for USFWS to obtain information and data relating to each
planning area from private landowners concerning land management issues
that may impact or relate to the planning unit. This is especially
important in cases such as with the CMR game refuge or other refuges
where cattle producers have a priority use of the refuge for domestic
livestock grazing purposes under the Taylor Grazing Act and other
authorities.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ MCA 76-16-102; 43 USC Sec. 1901(a)(4), (5); 43 USC Sec. 315b;
43 CFR Sec. 4100.0-2; The Repurposing of Federally Reserved Taylor
Grazing Districts For Wildlife Rewilding: A Statutory, Administrative
and Legal Analysis. Stillwater Technical Solutions. April 22, 2020.
J.R. Carlson et. al.

The system-wide policy cannot be used in such a way to repurpose
game refuges for priorities inconsistent with the original purposes.
Long established uses on certain game refuges have established customs
and cultures by use and law. In many cases bona-fide occupants and
settlers have maintained active use on the range since before the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
refuge was established.

These and other valid existing rights must be accounted for and
protected in any policy which may impact or seek to change the priority
scheme of the refuge. This should include advanced notification,
consultation, and coordination with adjacent property owners and local
and state governments regarding associated lands and waters.

Find also attached to this letter comments we submitted on the
revision of 602 FW 1-4 and the Missouri River Headwaters Conservation
Area which identify substantive concerns and failure to consult with
and coordinate such processes with affected private land holders and
local governments.

Regards,

John Fahlgren,
President
Valley County

*****

The complete letter with attachments is available for viewing
at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240410/117029/HHRG-
118-II13-20240410-SD007.pdf

------

Missouri River Conservation Districts Council

March 1, 2024

Public Comments Processing
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106, National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological
Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health

To Whom It Concerns:

The Missouri River Conservation Districts Council (MRCDC/Council)
is a coalition of the 15 conservation districts along the Missouri
River in Montana, spanning 725 miles of the river corridor, including
its tributaries and associated uplands, from its headwaters in Gallatin
County to Richland County at the North Dakota border.

MRCDC member districts are organized according to Montana statute
contained in Title 76, Chapter 15, Section 102 which states, ``It is
hereby declared to be the policy of the legislature to provide for the
conservation of soil and soil resources of this state, for the control
and prevention of soil erosion, for the prevention of floodwater and
sediment damages, and for furthering the conservation, development,
utilization, and disposal of water and thereby to preserve natural
resources, control floods, prevent impairment of dams and reservoirs,
preserve wildlife, protect the tax base, protect public lands, and
protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
people of this state.''

On page 7348, column 3 last paragraph, you state that these
proposed regulations and policy updates comply with and incorporate the
Service's commitment to cooperate and coordinate with State partners,
as appropriate . . .., it is our understanding that coordination
efforts should extend to local governments within which the lands are
located. With the authority above, the Council would like the reference
to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act 43 U.S.C.1712(c)(9) added
to language under new section 29.3 referring to this coordination
requirement in the implementation of section 29.3.

Two species that come to our minds when talking about imperiled
species that may be translocated to refuges are grizzly bears and
wolves, both of which are found and are becoming more abundant in
Montana. It is a concern of ours that the proposed rule specifies no
control, lethal or non-lethal, will be allowed of these imperiled
species unless there is a human health concern. These two predators
have a large impact on the communities they are currently in--changes
to ranching operations, changes to wildlife abundance and distribution,
and changes to human safety while recreating. Are these the imperiled
species the US Fish and Wildlife Service refers to when they talk about
translocating imperiled species and control options of predators on
refuges? (Page 7348, left column in second paragraph, ``. . . policy
updates would similarly codify the Service's ability to supplement
natural processes to meet fish and wildlife population objectives,
sustain ecosystems, and restore or recover imperiled species on refuges
when habitat conditions and natural processes are insufficient.'', page
7351, #3 Manage fish and wildlife. ``. . . and where appropriate,
restore or recover imperiled species.'', page 7352, #2 Conservation
translocations definition, ``We may allow the introduction of a species
outside its current range to avoid extinction or extirpation; restore a
species; reestablish a specific ecological function lost to extinction
or extirpation; or, in accordance with Sec. 17.81(a) of this chapter,
when necessary to meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes,
and ensure biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health.'')

In FWS-HQ-NWRS-2023-0024 potential policy changes included the
USFWS being able to acquire land, `` . . . land acquisition, minor and
major refuge boundary modifications . . .'' and ``. . . developing
comprehensive conservation plans for new refuges, their scope . . .''
The Council was concerned with this wording and sent a comment letter
regarding this language. Additional lines in this current proposed rule
change for BIDEH supplement our concern for USFWS land acquisition. Is
there potential for the US Fish and Wildlife Services to obtain
additional lands under this proposed rule change? (Page 7351 paragraph
(c)(2) . . . ``When natural processes cannot meet habitat objectives or
facilitate adaption to anthropogenic change, we will use science-based
management techniques or acquire lands when necessary to meet statutory
requirements.'' And (c)(5) Promote and maintain healthy soil, water,
and air, ``We will address threats to these abiotic components by
pursuing appropriate actions, including when such threats to refuge
resources arise outside refuge boundaries.'', page 7347 left column
near bottom, ``This proposed regulation would codify the Service's
continued commitment to managing refuge ecosystems holistically as
components of larger landscapes and seascapes and supporting natural
processes to meet our conservation goals . . .'', and page 7348 left
column near middle, ``. . . instruct managers to use such techniques
and encourage establishment of wildlife corridors . . .'')

On page 7352 section 29(3)(d)(6) Agricultural uses, the document
states, ``We prohibit the use of agriculture practices unless they are
determined necessary to meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge
purposes, and ensure biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health, and where we cannot achieve refuge management objectives
through natural processes.'' The language under section 29(3)(d)(6)
could be interpreted that all agricultural practices on the refuge
would be terminated ``unless'' it can be determined necessary to meet
statutory requirements. We believe this statement is far too broad for
us to understand the true meaning of the section. Appropriately managed
livestock grazing improves habitat for fish and wildlife species, so we
believe this habitat management tool should not be taken away but
rather implemented at a greater level across the refuges system.
Garfield County Conservation District is conducting a scientific
grazing monitoring project on over 60,000 acres of CMR Wildlife Refuge,
Bureau of Land Management, and private lands. In short, eight years of
data from 25 monitoring sites have proven that the range health on the
control sites with no grazing show a downhill (negative) trend. The
range health on lightly grazed and heavier grazed sites shows an uphill
(positive) trend. This study has included wet years as well as two of
the driest years on record. As such, this science proves livestock are
excellent eco-system service providers that benefit range health. As
Alan Savory has studied, learned and promoted; without livestock
grazing and trampling, the grass vegetation has to decay biologically
before the next growing season, and if it doesn't, the grassland and
the soil begin to die. If vegetation doesn't decay biologically, it
shifts to an oxidation process, which is very slow leading to the
excess vegetation smothering and killing other grasses which then leads
to a shift to woody vegetation and bare soil, releasing carbon. Fire as
a tool simply removes all vegetation, grass, brush and other woody
plants, releasing a massive amount of carbon and causing
desertification of the landscape. MRCDC believes that `no management'
is not a management technique that benefits wildlife or habitat lands.
Will this proposed rule change impact the livestock grazing leases on
the Charles M. Russel National Wildlife Refuge in Montana? Will USFWS
coordinate and utilize this local science in decision making?

Livestock grazing permits on wildlife refuges in Montana are vital
to the natural resources, and to our local communities, counties, and
state economy. On page 7349 under Regulatory Flexibility Act, the
proposed rule states, ``. . . no regulatory flexibility analysis is
required if the head of an agency certifies that the rule will not have
a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities.'' and ``. . . the Service certifies that this rule, as
proposed, would not have a significant economic effect on a substantial
number of small entities as defined under the Regulatory Flexibility
Act.'' What data was used by the USFWS to come to this conclusion? The
Council would like to see the economic data that was used by the USFWS
and be able to verify this statement.

Under section 29(3)(c)(5) Promote and maintain healthy soil, water,
and air. In Montana, an example of refuge management that directly
impacts air quality are wildfires that become difficult to control due
to a buildup of fuel loads and/or encroachment of flammable invasive
annual grasses within the boundaries of the refuge. Through proper
forage management, such as livestock grazing, the likelihood and
intensity of wildfires can be reduced. What are examples of refuge
management directives that impact air quality that the USFWS has
identified?

Under section 29(3)(d)(5) related to pesticide use as a form of
land management directly is the importance of land managers being able
to control noxious and invasive species with pesticides, or other
means, as needed and as stated in the proposed rule change. The Council
does agree with the ability to use pesticides in controlling invasive
species as part of an integrated pest management (IPM) plan. We would
also add that having a pre-approved IPM plan would allow refuge
management to expedite control measures when needed. Invasive species
won't wait for an approved plan to become a problem so it would be good
to have one in place before control is warranted.
To have better understanding and comments of these proposed BIDEH
rule changes overall, the Council needs to know what impacts there will
be, none of which were provided, but as stated in the document `are too
speculative for meaningful analysis.' The Council doesn't understand
why the US Fish and Wildlife Service brought forth these rule changes
to BIDEH without having meaningful analysis to go along with it.
Shouldn't the environmental impacts on implementing these rules changes
be better understood and known before introducing these BIDEH rule
changes? (Page 7350, in the middle column just above Primary Author,
the document states, ``Therefore, the environmental impacts of the
proposed rule are too speculative to lead to meaningful analysis at
this time.'')

The Council believes that local input and coordination is key for
the proper administration of National Wildlife Refuges. When specific
changes are proposed under the rule, with a commitment on page 7348
third column bottom of page to coordination with local governments,
specific language should be included in the policies emphasizing
cooperation and coordination in the implementation of these rules with
state, tribal, and local governments. On-the-ground, local ecological
knowledge of the land is important to incorporate into any plans and
decision processes.

An additional question the Council has is, how does the definition
of ``conservation'' in the proposed rule change compare to the
definition in the America the Beautiful Initiative? All of the public
comments submitted by the Council since this initiative was implemented
have gone unanswered.

The Missouri River Conservation Districts Council thanks you for
taking our comments into consideration regarding the proposed rule
change for the National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological Integrity,
Diversity, and Environmental Health rule.

Sincerely,

Karl Christians,
Chairman

______

Western Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies

February 27, 2024

Public Comments Processing
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological Integrity, Diversity,
and Environmental Health; Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106

The Western Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (WAFWA) is a
professional organization that represents 23 western state and Canadian
provincial fish and wildlife agencies. The states within WAFWA hold
nearly 60% of all National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) acres. The
responsibility for the management of fish and wildlife in and around
those NWR lands is held by the states' fish and wildlife agencies. That
being the case, it is necessary for the leadership within each states'
agency to have ample time to review materials that impact the
management of their public-entrusted responsibility.

In 2023, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service requested our states
review an earlier draft of the proposed BIDEH regulations and policy
and provide feedback. Since that draft, substantial changes were made
when producing the final document presented in the Federal Register.
Furthermore, the feedback from our states, via Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies submission, went largely unaddressed. This means that
we need to amend our earlier feedback to incorporate edits in this
final draft that have only confounded those original issues posed.

Fourteen of our eighteen active member states are in legislative
session during this 30-day period. Over eighty-one million acres of NWR
lands are in states that have had state fish and wildlife agency
leadership involved with their state legislative sessions during this
review period. WAFWA requests that the public comment period be
extended additional 60 days to allow for our agency leadership to have
time after their legislative sessions to give this the due diligence it
requires.

We appreciate your consideration of a deadline extension to allow
our state agencies the ability to effectively review the posted
proposed BIDEH regulations and policy changes and to provide input
using the formal public comment process.

Sincerely,

Zachary Lowe,
WAFWA Executive Director

______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Humboldt County, Nevada

Board of Commission

March 4, 2024

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: Proposed Rulemaking: National Wildlife Refuge System: Biological
Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health. Docket number:
FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106

Dear Director Williams:

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS or ``the Service'') is
proposing to write new regulations at 50 CFR Sec. 29.3 (the ``proposed
rule'') and related policy revisions to Service Manual 601 FW 3 to
further implement the biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health (BID EH) provision \1\ of the National Wildlife
Refuge System Improvement Act (``Improvement Act'' or ``Act'') of 1997
at 16 U.S.C. Sec. 168dd(a)(4)(B).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The BIDEH provision states: ``In administering the System, the
Secretary shall [. . .] ensure that the biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health of the System are maintained for
the benefit of present and future generations of Americans . . .'' 16
U.S.C. Sec. 168dd(a)(4)(8).
\2\ National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966
(Administration Act; 16 U.S.C. 668dd-668ee), as amended by the National
Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997 (Improvement Act; Pub.
L. 105-57).

The Board of Commissioners of Humboldt County, Nevada (the
``Board'' or ``County''), takes an active interest in this rulemaking
due to the Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge. The Sheldon National
Wildlife Refuge (or ``Sheldon Refuge'') occupies 572,896 acres of
federal land in northwest Nevada, the majority of which are in Humboldt
County. The Refuge has long been a valued resource in the region for
hunting, fishing, and other forms of recreation, as well as (until
1994) livestock grazing.\3\ In our experience, Refuge management
decisions can profoundly impact County interests, including wildfire
risk on the greater landscape, hunting, fishing, and recreational
access, ecologically and economically important activities like
grazing, control of invasive species on the greater landscape, regional
species conservation projects, and the economic stability and cultural
character of Humboldt County. In short, management decisions on the
Sheldon Refuge--and the regulations and policies that shape them--
affect the public health, safety, and welfare in our community.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ As stated in the Humboldt County Public Lands Resource
Management Policy Plan, the County maintains that the current
prohibition of livestock grazing on the Sheldon Refuge is inconsistent
with 16 U.S.C. Sec. 168dd(a)(4)(D).

It is deeply troubling to this Board that in its rush to provide a
one-size-fits-all ``consistent approach'' to managing refuges, the
proposed rule elevates select provisions of the Improvement Act (like
BIDEH at 16 U.S.C. Sec. 168dd(a)(4)(B)) while suppressing and
contravening others (like the supremacy of refuge purposes at 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 168dd(a)(4)(D)). The FWS has apparently forgotten that not all
refuges can be managed under a blanket set of BIDEH requirements
because different refuges have unique ``refuge purposes'' which refuge
managers must prioritize consistent with the Improvement Act. Id. For
example, some refuges (like Sheldon) have historic refuge purposes that
specifically include agricultural activities like livestock grazing
which, under the Improvement Act, must be prioritized even above the
agency mission.\4\ The proposed rule attempts to overwrite this
statutory requirement. Instead, it would unlawfully subordinate all
agricultural activities (even if they are a refuge purpose) to a host
of blanket and practicably insurmountable BIDEH requirements--
effectively banning the FWS from implementing any agricultural refuge
purpose. In other words, the proposed rule invents novel, extra-
statutory standards for carrying out agricultural refuge purposes that
are inconsistent with, and undermine, Congress's requirement that
carrying out a refuge's purposes (regardless of whether they support
wildlife or agriculture) shall be the refuge manager's highest
priority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``In administering the System, the Secretary shall . . . ensure
that the mission of the System described in paragraph (2) and the
purposes of each refuge are carried out, except that if a conflict
exists between the purposes of a refuge and the mission of the System,
the conflict shall be resolved in a manner that first protects the
purposes of the refuge, and, to the extent practicable, that also
achieves the mission of the System.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 168dd(a)(4)(D).

As a separate matter, the proposed rule would also effectively ban
discretionary agricultural activities which, even if not included in a
refuge's purpose, serve as critical tools for fuels management,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
invasive species control, and habitat enhancement.

Beyond questions of agriculture and grazing, we are also alarmed
that the proposed rule issues a biased, rigid, and sweeping
interpretation of Congress's broad mandate to manage refuges for
general BIDEH. This unwarranted interpretation forms a web of
priorities and prohibitions which will frustrate refuge managers'
flexibility and latitude to address complex landscape-scale issues such
as wildfire resistance and resilience, invasive vegetation management,
and conservation-oriented predator control (among other actions) in the
most timely and effective manner. The proposed rule's sweeping BIDEH
mandates also have the potential to interfere with priority wildlife-
dependent recreation such as hunting and fishing activities.\5\ We
therefore submit the following comments to ensure FWS regulations are
consistent with the Improvement Act and allow for flexible refuge
management decisions that support landscape-scale public health,
safety, and welfare concurrent with protecting valued wildlife and
habitat.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Under Executive Order 12996, `` wildlife dependent recreation''
as it pertains to the System is defined as: hunting, fishing, wildlife
photography and observation, and environmental interpretation and
education. Amendments to the National Wildlife Refuge System
Administration Act state it is the policy of the United States that:

``[C]ompatible wildlife-dependent recreation is a legitimate and
appropriate general public use of the System.'' 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(B) (emphasis added).

``[C]ompatible wildlife-dependent recreational uses are the
priority general public uses of the System and shall receive priority
consideration in refuge planning and management.'' 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(C) (emphasis added).

"[W]hen the Secretary determines that a proposed wildlife-dependent
recreational use is a compatible use within a refuge, that activity
should be facilitated . . .'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(D) (emphasis
added).

Further, in administering the System, the Secretary shall:

[P]rovide increased opportunities for families to experience
compatible wildlife-dependent recreation, particularly opportunities
for parents and their children to safely engage in traditional outdoor
activities, such as fishing and hunting.'' 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(K) (emphasis added).

Congress has further determined that:

``When managed in accordance with principles of sound fish and
wildlife management and administration, fishing, hunting, wildlife
observation, and environmental education in national wildlife refuges
have been and are expected to continue to be generally compatible
uses.'' Public Law 105-57, Sec. (2)(6).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Primary Comment:

Humboldt County's primary comment is that the current rulemaking
and companion policy should be abandoned because they are inconsistent
with and undermine key provisions of the Improvement Act. Tangentially,
the proposed rule and companion policy would create confusion, do more
harm than good, and are unnecessary for implementation of the
Improvement Act. Failing abandonment of this unnecessary rulemaking,
any regulation that is adopted must remedy these substantial
shortcomings. Our subsequent comments (below) expand on and give
context to this recommendation.

2. The Proposed Rule would improperly restrict or ban agricultural
refuge purposes which have priority under the Improvement Act.

Background:

The Improvement Act lays out the policies and administrative
mandates under which the national wildlife refuge system (the
``System'') and its component refuges are managed. Foremost among these
is the System's mission ``to administer a national network of lands and
waters for the conservation, management, and where appropriate,
restoration of the fish, wildlife, and plant resources and their
habitats within the United States for the benefit of present and future
generations of Americans.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(2). Through the
mission, Congress made clear its general intent that the System be
managed to prioritize wildlife and habitat over other values.
However, the Improvement Act also recognizes that each individual
refuge has specific ``refuge purposes'' \6\ set forth in the refuge's
establishing documents that differ from one refuge to another. As a
general policy, the Improvement Act stipulates that ``each refuge shall
be managed to fulfill the mission of the System, as well as the
specific purposes for which that refuge was established . . .'' 16
U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(A).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ``The terms `purposes of the refuge' and `purposes of each
refuge' mean the purposes specified in or derived from the law,
proclamation, executive order, agreement, public land order, donation
document, or administrative memorandum establishing, authorizing, or
expanding a refuge, refuge unit, or refuge subunit.'' 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668ee(10).

Finally, Congress also recognizes that the System mission and the
purposes of an individual refuge may sometimes diverge, and that
meeting the dual requirements of fulfilling both the mission and a
refuge's purpose may not always be straightforward, or even possible.
In such instances, Congress gives clear instruction that it is an
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
individual refuge's purpose(s) that must take precedence:

``In administering the System, the Secretary shall . . . ensure
that the mission of the System described in paragraph (2) and
the purposes of each refuge are carried out, except that if a
conflict exists between the purposes of a refuge and the
mission of the System, the conflict shall be resolved in a
manner that first protects the purposes of the refuge, and, to
the extent practicable, that also achieves the mission of the
System.''

16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(D) (emphasis added).

In short, Congress makes a special provision for ensuring that
fulfilling the unique, historical reasons for the creation of each
refuge (the ``refuge purposes'') are prioritized in refuge management
decisions, even surpassing the FWS's responsibility to fulfill the
System mission.

Humboldt County is aware that the Sheldon Refuge was created with a
historical dual wildlife/ agriculture refuge purpose. The majority of
the Refuge (539,000 acres) was established under an Executive Order
\7\ ``for the conservation and development of natural wildlife
resources and for the protection and improvement of public grazing
lands and natural forage resources.'' More specifically, according to
the Sheldon Refuge's refuge purpose statement:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ The Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge (``Sheldon Refuge'') was
established under three separate executive orders. Executive Order
7522, issued in 1936 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt, created the
Charles Sheldon Antelope Range which constitutes the vast majority
(539,000 out of 573,000 acres) of what is now the Sheldon Refuge. By
contrast, the purpose of the--31,000 acre Charles Sheldon Wildlife
Refuge (``Little Sheldon'') established under E.0. 5540 in 1931 (and
expanded under E.0. 7364 in 1936) was ``as a refuge and breeding ground
for wild animals and birds'' (and subsequently in 1936:``. . . to
further effectuate the purposes of the Migratory Bird Act . . .'') and
did not include grazing as one of the purposes for that much smaller
parcel. In 1978, the 31,000-acre Charles Sheldon Wildlife Refuge
(``Little Sheldon'') and the 539,000-acre Charles Sheldon Antelope
Range were combined (PLO 5634) and renamed the Sheldon National
Wildlife Refuge. Therefore, the two units that today make up the
Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge have distinct refuge purposes, as
established under three distinct E.0.s.

the natural forage resources on the Sheldon Range
``shall first be utilized for the purpose of sustaining in a
healthy condition a maximum of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) antelope, the primary species, and such nonpredatory
secondary species in such numbers as may be necessary to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
maintain a balanced wildlife population . . .''

``[A]ll the forage resources within this range or
preserve shall be available, except as herein otherwise
provided with respect to wildlife, for domestic livestock . .
.''

This dual wildlife/agriculture refuge purpose is also recognized in
the refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plan (CCP), which states that the
Sheldon Refuge was:

``. . . set apart for the conservation and
development of natural wildlife resources and for the
protection and improvement of public grazing lands and natural
forage resources . . . EO 7522 dated December 21, 1936.''
(emphasis added).

Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge Final Comprehensive
Conservation Plan and Environmental Impact Statement, August
2012, p. 1-7.
While this dual wildlife/agricultural refuge purpose may not be
palatable to current FWS leadership, it is a sound conservation
approach and, more to the point, is protected by a Congressional
mandate that the FWS does not have the authority to overwrite, i.e.
provided the Sheldon Refuge's specific wildlife quotas are met, if a
conflict (real or perceived) exists between the agricultural component
of Sheldon's refuge purpose and the wildlife prioritizing mission of
the System, ``the conflict shall be resolved in a manner that first
protects the purposes of the refuge.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(D)
(emphasis added).

The Proposed Rule:

The FWS's proposed rule at 16 CFR Sec. 29.3(d)(6) does not
acknowledge the fact that a refuge can have agricultural refuge
purposes. Nor does it acknowledge that under the Improvement Act refuge
purposes have priority over the System mission; while the rulemaking
notes that ``[t]he law states that each refuge must be managed to
fulfill both the Refuge System mission and the specific purposes for
which that refuge was established'' (89 FR 7364) the FWS guilefully
omits any mention of the priority Congress gives refuge purposes over
the System mission in 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(D). Ignoring these
facts, the proposed rule instead singles out agriculture as a special
management activity ``having a particular propensity to affect BIDEH''
\8\ therefore requiring almost total prohibition, irrespective of
whether the agricultural activity is a refuge purpose or not:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 89 FR 7346.

``Agricultural uses. We prohibit the use of agricultural
practices unless they are determined necessary to meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health, and
where we cannot achieve refuge management objectives through
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
natural processes.'' 89 FR 7352.

This provision creates a four-part test that would have the
practical effect of a blanket ban on agriculture. It also invents novel
criteria (e.g. meeting the FWS's new definition of BIDEH; being
authorized only upon failure of ``natural processes'') that a refuge
purpose--like grazing on the Sheldon Refuge--is not subject to under
the Improvement Act. To the contrary, Congress did not impose
restrictions or criteria on carrying out refuge purposes, agricultural
or otherwise, in the Improvement Act and the FWS cannot invent them
where they do not exist.

The FWS's attempt to overwrite this critical provision of the
Improvement Act is all the more apparent in its spurious claim that in
the Act, Congress really recognized three competing priorities (the
System mission, refuge purposes, and BIDEH) in refuge management, and
tasked the FWS with sorting out the ensuing confusion:

``In the statute's requirements for administering the Refuge
System, Congress elevated ensuring the maintenance of BIDEH to
a similar level of importance as ensuring that the Refuge
System mission and refuge purposes are carried out, challenging
the Service to implement these integral directives together to
provide the greatest conservation benefits for fish and
wildlife.'' 89 FR 7346-7. (Emphasis added.)

In the proposed rule's creative interpretation, the Act's BIDEH
clause (to ``ensure that the biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health of the System are maintained for the benefit of
present and future generations of Americans . . . 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(B)) somehow emerges from the ``challenging'' confusion
carrying more weight than even the System mission; i.e. while the Act
clearly subordinates the System mission to refuge purposes without
exception, under the proposed rule, the BIDEH provision would trump
(agricultural) refuge purposes.
This creative interpretation has no basis in fact. Congress
recognizes two, and only two, competing directives when it states that
``each refuge shall be managed to fulfill the mission of the System, as
well as the specific purposes for which that refuge was established . .
.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(A). And again, Congress recognizes two,
and only two, competing directives in its clear instruction that
conflicts will be resolved in favor of refuge purposes:

``In administering the System, the Secretary shall . . . ensure
that the mission of the System described in paragraph (2) and
the purposes of each refuge are carried out, except that if a
conflict exists between the purposes of a refuge and the
mission of the System, the conflict shall be resolved in a
manner that first protects the purposes of the refuge, and, to
the extent practicable, that also achieves the mission of the
System.''

16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(D) (emphasis added).

Summary:

In the proposed rule, the FWS claims to be providing much needed
interpretation of inconclusive ``challenging'' statutory language that
creates competing responsibilities that the FWS itself has been tasked
with resolving--which they do (not surprisingly) in favor of
prioritizing BIDEH above even the System mission or refuge purposes.
But the Improvement Act requires no such tortured interpretation; it is
perfectly clear. The Act recognizes only two primary administrative
responsibilities--carrying out the System mission and the refuge
purposes--and provides plain instruction that any conflicts between
these shall preserve the refuge purposes first. The FWS's proposed
regulation seeks to overwrite this provision through elevating BIDEH as
a value superior to (agricultural) refuge purposes. But the FWS cannot
simply invent new restrictions on agricultural refuge purposes when
Congress has imposed no such restrictions under the Improvement Act,
and further, given that Congress elevates carrying out refuge purposes
(agricultural or otherwise) to the highest management priority. ``[A]
regulation does not trump an otherwise applicable statute.'' See, e.g.
United States v. Maes, 546 F.3d 1066, 1068 (9th Cir. 2008); United
States v. Doe, 701 F.2d 819, 823 (9th Cir. 1983). (``Where an
administrative regulation conflicts with a statute, the statute
controls.'')

Remedy:

The FWS cannot overwrite existing statute in its proposed rule. Nor
can it selectively implement statute so as to ignore, or worse,
contravene, Congressional mandates. The FWS's proposed rule does both.
We therefore recommend the FWS abandon the current rulemaking. Failing
that, any regulation pertaining either to BIDEH or agricultural
activities must acknowledge in regulatory and guidance documents the
priority of refuge purposes (agricultural or otherwise) over the System
mission.

3. The Proposed Rule undermines flexible, effective refuge management.

Beyond the blanket BIDEH mandates in sections (a)-(c), section (d)
of the proposed rule imposes additional restrictions on specific
management activities that, according to the FWS, ``especially
influence BIDEH.'' 89 FR 7348. These include predator control, invasive
species management, pesticide use, agricultural uses, and mosquito
control. Under the proposed rule----

``these activities and uses are all subject to the underlying
conservation principle that defers to natural processes and
favors management that mimics natural processes.'' 89 FR 7348.

We find that this restrictive mandate is unnecessary and will cause
more harm than good. Reflexively deferring to ``natural processes'' as
a rigid conservation principal is a dangerous management approach when
(as in Humboldt County) wildfire and invasive vegetation are now
primary drivers of habitat loss as well as being a profound human
health and safety risk. Refuge managers should have full flexibility to
use any reasonable tool \9\ at their disposal to mitigate fuel loading
and invasive vegetation (particularly near human habitation and private
property) and restore burned landscapes regardless of whether such
activities meet the proposed rule's standard as ``natural.'' This
applies particularly (though not exclusively) to managed livestock
grazing and farming, which can serve as a critical fuels reduction and
habitat management tool. By hampering refuge managers' ability to make
timely decisions based on the specific conditions and threats to a
given refuge or refuge area, the proposed rule sacrifices long-term
fuels and vegetation outcomes for short-term optics and ideals.

\9\ Refuge management flexibility to manage fuels is necessary to
implement interagency policy for wildland fire prevention:

``Fire Management and Ecosystem Sustainability: The full range of
fire management activities will he used to help achieve ecosystem
sustainability, including its interrelated ecological, economic, and
social components. ``Full range of fire management activities'' may
include any vegetative management treatment.'' Guidance for
Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy. Interagency
Wildland Fire Leadership Council, Feb. 13, 2009, p. 10. (Emphasis
added.)

Similarly, in Humboldt County predator control is an essential
component of special status species conservation (as with the Greater
Sage-grouse) when predator populations are substantially out of balance
(as with ravens). In order to participate in the timely, meaningful
conservation of special status species with other federal, as well as
state and local partners, refuge managers should not be bound by an
artificial and idealistic deference to ``natural processes'' but should
have the latitude to use any reasonable means to reestablish a thriving
ecological predator/prey balance on a given refuge.
Remedy:

Any regulation implementing the Improvement Act should allow refuge
managers the latitude and flexibility to address ecological imbalances
including, but not limited to, fuel loading, invasive vegetation, and
predator control, in a manner that is appropriate and effective to the
specific refuge and circumstances. Because the proposed rule requires
deference to ``natural processes'' and ``mimicking natural processes''
in all management decisions, it fails to allow managers the flexibility
necessary for timely and effective refuge management decisions. The
proposed rule should therefore be abandoned. Failing this, the proposed
rule should be substantially amended to include such flexibility.

4. The Proposed Rule has the potential to undermine wildlife-dependent
recreational activities \10\ like hunting and fishing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Under Executive Order 12996, ``wildlife-dependent recreation''
as it pertains to the System is defined as: hunting, fishing, wildlife
photography and observation, and environmental interpretation and
education.

The proposed rule at Sec. 29.3(c) creates novel, sweeping BIDEH
management directives that have the potential to restrict, or even
foreclose on, heritage refuge recreational activities such as hunting
and fishing. Under the Improvement Act, ``compatibility'' is the unique
standard to which wildlife- dependent recreational activities
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(including hunting and fishing) are held. According to the Act----

`The term ``compatible use'' means a wildlife-dependent
recreational use [. . .] that, in the sound professional
judgment of the Director, will not materially interfere with or
detract from the fulfillment of the mission of the System or
the purposes of the refuge.' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668ee(1).

Under the Improvement Act, wildlife-dependent recreational
activities that meet the above two-fold compatibility standard are
given priority:

``[C]ompatible wildlife-dependent recreation is a legitimate
and appropriate general public use of the System.'' 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(B) (emphasis added).

``[C]ompatible wildlife-dependent recreational uses are the
priority general public uses of the System and shall receive
priority consideration in refuge planning and management.'' 16
U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(C) (emphasis added).

``[W]hen the Secretary determines that a proposed wildlife-
dependent recreational use is a compatible use within a refuge,
that activity should be facilitated . . .'' 16 U.S.C.
Sec. 668dd(a)(3)(D) (emphasis added).

Further, in administering the System, the Secretary shall:

[P]rovide increased opportunities for families to experience
compatible wildlife-dependent recreation, particularly
opportunities for parents and their children to safely engage
in traditional outdoor activities, such as fishing and
hunting.'' 16 U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(K) (emphasis added).
Congress has further determined that:

``When managed in accordance with principles of sound fish and
wildlife management and administration, fishing, hunting,
wildlife observation, and environmental education in national
wildlife refuges have been and are expected to continue to be
generally compatible uses.'' Public Law 105-57, Sec. (2)(6).

Notably, the FWS's proposed BIDEH rule invents an additional
management standard that exceeds the Improvement Act's two-fold
compatibility test for hunting and fishing. The proposed rule would
only allow----

``Compatible, refuge-approved recreational hunting and fishing
opportunities that do not compromise maintaining biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health on the refuge .
. .'' 89 FR 7352.

It is clear that the proposed rule's novel BIDEH management
directives have the potential to restrict hunting and fishing
activities (though the vagueness of the rule with respect to hunting
and fishing gives no specific information as to how BIDEH directives
would apply to hunting and fishing). What is unclear is what authority
the FWS has to augment the two-fold compatibility standard Congress has
established for permissible hunting and fishing use of refuges in this
proposed rule. As we noted above, the Improvement Act nowhere
acknowledges BIDEH as a third standard that refuge uses must meet. By
imposing new, additional conditions on hunting and fishing refuge uses
beyond the Act's two-fold compatibility test, the proposed rule exceeds
the limits of statute and could improperly restrict Congressionally
prioritized wildlife-dependent recreational activities that
substantially contribute to Humboldt County's economy, customs, and
community character.
Remedy:

Any regulation implementing the Improvement Act must defer to
Congressionally mandated compatibility standards for authorizing
hunting, fishing, and other wildlife-dependent recreational activities,
as well as Congressional directives prioritizing such activities when
they meet the Improvement Act's two-fold compatibility test. The
proposed rule improperly seeks to add additional BIDEH restrictions and
criteria to hunting and fishing activities not recognized in the
Improvement Act. For this reason, the proposed rule should be
abandoned. Failing this, the proposed rule must be substantially
amended to defer to Congress's two-fold compatibility test and
prioritization of compatible hunting and fishing refuge uses.
5. Summary:

The FWS's proposed rule attempts to rewrite the Improvement Act by
papering over the inconvenient truth that the Improvement Act
explicitly preserves and prioritizes the historic purposes for which
individual refuges were created, which in some cases (as on the Sheldon
Refuge) include agricultural use. This is impermissible. It is not for
the FWS to pick and choose which provisions of the Improvement Act to
implement and which to ignore, or to otherwise revise or edit the laws
Congress writes. The agency must implement Congress's laws without bias
or favor, but the proposed rule fails to do so. Further, by imposing
blanket BIDEH management criteria, including mandatory deference to
natural processes, the proposed rule inappropriately constrains refuge
managers' ability to make timely and effective management decisions
regarding fuels control, invasive vegetation, predator control, and
other factors that affect the public health, safety, and welfare as
well as wildlife and habitat. Finally, the proposed rule's vague and
sweeping BIDEH mandates could improperly restrict hunting, fishing, and
other wildlife-dependent recreational activities that have been
recognized by Congress as priority public refuge uses. For these
reasons Humboldt County recommends that the proposed rule and the
companion BIDEH policy document be abandoned. Failing this, they must
be substantively rewritten to correct these shortcomings.

Humboldt County appreciates the opportunity to provide these
comments on the FWS's proposed rule. If the FWS has questions or would
care to discuss these comments further, please contact County Manager
Don Kalkoske or County public lands consultant Andy Rieber.

Sincerely,

Jesse Hill,
Chairman

______

Alabama Farmers Federation

February 29, 2024

Public Comments Processing
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106

To Whom It May Concern:

The Alabama Farmers Federation is an affiliate of the American Farm
Bureau Federation and Alabama' s largest farm organization representing
over 350,000 members in all 67 Alabama counties. We appreciate the
opportunity to comment on the proposed rule and updated policy for
``biological integrity, diversity and environmental health'' on the
National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS).

Farmers in Alabama have been and continue to participate in
cooperative agriculture with NWRS, including Wheeler National Wildlife
Refuge. This mutually beneficial relationship provides opportunities
for farmers to access good farmland and leave a portion of their crop
as feed for wildlife. However, due to policy changes over the last
several years, the farmers have been pushed out and then invited back
onto the refuge. This current proposal jeopardizes the continued use of
genetically engineered crops (GECs) on NWRS lands which are essential
to meeting the objectives of the NWRS.

Farmers choose to plant GECs due to their advantages, which include
reduced pesticide applications, reduced tillage practices, reduced fuel
consumption and greater and more consistent yields. These should be the
same goals the NWRS seeks to achieve. Increased and more consistent
production with less inputs are good for both the farmer and the
ecosystem.

On August 2, 2018, the USFWS issued a policy memorandum withdrawing
a July 17, 2014 , policy which would have phased out the use of GECs on
NWRS lands. At that time, the USFWS stated, ``there may be situations,
however, where the use of GMO crop seeds is essential to best fulfill
the purposes of the refuge and the needs of birds and other wildlife .
. .'' We believe this is still the case and encourage the agency reach
this same conclusion once again.

Further, genetically modified crops continue to be used widely in
agriculture as they have time and time been found to be safe. In fact,
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) estimates that
more than 95% of animals used for meat and dairy in the United States
eat GMO crops. The FDA also states that studies show the health and
safety of animals are the same whether they eat GMO or non-GMO foods.
The USFWS should adopt this same view. Policies across various agencies
at the federal level should not be at odds with one other.

Thank you again for the opportunity to comment.

Sincerely,

Jimmy Parnell,
President

______

Family Farm Alliance

April 2, 2024

Shannon Estenoz, Assistant Secretary
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Department of the Interior
Washington, DC 20240

Re: FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-1016--Proposed Regulations to Ensure BIDEH of the
Refuge System are Maintained

Dear Assistant Secretary Estenoz:

On behalf of the Family Farm Alliance (Alliance), I appreciate the
opportunity to comment on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's
(Service) proposed new regulations intended to ensure that the
biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health (BIDEH) of
the National Wildlife Refuge System (Refuge System) are maintained, and
where appropriate, restored and enhanced, in accordance with the
National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997. In addition,
the Service is proposing updates to the existing BIDEH policy. We urge
that the Service not adopt the proposed rule/policies for the reasons
articulated in this letter.
Of utmost concern is that the notice of rulemaking recites
reductions in wildlife populations and climate change but does not link
the specific policy changes to these underlying concerns.\1\ In fact,
when the healthy relationship between Western waterfowl populations and
irrigated agriculture is fully considered and understood, it would
appear that the Service should be encouraging increased partnership-
driven collaboration that seeks to replicate these successes elsewhere,
instead of advancing the types of anti-farming arguments that we
regularly see coming from litigious, well-funded environmental
organizations. The fact that some of the most litigious anti-farming
and ranching organizations \2\ are supportive of this regulation speaks
volumes. One group has vocally advocated phasing out 22,000 acres of
farming in the Tule Lake and Lower Klamath National Wildlife
Refuges.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The preamble to the proposed rule states that refuges ``have
begun to experience the effects of climate change while continuing to
contend with the myriad of other anthropogenic stressors affecting
fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats. Climate change is
transforming historical species composition and ecological function of
habitats, creating new challenges to traditional wildlife management
strategies that were based on stable, stationary baseline conditions .
. .. the Service has determined that this proposed rule and policy
revision is warranted to clarify Refuge System policies and practices;
better prepare refuges to confront future impacts from climate change
and other anthropogenic change; and provide the opportunity for public
input on the Service's interpretation of the Improvement Act's BIDEH
mandate, including its application in the context of predator control,
conservation translocations, genetically engineered organisms, invasive
species, pesticide use, agricultural practices, and mosquito control.''
\2\ e.g., Western Watershed Project 2/28/24 letter to Shannon
Estenoz, (``We applaud the recognition that agriculture is incompatible
with wildlife conservation on refuges in most cases.''); 2/2/2024 News
Release, Center for Biological Diversity (``conventional agricultural
practices'' are ``one of the most egregious threats to wildlife on
refuges'') .
\3\ https://waterwatch.org/programs/klamath-basin/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For generations, American family farmers and ranchers have grown
food and fiber for the world, and these farmers will have to muster
more innovation to meet the critical challenge of producing even more
to meet projected future increases in world (and U.S.) demand for these
commodities. It is our view that such innovation in agriculture must be
encouraged by the Federal government, rather than stifled with new,
top-down federal policies and regulations that create uncertainty for
irrigated farms and ranches in the rural West.
About the Family Farm Alliance

The Alliance is a grassroots organization of family farmers,
ranchers, irrigation districts and allied industries in 16 Western
states. The Alliance is focused on one mission: To ensure the
availability of reliable, affordable irrigation water supplies to
Western farmers and ranchers. We are also committed to the fundamental
proposition that Western irrigated agriculture must be preserved and
protected for a host of economic, sociological, environmental, and
national security reasons--many of which are often overlooked in the
context of other national policy decisions.
Background

There are over 560 national wildlife refuges in the United States,
encompassing more than 897 million land acres.\4\ with the involved
land either having been reserved from the public domain or acquired
from private ownership by purchase or condemnation, and most are
located in western states with irrigated agricultural lands. Each has
its own specific history and circumstances. Farming and grazing are
common on refuge lands and integrated with other management practices
by refuge managers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.fws.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
2022_annual_report_of_lands_with_data_ tables.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The statutes and executive orders establishing each refuge also
provide management policies. For example, by statute, a group of
refuges where I reside--the Klamath Basin of Oregon and California--
``shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior for the major
purpose of waterfowl management, but with full consideration to optimum
agricultural use that is consistent therewith.'' (Public Law 88-567)
Highly productive land within these refuges was originally designated
for homesteading. Congress later chose to stop the homesteading to
preserve the unoccupied state of land then being farmed but directed
that Interior ``continue the present pattern of leasing'' specified
land and ``maximize'' revenue from the leasing, and lease revenue
(rent) is used for compensatory payments to local governments including
three counties.
In 1997, recognizing the multitude of circumstances and management
practices on wildlife refuges, enacted the National Wildlife Refuge
System Improvement Act (Improvement Act) (Public Law 105-57). The
Improvement Act requires refuge managers to prepare comprehensive
conservation plans (CCP) for refuges or refuge complexes. The
Improvement Act also provides a uniform procedure to authorize ``uses''
of refuges land that are not specified in statutes or executive orders
creating the reservation. These uses may include hunting, wildlife
viewing, grazing, farming, or myriad other activities. Where an
activity is not among the legal purposes of a refuge, it can be
authorized if it is ``compatible'' with the purpose or purposes of the
refuge. A use is compatible if, ``based on sound professional judgment,
[the use] will not materially interfere with or detract from the
fulfillment of the National Wildlife Refuge System mission or the
purpose(s) of the national wildlife refuge.'' (50 C.F.R. Sec. 25.12)
Refuge managers have made many thousands of compatibility
determinations under a process detailed in federal regulations. (50
C.F.R. 26.41)
Overview of the Proposed Regulation

The Service claims these proposed regulatory and policy revisions
would support conservation throughout the Refuge System in response to
both long-standing and contemporary conservation challenges, including
the ``universal and profound effects of climate change'' on refuge
species and ecosystems. Together, these proposals are intended to
uphold BIDEH across the Refuge System by providing refuge managers with
a consistent approach for evaluating and implementing management
actions to protect vulnerable species, restore and connect habitats,
promote natural processes, sustain vital ecological functions, increase
resilience, and adapt to climate change. The proposed regulation, an
update of a policy issued during the last week of the Clinton
administration, targets, and points to the elimination of long-standing
and widespread agricultural practices on public lands in the national
wildlife refuge system. The regulation would establish a policy to
prohibit farming and grazing unless new, extra-statutory criteria are
satisfied.
Concerns with Proposed Regulation

The regulation proposed on February 1, 2024, includes several new
policy approaches that directly affect agriculture. These include 1)
Use of genetically engineered organisms; 2) Invasive species
management; 3) Pesticide use; and 4) Agricultural uses. These new
requirements would change the rules for selected activities. For
example, in the case of agricultural uses, the Improvement Act
stipulates that agricultural activities can be authorized if compatible
with refuge purposes, but the new rule would presumptively prohibit
agriculture unless it is ``determined necessary'' to accomplish refuge
purposes. Thus, the proposed rule/policies would impermissibly
establish a presumption against allowing certain activities of refuge
lands nationwide rather than follow the requirements of the Improvement
Act, which provides that the Service may allow activities that are not
specific refuge purposes, on a case-by-case basis, for each refuge, if
the activity is determined to be a compatible use.
Additionally, the proposed rule could threaten important activities
on privately-owned agricultural lands adjacent to or near federal
refuge lands, in contradiction to the statutory requirement that the
Secretary of Interior, ``in administering the [Refuge] System, shall .
. . ensure effective coordination, interaction, and cooperation with
owners of land adjoining refuges and the fish and wildlife agency of
the States in which the units of the system are located.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act, 16
U.S.C. Sec. 668dd(a)(4)(E).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specifically, subparagraph (c)(5) the proposed rule includes
sweeping new authority to empower the Service to ``address threats'' to
refuges ``by pursuing appropriate actions, including when such threats
to refuge resources arise outside refuge boundaries.'' \6\ The Alliance
is concerned that the Service's discretion of what a ``threat'' to
refuge resources is, how far ``outside refuge boundaries'' could be
interpreted, and what ``appropriate actions'' could mean to irrigation
and agricultural activities near and adjacent to refuge boundaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Fed.Reg. 7351 (Feb. 2, 2024) (amending 50 C.F.R. subchapter C,
part 29).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Service's proposed policy update to its refuge Service Manual
includes a new vague, legal standard that directs refuge managers to
use their ``sound professional judgment'' to ``ensure that management
actions benefit wildlife conservation by contributing to, and not
diminishing BIDEH.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 89 Fed.Reg. 7347 (Feb. 2, 2024) (amending 50 C.F.R. subchapter
C, part 29)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Included with a host of proposed management directives is proposed
paragraph (c)(4), which empowers refuge manager to ``acquire, transfer,
or lease water rights'' and ``to pursue and secure critical water
assets to support the myriad of migratory birds, fish, and other
wildlife that rely on refuge habitats.''
These statements are concerning in light of provisions in Service
Manual paragraph 3.15 that direct managers to ``regularly monitor land
use proposals, changes to adjacent lands and external activities for
their potential impacts to the BIDEH of ecosystems that includes
refuges,'' but that if the refuge manager deems appropriate, can ``take
action within the legal authorities available to the Service.'' \8\ The
policy proposals appear to invite litigation rather than promote
cooperation with local, state and private agricultural landowners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Manual Part 601 FW 3.15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many aspects of the proposed rule/policies are highly subjective or
vague. The proposed rule thus proposes sweeping, self-granted power
that is undefined and we believe would invite conflict and litigation
that would not serve the public interest. It is not good policy or
appropriate to promulgate these broad statements and objectives as
rules with legal effect. The proposed rule is anchored in the BIDEH
policy, which itself derives from broad directives in the Improvement
Act. The rule appears to be an obvious departure from the process for
approving compatible uses in favor of a blanket policy that is hostile
to agriculture.
Perhaps our biggest concern with the proposed regulation is that
the notice of rulemaking recites reductions in wildlife populations and
climate change but does not link the specific policy changes to these
underlying concerns. While the proposed rule discusses important global
concerns regarding impacts to species and ecosystems, there is no clear
logic explaining why the specific elements of proposed rule would
address or resolve these issues or improve the conditions of concern.
In the absence of this discussion, a primary purpose of our letter is
to demonstrate the important role that Western irrigated agriculture
plays in providing habitat to Western wildlife, in particular
waterfowl.
The Intermountain West Joint Venture Water 4 Initiative

The Family Farm Alliance works closely with the Intermountain West
Joint Venture (IWJV), a leader in utilizing science and technology
advancements to link agriculture, hydrology, and wildlife habitat
conservation. The IWJV's Water 4 Initiative is focused on the
importance of maintaining agricultural land for habitat conservation
and landscape resiliency within western states. Integrating
agriculture, science, technology, and ecology can lead to improved
understanding of key linkages related to the importance of agricultural
irrigation and the need to invest in modernizing irrigation
infrastructure. Such investments also have collateral benefits for
landscape resiliency including groundwater recharge, habitat
enhancement, and conservation of fish and wildlife.
We agree with IWJV that there is a unique opportunity to address
long term food security through investments in agricultural
infrastructure that in turn have benefits for wildlife conservation.
The Importance of Agriculture to Migratory Birds in the West

Agriculture and human settlement have long been tied to
ecologically important wetland and riparian resources and the water
they provide. For over one hundred years, this pattern has concentrated
private landownership in the West's river bottoms and valleys, areas
that are surrounded by publicly-owned sagebrush rangelands and forests.
Meadow hydrology today is influenced by water law in the west of the
United States that structures timing of irrigation and flooding in
early to late spring when water is first made available to growers and
again in mid-summer when fields are re-flooded to promote regrowth
after hay cutting:

``Waterbird reliance on agricultural wetlands is well
documented, and while natural systems exhibit greater ecosystem
benefit, seasonal waterbird utilization provides an important
habitat niche compatible with existing water-use practices.''
\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Working Science for Working Landscapes (see discussion section
of original research paper)

In order to monitor changes in the resiliency of these networks,
IWJV scientist Patrick Donnelly partnered with scientists from the
University of Montana, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service's Migratory Bird Program to look at surface water
changes over 35 years in 26 key waterbird landscapes in the
Intermountain West. Donnelly's work noted that agricultural and wetland
relationships were very complex. Notably, the study found that
approximately 7% of irrigated lands linked to flood irrigation and
water storage practices supported 61% of all wetland inundation in
snowmelt watersheds.\10\ In monsoonal watersheds, small earthen dams,
meant to capture surface runoff for livestock watering, were a major
component of wetland resources (67%) that supported networks of
isolated wetlands surrounding endorheic \11\ lakes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Wetland trends from the IWJV: Maintaining Resiliency of
Continental Waterbird Flyways (see paper)
\11\ An endorheic lake or basin has no outflow to an external body
of water such as a river or ocean, and only loses water through
evaporation or seepage into the ground.

Emerging science is greatly expanding our understanding of wetland
resources and the impacts that climate change and human water uses are
having on finite wetland habitats on public and private lands in the
West. The data has also elevated the role that flood-irrigated
agricultural lands in natural floodplains are playing a key role in
maintaining migratory bird populations in water-limited landscapes.
These habitats are immensely valuable to migratory birds. Recent
research shows that roughly 80% of the habitat use by sandhill cranes,
white-faced ibis, cinnamon teal, and northern pintails in the
Intermountain West is on privately owned, flood-irrigated wet meadows.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To wit:

``Sustaining network resilience will require conservation
strategies to balance water allocations preserving
agriculture and wetlands on private lands that accounted
for 67-96% of habitat use.'' \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ From the paper abstract: The Call of the Cranes: What Sandhill
Crane Migration Can Tell Us About Water Availability in the West (see
original research paper)

``Flood-irrigated agriculture, an important foraging
resource for ibis (Moulton et al. 2013), was associated
with approximately 88% of sites.'' \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ ``White-Faced Ibis and Water in the West: Indicating the Path
to Resiliency in an Arid Region'' (Page 6 of original technical report)

``Moreover, 29.8% of stopover use points occurred in wet
agriculture, the most used (cinnamon teal) habitat type
across all ecoregions in our study.'' \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ From discussion: Migration Stopover Ecology of Cinnamon Teal
(Research under review).

``We documented the majority of foraging birds in flood-
irrigated and wheel-line sprinkler-irrigated agricultural
fields (76%) and natural wetlands (13%), which were limited
in our study area (3% of land cover) . . . . Most
agricultural fields (>85%) used by foraging ibis were
flood-irrigated and all had standing water or recent
moisture at the time of use.'' \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ From discussion: Importance of flood irrigation for foraging
colonial waterbirds

The IWJV's goal, informed by human dimensions research, is to help
landowners continue to mimic natural hydrology through flood irrigation
in floodplain systems. Cutting-edge IWJV science shows that critically
important flood-irrigated landscapes within the Intermountain West
comprise a wetland network supported by agriculture and necessary for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the survival of migratory birds.

A pre-print version of Patrick Donnelly's next publication--
Beneficial `inefficiencies' of western ranching: Flood-irrigated hay
production sustains wetland systems by mimicking historic hydrologic
processes--affirms that grass-hay flood irrigation at large scales, in
part, mimics floodplain processes sustaining wetlands and groundwater
recharge.\16\ Despite representing only 2.5% of irrigated lands, grass-
hay operations supported a majority (58%) of temporary wetlands, a rare
and declining habitat for wildlife in the Intermountain West. This
novel understanding of grass-hay agroecology highlights the vital role
of working ranches in the resilience and stewardship of riparian
systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/
2023.12.10.571036v1.full

Finally, based on the upcoming paper's finding on flood-irrigated
grass hay, Mr. Donnelly analyzed managed public wildlife refuge/
wildlife area wetlands. This provided a glimpse at the managed surface
water on the landscape (irrigation resulting in surface water wetland
habitat + managed public wetlands) in which private and landowners and
refuge managers have the ability to manage the timing, flooding
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
duration, and water levels:

Flood-Irrigated Grass-Hay: 818,156 acres \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Id.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Managed Public Wetlands: 193,646 acres (IWJV analysis)

That shows that 81% of the managed surface water wetland habitat in
the Intermountain West over the last seven years is a result of
irrigated agriculture. The wildlife refuges provide certain habitats--
summer flooded semi-permanent wetlands, fall-flooded seasonal
wetlands--that are different from the irrigated grass-hay habitats, so
we truly need all these habitats.

There's also evidence that points to the fact that many wildlife
refuges in the Intermountain West traditionally relied upon
agricultural irrigation return flows (e.g., tailwater) as a key
component of their water supplies. For example, the narrative at the
beginning of the Great Salt Lake Wetland Habitat Needs report \18\
observes that, when canals flowed, the refuges had water supplies, when
irrigated agricultural lands were developed and irrigation ceased,
those water supplies went away.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Great Salt Lake Wetland Habitat: A Needs Report Based on
Interviews with the Managers. November 2020. Prepared by Janice Gardner
and Sarah Woodbury, Wild Utah Project.

Here's the bottom line. Based on the bird utilization of flood-
irrigated agricultural lands, the reality that irrigated agriculture
accounts for 81% of the managed surface water wetland habitat, and the
history of some key wildlife refuges being dependent on return flows
from irrigated agriculture (which is lost without agricultural
irrigation), it's clear that irrigated agriculture is playing a very
important role in sustaining wetland-dependent migratory bird habitat
across the Flyways.
The importance of maintaining Western agricultural land for habitat
conservation and landscape resiliency

The proposed regulation imbeds a message that we often hear from
certain litigious environmental activist groups. While irrigation has
increased agricultural productivity in the arid American West, these
critics often focus only on how it has altered the natural landscape.
However, irrigation projects also provide important benefits to
wetlands. In California's Sacramento Valley, rice production provides
vitally important surrogate habitat and food for waterfowl and other
species. In the Klamath Basin of California and Oregon, cereal grains
and other wildlife-friendly agricultural production is critical to
meeting the needs of Pacific Flyway waterfowl. In addition, irrigated
corn, wheat, and alfalfa croplands in the McNary and the Columbia
National Wildlife Refuges in central and eastern Washington provide a
valuable source for ducks, geese and other waterfowl.
IWJV has begun to quantify the exact number of agricultural acres
that need to be enhanced/protected in the Klamath Basin in California
and Oregon (among other locations) to provide habitat to sustain water
bird and waterfowl populations. This has critical implications for the
broader agricultural community in the Pacific Flyway. If habitat is not
maintained in the Klamath Basin, migrating birds will likely move
south, to California's Central Valley, earlier in the season. This
earlier migration means birds may arrive before rice is harvested,
resulting in potentially devastating impacts to rice production. This
is just one example showing the importance of understanding landscape
systems as a whole and the ripple effects that can occur through
habitat loss.
In Northern Colorado, a study by Colorado State University (CSU)
researchers found that 92 percent of wetlands were visually connected
to the irrigation infrastructure. Though land conversion and water
diversions have led to dramatic reductions in historic wetland acreage
in some places, it is clear from the CSU study that current
agricultural landscapes create wetlands that rely on irrigation
water.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Sueltenfuss, Cooper, Knight, and Waskom, ``The creation and
maintenance of wetland ecosystems from irrigation canal and reservoir
seepage in a semi-arid landscape,'' Colorado State University, 2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Americans should appreciate the fact that Western farming and
ranching operations provide valuable open space. In the Southern
Rockies, for example, 43 percent of the private land that is located
adjacent to public lands has a public grazing lease. The approximately
24,000 grazing leases on BLM and Forest Service lands are connected to
more than 230 million acres \20\ of private land that ranchers utilize
for sheep and cattle grazing during the rest of the year. What would
happen to wildlife and open space if public-land grazing were to end
and the private lands were developed? Private lands provide most winter
and riparian habitat for many wildlife species. Public lands, being
less productive, cannot sustain healthy wildlife populations once the
private lands rimming their boundaries are developed and reappear as
housing subdivisions.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Congressional Research Service Report, ``Statistics on
Livestock Grazing on Federal Lands: FY 2002-2016'' (August, 2017)
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44932/3
\21\ Gary P. Nabhan, Richard L. Knight, and Susan Charnley, ``The
Biodiversity that Nature Reserves Can't Capture: How Western Ranches,
Tribal Grazing Lands and Private Forests Sustain Ecosystems and Their
Diverse Species'' in Saving the Wide Open Spaces, 2011
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

We urge that the Service not adopt the proposed regulations. Our
members and others in the regulated community see increased Federal
top-down regulations and controls being proposed and put in place,
while proven, collaborative partnership-driven approaches to find
lasting solutions to vexing water problems appear to have been put on
the back burner. Our producers find it difficult to understand why
agricultural production finds itself continually under attack when
farmers and ranchers continue to provide the food and fiber to feed and
clothe the Nation and the world. We are troubled why the Service and
other federal agencies are ``biting the hand'' that produces the food.

While inflation and the cost of living being the top concern of
Americans, our own government's policies are putting the squeeze on
some of the world's best producers of safe, affordable food. We are
already losing American farmers,\22\ against the current backdrop of
shrinking significantly inflated food costs, global food supply
challenges, and a looming global famine. Rather than advance the
harmful agendas of anti-farming and ranching activists, the importance
of Western American agricultural production should be carefully and
thoughtfully evaluated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ The USDA's recently released five-year Census of Agriculture
showed the biggest five-year decline in number of farmers since at
least 2000. Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack recently said this
highlights the need to do more to help medium-sized and small
operations.

Now is the time to focus on the critical importance of maintaining
our country's food security and locally sourced foods. Rising food
prices and global hunger are linked to the war in Ukraine, extreme
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
climate events, and other global stressors.

Thank you for this opportunity to comment. Farmers, ranchers, and
some conservation groups know that the best water solutions are unique
and come from the local, watershed, and state levels. They know we need
policies that encourage agricultural producers, NGOs, and state and
federal agencies to work together in a strategic, coordinated fashion.
They understand that species recovery and economic growth and activity
do not have to be mutually exclusive.

Western irrigated agriculture is a strategic and irreplaceable
national resource important to both our food security and our economy.
It must be appreciated, valued, and protected by the federal government
in the 21st Century.

Sincerely,

Dan Keppen,
Executive Director

______

State of Utah

Department of Natural Resources

March 4, 2024

Shannon Estenoz, Assistant Secretary
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Department of the Interior
Washington, DC 20240

Re: FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-1016--National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological
Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health

Dear Assistant Secretary Estenoz:

The State of Utah (``State''), through the Public Lands Policy
Coordinating Office, in coordination with the Utah Division of Wildlife
Resources (``DWR''), has reviewed the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's
(``Service'') proposed new regulations regarding the National Wildlife
Refuge System; Biological Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental
Health (``Proposed Rule''). The State provides the following specific
comments regarding the Proposed Rule:

First, the State appreciates the Proposed Rule's recognition of the
need for coordination with State fish and wildlife agencies when
evaluating the biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health (``BIDEH'') of the National Wildlife Refuge System (``refuge
system''). The State maintains jurisdiction over wildlife within its
borders that are not subject to the Endangered Species Act and numerous
wildlife species subject to the State's jurisdiction reside on National
Wildlife Refuges within the State. It is therefore imperative that the
Service coordinate wildlife management with DWR and ensure management
decisions are based on the best available local science provided by the
DWR. The State requests express recognition of this jurisdictional
authority throughout the Proposed Rule, especially where refuge
managers are afforded discretion to make determinations related to
mitigation and adaptation strategies for wildlife.

Second, the State appreciates the Service's recognition in the
Supplementary Information section that ``historical conditions may need
to serve as a reference point, rather than an end goal.'' However, the
State is concerned that the proposed regulatory language does not fully
reflect this intent. For instance, the definition of ``historical
conditions,'' wherein reference to this intent would be most
appropriate, does not include any mention of using historical
conditions as a reference point. The State suggests including clear
statements in the regulatory language to ensure historical conditions
are utilized in a manner consistent with the Service's stated intent.

Third, the State provides the following more specific comments
regarding the proposed regulatory language:
Section 29.3(a)--Ensure biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health:

The final sentence of this paragraph suggests the Service will use
``sound professional judgment, informed by the best available
scientific information'' to inform management within refuges. Along
with the best available science, the Service's ``professional
judgment'' should be informed by local information and science provided
through DWR. The Service recognized in the Supplementary Information
section that ensuring BIDEH of the refuge system ``necessitates a
landscape-level perspective for managing an interconnected network of
land and waters.'' The State has jurisdictional authority over many of
the resources inside and outside of the refuge system that will be
affected by specific management decisions. Accordingly, to facilitate a
``landscape-level perspective,'' there must be explicit reference here
to utilizing state-specific information to inform the Service's
judgment.
Section 29.3(b)--Definitions:

Biological Integrity: The final sentence in this definition is a
statement regarding the Service's method for evaluating biological
integrity. To ensure clarity of definition, this sentence should be
removed and placed in the ``management directives'' section of the
Proposed Rule.
Climate change mitigation: This definition focuses solely on
methods to address climate change itself, not to address the effects of
climate change on the refuge systems and/or the BIDEH objectives. The
State is concerned that the inclusion of such a definition renders the
Proposed Rule overly broad and shifts focus from the BIDEH issues the
Proposed Rule is meant to address. Mitigation in this context should
refer to management actions that address identified effects of climate
change.

Diversity: The final sentence in this definition is a statement
regarding the Service's method for evaluating diversity. To ensure
clarity of definition, this sentence should be removed and placed in
the ``management directives'' section of the Proposed Rule.

Environmental change: The reference here to ``alteration or
disturbance of the environment caused by humans'' causes significant
confusion between this definition and the proffered definition for
``anthropogenic change.'' The State suggests the removal of the phrase
``caused by humans or natural processes.'' Alternatively, the State
suggests the removal of the ``human processes'' language to avoid
confusion with the definition of anthropogenic change.

Environmental health: The final sentence in this definition is a
statement regarding the Service's method for evaluating environmental
health. To ensure clarity of definition, this sentence should be
removed and placed in the ``management directives'' section of the
Proposed Rule.

Historical conditions: As discussed above, the Service should
consider including a clear statement that ``historical conditions'' may
be utilized as a reference point rather than an end goal. Without this
additional clarity in the regulatory language, the Service's intent of
utilizing ``historical conditions'' in this fashion may not be
implemented.

Native: The term ``native'' is used in many contexts outside of
wildlife management. As such, for purposes of clarity, the State
recommends this sentence be revised to define the phrase ``native
species.'' This will ensure the definition is limited appropriately.
Section 29.3(c)--Management directives for ensuring biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health:

29.3(c)(1)--The language outlined for addressing climate change
references ``using climate change mitigation and adaptation
strategies.'' However, as discussed above, the definition of ``climate
change mitigation'' refers solely to measures designed to address
climate change generally, rather than measures designed to address the
effects of climate change on BIDEH. At a minimum, the definition should
be revised. However, the State also recommends additional clarity in
this section to ensure management designed to address the effects of
climate change are directed to the refuge system.

29.3(c)(2)--The language here suggests the Service will ``avoid and
minimize habitat fragmentation.'' However, avoiding and minimizing are
different management approaches, that should be addressed separately.
The State suggests a revision of this language to provide clarity for
when habitat fragmentation will be avoided, as opposed to minimized.

29.3(c)(5)--This section refers to addressing threats through
management actions, ``including when such threats to refuge resources
arise outside refuge boundaries.'' This suggests the Service can act on
threats outside the refuge system entirely. While this may be necessary
in certain circumstances, there should be limits on the discretion
afforded to refuge managers to develop management actions outside of
the refuge system boundaries.
Section 29.3(d)--Management activities and uses with the potential to
ensure biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health.

29.3(d)(1)--The State is concerned that the prohibition on predator
control inside the refuge system could have effects beyond the
Service's jurisdiction. Predators within the refuge system can, and
often will, move outside of the refuge system. Prohibiting predator
control, without consultation with the State and/or DWR, may therefore
result in unintended consequences outside of the boundaries of the
refuge system. The State suggests the Service consider creating
comprehensive predator control plans for the refuge system and the
landscapes surrounding those systems that are affected by excessive
predation. At a minimum, there must be consultation with the State
before including an outright prohibition on predator control within the
refuge systems.

29.3(d)(2)--The State is concerned about an allowance for the
introduction of species outside their current range. At a minimum,
there should be a reference here to the best available science for such
an introduction, particularly as it relates to the suitability of
habitat for such an introduction. Additionally, the State requests
explicit reference here to the need for consultation with DWR before
allowing introductions outside a species' range. This will ensure that
any future environmental analyses will consider how such an
introduction will affect the existing environment and any species
currently residing within that environment.

The State appreciates the cooperative relationship it has with the
Service and the consideration of the concerns outlined herein. Please
direct any written correspondence to the Public Lands Policy
Coordinating Office at the address below or call to discuss any
questions or concerns.

Sincerely,

Redge B. Johnson,
Director

______

Modoc County, California

Board of Supervisors

February 27, 2024

Public Comments Processing
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: Comments: Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106

To Whom It May Concern:

Modoc County, California (County) appreciates the opportunity to
submit its position regarding the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's
(Service) proposed new regulations regarding the biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health (BIDEH) of the National Wildlife
Refuge System (Refuge System). Modoc County could be considered an
epicenter for refuges ``created'' from productive agricultural land
rich in wildlife habitat. This habitat often existed because of
traditional, ecologically friendly agricultural practices. In many
cases, we have seen that habitat degraded and lost through
preservation-like refuge management that ceased the activities that
were beneficial to wildlife. It is, through this lens, that the County
analyzes the Service's proposal.
General Comments

The National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act (as amended)
states refuges should be managed to meet both the purpose for which the
refuge was established and the overall mission of the Refuge System. As
it relates to this proposal, it is also to ensure the BIDEH are
maintained for the future. As a County, we respect this mission.

However, as a practical matter, we observe the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service is skeptical of commercial agricultural activities
(haying, grazing, farming), on refuge land, even when these practices
are producing desired habitat and food. Many believe there is no place
for any agriculture, other than raising a little grain for waterfowl
feed, on refuges. Based on our experience interacting with the agency,
it is evident that they feel great pressure from many in the
environmental community to maintain these beliefs and implement them.
Our primary concern with this proposal is that it will go even further
in pushing managers to make decisions regarding agriculture on refuges
that will be detrimental to both wildlife and our local communities.

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service lacks the experience or
knowledge of how to properly manage agricultural practices on the
refuge that benefit both the refuge and the local community. There is a
natural tendency to want to ``love a refuge to death'' rather than see
habitat maintained through agriculture. We are seeing other federal
efforts to `preserve rather than conserve' federal land and resources.
The County urges you to rewrite this proposal in order to give local
managers the latitude and the support necessary to employ beneficial
agricultural activities that can provide quality habitat and maintain
community backing.

We have many local examples of the ecological damage created when
agricultural activities have ceased in the name of environmental purity
on refuges. Within the County, we have seen quality habitat degraded by
removing the haying and grazing that maintained the wetland/meadow
grasses in the short, growing stages desired by grazing waterfowl. We
have observed productive land invaded by noxious weeds and destructive
rodents because weed and predator control were abandoned. Lack of
irrigation or proper irrigation has turned wetlands into deserts,
valuable meadow habitat into overgrown, waterfowl unfriendly swamps,
and become breeding grounds for destructive swarms of grasshoppers.
Pressure from anti-use advocates and a lack of strong support from the
upper echelons have contributed to these situations.

One solution to repeating these mistakes continually is interaction
with local government. County governments have direct connections with
local producers who continue to produce, on nearby farms and ranches,
the kind of habitat that are often what refuge wildlife need. County
government also can bring university cooperative extension (natural
resource advisors) scientists into the discussions that can lead to
management outcomes that can benefit refuges, local communities, and
nearby landowners. To this end, we are quite concerned that in the
section of the Federal Register entitled ``Coordination with Adjacent
Landowners, State, and Tribal Partners'', you have failed to include
local government. The Service's relationship with adjacent landowners
is often troubled as they see increased depredation of their private
land and crops if refuge habitat is degraded or not appealing.
Additionally, we are now seeing refuges, because of stagnant
overgrowth, creating wildfire risks for neighbors.

In this same section of the description of your proposal, you
discuss the need for a landscape perspective in order to ensure the
BIDEH of the Refuge System. While we don't disagree that there may be a
need for some 30,000 feet guidance, each refuge is unique unto itself
and it is far more important to address BIDEH at the refuge level. Your
best facilitator for that remains local government. We strongly
encourage you to not be swept up in the current one-size-fits-all, top
down direction sweeping the federal land management agencies. This
approach serves all impacted poorly.

The proposed regulations direct managers to prioritize natural
processes and support ecological connectivity to achieve refuge goals
and objectives. The County would remind the Service that grazing,
although it be by livestock rather than wild ungulates, is a natural
process. It is also science-based. The only other method for removing
old-growth wetland vegetation, besides haying and grazing, is burning.

The same paragraph encourages the establishment of wildlife
corridors to facilitate the adaption of climate change. We have no
problems with corridors within refuge boundaries. We become very
concerned when the Service begins to look over the fence at neighboring
properties. Refuge expansion, for whatever reason, especially without
early and meaningful coordination with local government, is something
the County takes very seriously. We recently were made aware of an
expansion of a local refuge after a deal had already been brokered with
the adjacent landowner. The Service acquired it, not because the
potential acquisition had been carefully analyzed (there was no
National Environmental Policy Act assessment) and found vital to the
Refuge Systems mission, but because it was available. Our land use
policy is that federal agencies should concentrate on better management
of the land and resources they are already responsible for, rather than
acquiring additional land. We see this proposal as encouraging
additional acquisitions and urge that it be rewritten.

The County's belief is that much stronger engagement with local
government would be greatly beneficial to both the Service and the
Refuge System. We strongly urge you to rewrite this section to not only
include local government as one of the entities for consultation but
also highlight its importance.

We will repeat again that refuge staff often feel they are under
immense pressure from many directions to curb the use of haying,
grazing, and farming as tools for producing wildlife habitat and food,
regardless of whether or not that food and habitat can be duplicated
another way. These new proposals will likely increase that pressure
under the guise of climate change. We suggest support for the desirable
end results and not to be dictating the means to get there. As it
relates to climate change, our observations are that the unsatisfactory
condition of federal lands is not due to climate change, but rather to
the failure of federal land managers to adopt appropriate management
strategies to address the challenges of climate change. Those decisions
should be made locally, to address site-specific conditions, rather
than be a one-size-fits-all approach.

Climate change management requires an aggressive approach that
needs all the tools in a refuge manager's toolbox. It means more
effective and efficient use of available water, utilizing haying and
grazing to produce more fire-resilient refuges as well as desired
regrowth for late-season wildlife forage and appropriate upland grazing
to provide species of concern with the heterogeneous mix of forages
they require. These sorts of practices need policies and regulations
that encourage their use if we are to have refuges with the resiliency
to withstand the challenges that will come with climate change resource
management. These include, but are not limited to, wildfire, flooding,
and invasive weeds and insects.
Specific Comments

Your proposal summary states that these rules/policies would
provide refuge managers with a consistent approach for evaluating and
implementing management actions. In the whole, that may be true, but
the County reminds the Service that there is a statutory exception to
that statement; the Lower Klamath and Tule Lake refuges. To paraphrase
George Orwell; all refuges are equal, but some refuges are more equal
than others.
Public Law 88-567 (Kuchel Act) clearly states these refuges are to
be managed for waterfowl but with full consideration to optimum
agricultural use. This new proposal is clearly not compatible with the
Kuchel Act. The County strongly urges direction be provided that
emphatically states that the management direction for these two refuges
comes from the law, not this new proposal, regardless of its final
form. While this might seem to be a non-issue, the refuge managers have
been under constant pressure since the inception of the Kuchel Act,
both from within and outside the Service, to manage in such a way to
minimize the importance of the mandated farming. The County has seen
several attempts over the years to sidestep the intent of the law and
attempt to make the viability of agriculture on these refuges difficult
or impossible.

We suggest direction be developed that clearly delineates to all
decision makers on these two refuges that agriculture is not optional.
We also suggest selecting personnel in management positions that have
the necessary background to understand the importance of refuge
farming; for the refuge, the communities, and the impacted local
governments.

We fully understand that the Refuge System does not have a primary
obligation to consider the impacts their operations have on the
surrounding local communities. The single mission is management for
wildlife and their habitat. However, this is not the case for the Lower
Klamath and Tule Lake Refuges. Because of the legislative mandate for
agricultural activity, Congress made it quite clear that this required
farming was there to benefit the local community, as well as indirectly
the waterfowl.

The importance of these ``lease lands'' to the local economy cannot
be understated. These acres provide a starting place for the next
generation of farmers. They are an important component of the
agricultural economy of the tri-county area, contributing significantly
to the overall economic health of the basin. They help local government
directly through the refuge revenue sharing program as a portion of the
lease money goes to the three counties. Indirectly, they help
contribute to both the secured and unsecured tax rolls. While these
amounts may not seem significant from the Service headquarters 2800
miles away, but they are critical for providing essential services to
our citizens.

The Clear Lake National Wildlife Refuge contains one of the last
known Greater Sage Grouse leks in Northeastern California. It is
maintained, at least in part, by the grazing that takes place there.
This managed grazing is critical for the heterogeneousness needed for
proper Sage Grouse habitat. It cannot be produced any other way than by
appropriate grazing. Again, we believe that this proposal provides
additional pressure, on top of that already existing from the
environmental community, to remove livestock from refuge land,
regardless of the benefits.

The Modoc National Wildlife Refuge is almost entirely wetland. This
habitat is ideal for many species of waterfowl. This habitat was
primarily developed through the use of haying and grazing while it was
in private hands. While these activities have continued in some form
since the Service acquired the land, there has been continual pressure
to change or discontinue the agricultural practices that created the
desired short grass waterfowl habitat. Haying and grazing are the only
mechanisms available to provide the short new-growth grasses that
migrating waterfowl require for spring and fall migrations. There is no
viable alternative. Because there are many that believe no commercial
activity has a place on a wildlife refuge, there is constant pressure
for cessation of the haying and grazing. The proposed regulations add
to this pressure. They should be rewritten to provide support for
local-level decision-making, ideally including the local expe1tise
familiar with how agricultural activities can be managed to produce
desired habitat.
Summary

The County views the direction of this proposal as detrimental to
refuge management, as it re-enforces the push for the removal of
agricultural practices that are already too prevalent. Using the
challenge of climate change as the reason for this proposal does
nothing to weaken the argument that many of the agricultural practices
are the only way to maintain and enhance certain desired conditions. In
fact, often climate change management would require an increased
reliance on these practices as water applications must become more
efficient and effective.

We again reiterate that the Lower Klamath and Tule Lake Refuges
must be clearly separated from other refuges in the way they are to be
managed. This proposal is in conflict with the Kuchel Act and separate
guidance must be developed that fully complies with this legislation.

Finally, the County reminds the Service that local government must
be a partner in refuge management. We can provide both support and
local expertise for local refuge managers that will benefit all. We
encourage a re-draft of this portion of the proposal.

The County appreciates consideration of our position and looks
forward to an improved proposal.

Sincerely,

Shane Starr,
Chair of the Board

______

Wyoming Game and Fish Department

Cheyenne, WY

March 4, 2024

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological Integrity, Diversity,
and Environmental Health proposed rule change--FWS-HQ-NWRS-
2022-0106

Dear Madam/Sir:

The Wyoming Game and Fish Department (Department) has reviewed the
proposed National Wildlife Refuge System, Biological Integrity,
Diversity, and Environmental Health (BIDEH) proposed regulations
change. The Department is statutorily charged with managing and
protecting all Wyoming wildlife (W.S. 23-1-103). Pursuant to our
mission, we offer the following comments for your consideration.

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), propose new
regulations to ensure that the BIDEH of the National Wildlife Refuge
System (Refuge System) are maintained, and where appropriate, restored
and enhanced, in accordance with the National Wildlife Refuge System
Improvement Act of 1997. These proposed regulatory and policy revisions
would support conservation throughout the Refuge System in response to
both long-standing and contemporary conservation challenges, including
the universal and profound effects of climate change on refuge species
and ecosystems.

The Department encourages the Service to continue to work directly
with the states, as well as with their regional associations, in an
effort to enhance these proposed changes with language which recognizes
the expertise and authority of the individual state fish and wildlife
management agencies. There are several proposed changes which could
substantially benefit from inclusion of direction for the Service to
consult and collaborate with the affected state(s) in matters for which
the states can provide a high level of expertise in addressing species
or ecosystem specific issues. Areas within the regulations where
inclusion of such language would be extremely meaningful include:

PART 29--LAND USE MANAGEMENT

Sec. 29.3 Biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health.

(c) Management directives for ensuring BIDEH.

(2) Conserve and connect habitat

(3) Manage fish and wildlife populations

(d) Management activities and uses with potential to ensure BIDEH.

(1) Native predator control

(2) Conservation translocations

(4) Invasive species management

(6) Agricultural uses

The above listed regulation sections are also proposed to be
extremely restrictive in the potential management options which can be
considered for the refuge system. This direction, in conjunction with
no consultation with the respective state fish and wildlife agencies,
will only exacerbate the Service's limited opportunity to develop
successful management options to address BIDEH within the refuge
system.

Thank you for the opportunity to comment.

Sincerely,

Angi Bruce,
Deputy Director

______

Idaho Cattle Association

March 4, 2024

Public Comments Processing
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

Re: Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106; RIN 1018-BG78; National Wildlife
Refuge System; Biological Integrity, Diversity, and
Environmental Health

To Whom It May Concern:

On behalf of Idaho's cattle ranching families, the Idaho Cattle
Association submits the following comments regarding the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service's (FWS) proposed rulemaking and policy revisions to
ensure Biological Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health
(BIDEH) on National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS) lands. Ranchers are
the stewards of the ecosystem on both the private and public land they
use. They provide an effective line of defense against fire and noxious
weeds, manage forage for optimum production, and are the primary
protectors of open space in the private lands of the west. Because of
this, we have a vested interest in this proposal and encourage you to
consider the importance of continued livestock grazing on NWRS as tool
that builds and supports healthy landscapes.

The rule calls for FWS to ``allow for and defer to natural
processes on habitats within the Refuge System and promote
conservation, restoration, and connectivity to meet refuge habitat
objectives and landscape planning goals [. . .] When natural processes
cannot meet habitat objectives or facilitate adaptation to
anthropogenic change, we will use science-based management techniques
[. . .]'' It is important the FWS acknowledges that livestock grazing
is a ``natural process'' that provides many important benefits to the
landscape.

As a wise and sustainable use of the land, managed livestock
grazing fosters a good ecological balance as it promotes good grass
growth, lessens the threat of catastrophic wildfires, and controls the
spread of weeds. In terms of climate change concerns, grazing provides
benefit here too. When cattle graze, they stimulate soil microbial
activity, promoting good nitrogen storage, deeper roots, and healthier
plants. Healthier soil also sequesters more carbon.

Idaho ranchers and livestock grazing permittees provide
infrastructure vital to wildlife. Particularly on federal land, there
are places in Idaho that, without developed water sources, wildlife
would have no water for fifty miles or more. Because of water
developments that grazing permittees have established and continue to
maintain across public lands, wildlife have been able to flourish.
Certainly, the federal government would not be able to maintain the
wildlife's vital water supply on all this land without the efforts of
the grazing permittees.

Livestock grazing ensures results in effective weed control.
Grazing is an effective tool to manage a wide variety of forage,
spurring growth of perennial grasses. Well-managed grazing has been
scientifically proven to have a positive impact in decreasing invasive
species like cheatgrass. The timing and intensity of grazing for such
efforts requires flexibility in management that an overly prescriptive
land use plans would prohibit, thereby blocking an effective
conservation tool.

Foremost, livestock grazing on plays an essential role in fuels
management and wildfire control. Grazing reduces the threat of
catastrophic fire by reducing fine fuels. It removes the overgrowth of
forage which is the primary fuel for many wildfires. Management
flexibility is needed to manage the landscape in such a way to be
responsive to reducing fuel loads--this rule may serve to stifle that
needed flexibility. In Idaho, we have seen several areas closed to
grazing and have witnessed the resulting environmental degration. For
example livestock grazing has been canceled on state Wildlife
Management Areas (WMA), whose mission is to support wildlife species
and serve as principal habitat for at-risk species, similar to NWRS
lands. The Craig Mountain WMA has seen multiple devastating
catastrophic fires since the state took over management and removed
grazing. Given the proliferation of wildfire within the WMA, due in
part to land management decisions and inaction, the state is clearly
missing the mark. Rather than serving as a safe harbor for species, the
WMA is a tinderbox just asking for repeated catastrophic fires. This is
precisely the scenario that will occur if FWS removes grazing from NWRS
lands.

Moving forward, it is critical that livestock grazing is both
continued on NWRS lands and expanded as a tool to assist FWS in
managing those lands. Any removal of these activities would put
remaining habitat at great risk of being lost--if not by catastrophic
fire, then to development of the surrounding landscape.

We are particularly concerned with this statement in the proposed
rule: ``We prohibit the use of agricultural practices unless they are
determined necessary to meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge
purposes, and ensure biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health, and where we cannot achieve refuge management objectives
through natural processes.'' As enumerated above, livestock grazing is
an important conservation tool in managing the landscape for the
benefit of plant and wildlife species. It is essential that FWS
acknowledges it to be an acceptable practice and natural process.

An additional concerning element of the rule is the goal to acquire
more land to put in the NWRS system. The rule seeks to ``acquire lands
when necessary to meet statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes,
and ensure biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health''.
We are unequivocally opposed to the federal government's acquisition of
private lands. If opportunities for productive working landscapes are
reduced or diminished through land acquisition, the resulting impact is
the financial unsustainability of agriculture operations which causes
the sale and development of intact landscapes and habitat. The best
thing that FWS can do to support those intact landscapes is not to
acquire those lands, but rather to partner with landowners in voluntary
conservation efforts.

The Idaho Cattle Association appreciates the opportunity to provide
comment on this proposed rule. The continued presence of livestock
grazing on enhances wildlife habitat and native biological diversity
and the cattle ranchers who manage the grazing provide an invaluable
partner to the federal government in achieving its conservation goals.
In addition to these comments, we also support the comments submitted
by the Public Lands Council and National Cattlemen's Beef Association.

Sincerely,

Jerry Wroten,
President

______

March 1, 2024

Shannon Estenoz, Assistant Secretary
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of Interior
Washington, DC 20240

Assistant Secretary Estenoz:

We write to express concern with the proposed National Wildlife
Refuge System's (NWRS) biological integrity, diversity, and
environmental health (BIDEH) proposed rule and proposed policy updates
(Docket Number: FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106). We first ask that you extend
the comment period to at least a 90-day period due to the complex
nature of this proposal and the need for additional stakeholder input.
Our organizations have the privilege of representing tens of thousands
of hunters, anglers, and conservationists in each of our respective
states.

Establishing a broad, top-down structure such as the proposed BIDEH
rule, where widely accepted wildlife habitat management practices, such
as cooperative agriculture, predator control, and use of pesticides,
are first prohibited unless justified, will reduce the necessary
flexibility to meet the goals of each unique refuge unit. Mechanical
and chemical management practices are important tools that wildlife
managers should be able to utilize in managing each Refuge and the
current regulations are sufficient to prevent ecological harms.

Additionally, we are concerned that the BIDEH proposal does not
safeguard the primary purpose of each individual NWRS unit. The
Improvement Act requires that when conflict arises between the NWRS
mission and the established refuge purpose, the purpose of the unit
itself supersedes the NWRS mission. The BIDEH proposed rule appears
contradictory.

Further, as the National Wildlife Refuge System presently needs
more money from Congress to address deferred maintenance, chronic
understaffing, and executing habitat improvement projects, this is not
the time for new obstacles to this important work. Instead, the
National Wildlife Refuge System could best advance its mission with
greater clarity about projects, programs, and deferred maintenance.

We appreciate your consideration of additional time to comment on
this proposal and look forward to working with the agency to make this
proposed rule work for our members.

Sincerely,

Alabama Wildlife Federation   North Dakota Wildlife Federation

Arizona Wildlife Federation   Oregon Hunters Association

Idaho Wildlife Federation     Tennessee Wildlife Federation

Michigan United
Conservation Clubs            Wyoming Wildlife Federation

Nevada Wildlife Federation

______

February 26, 2024

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Falls Church, VA

The undersigned organizations, which represent millions of
America's hunters, anglers, recreational shooters, and wildlife
scientists and other professionals, write today to express strong
concerns with the recently proposed National Wildlife Refuge System
(NWRS) biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health
(BIDEH) proposed rule and proposed policy updates (Docket Number: FWS-
HQ-NWRS-2022-0106).

At the outset, the undersigned organizations strongly urge the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) to extend the comment period to at
least a 90-day period. The policy changes contained in the BIDEH
proposal represent significant and consequential changes to how the
NWRS has managed and conserved its land and waters for the last
century. Recognizing the magnitude of the proposed changes, the
undersigned believe that a 30-day comment deprives partners and
stakeholders of the time and attention necessary to formulate
substantial comments to address the sweeping changes proposed in BIDEH.
For example, in June 2023, FWS published the proposed 2023-2024 Hunt
Fish Rule and provided the public a 90-day period for comments.
Comparatively, the BIDEH proposal has the potential to have far greater
impacts on fish, wildlife, and their associated habitats as well as the
American public than the 2023-2024 Hunt Fish Rule. The BIDEH proposal
in and of itself is a complex and marked change in direction for the
NWRS, and the signatories believe that the BIDEH proposal requires a
comment period that is equal to or greater than what was provided for
the 2023-2024 Hunt Fish Rule.

We are concerned that the intent of the BIDEH proposal is
inconsistent with the intent and the plain language of the National
Wildlife Improvement Act of 1997 (Improvement Act). For example, BIDEH
is only mentioned one time in the entire Improvement Act under Section
5, Administration of the System--and yet it's singularly selected out
of a list of 14 items to create this proposed policy to ``ensure that
the biological integrity, diversity, and the environmental health of
the System are maintained for the benefit of present and future
generations of Americans''. The plain language of the Improvement Act
does not direct the NWRS to establish or propose broad, sweeping
changes as identified in the BIDEH proposal.

Additionally, we are concerned that the BIDEH proposal does not
prioritize the primary purpose of each individual NWRS unit. The
Improvement Act requires that when conflict arises between the NWRS
mission and the established refuge purpose, the purpose of the unit
itself should take precedence over the NWRS mission. Unfortunately, the
BIDEH proposal does not appear to reflect this requirement as the
proposal states: ``The law states that each refuge must be managed to
fulfill both the Refuge System mission and the specific purposes for
which that refuge was established''. While this statement is true, it
makes a muddle of a clear part of the Improvement Act--that refuge
purposes take priority over the mission of the NWRS rather being placed
on equal footing. The BIDEH proposal has a single-minded focus on the
overall mission of the NWRS and does not fulfill the need to support
the purpose of each unique NWRS unit. This threatens to create a top-
down approach that will undermine the distinctive purpose for which
each individual refuge was established, and it could erode public
support for the refuge system by disenfranchising those who have long
fought for the establishment of refuges and sought to see the NWRS
adequately funded. Furthermore, the proposal does not consider the
distinctive challenges and varied conservation measures that are
necessary to fulfil the purpose of each refuge. Establishing a broad,
top-down structure such as BIDEH, where widely accepted wildlife
habitat management practices, such as cooperative agriculture are first
prohibited unless justified, will reduce the necessary flexibility to
meet the goals of each unique refuge unit.

In summary, the undersigned organizations do not believe the BIDEH
proposal is consistent with the Congressional intent and the plain
language of the Improvement Act. We also strongly urge FWS to extend
the comment period to a minimum of 90 days. The proposed direction
contained in the BIDEH proposal is a significant departure from how the
NWRS has traditionally managed its land and water in cooperation and
partnership with the American public. With such a significant change in
mind, the undersigned request more time to thoroughly examine the
consequences and outcomes of the BIDEH proposal.

Finally, we request a meeting with the FWS Director to discuss
implementation of the Refuge Improvement Act and the future of the
NWRS.

Sincerely,

American Woodcock Society     National Shooting Sports
Foundation

Archery Trade Association     National Wild Turkey Federation

Association of Fish &
Wildlife Agencies             North American Falconers
Association

Backcountry Hunters &
Anglers                       North American Grouse Partnership

Boone and Crockett Club       Orion: The Hunter's Institute

California Waterfowl          Pheasants Forever

Campfire Club of America      Pope & Young Club

Congressional Sportsmen's
Foundation                    Professional Outfitters and
Guides of America

Conservation Force            Quail Forever

Council to Advance Hunting
and the Shooting Sports       Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation

Delta Waterfowl               Ruffed Grouse Society

Ducks Unlimited               Safari Club International

Houston Safari Club           Sportsmen's Alliance

Izaak Walton League of
America                       Theodore Roosevelt Conservation
Partnership

Masters of Foxhounds
Association                   Whitetails Unlimited

Mule Deer Foundation          Wild Sheep Foundation

National Bobwhite and
Grassland Initiative          Wildlife Forever

National Deer Association     Wildlife Mississippi

National Rifle Association

______

March 4, 2024

Shannon Estenoz, Assist. Secretary
Martha Williams, Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Washington, DC 20240

Re: National Wildlife Refuge System; Biological Integrity, Diversity,
and Environmental Health; Docket No. FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106

Dear Assistant Secretary Estenoz and Director Williams:

The Montana Stockgrowers Association (MSGA), Montana Association of
State Grazing Districts (MASGD), and the Montana Public Lands Council
(MPLC) submit the following comments regarding the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service's (USFWS) proposed rulemaking and policy revisions to
ensure Biological Integrity, Diversity, and Ecological Health (BIDEH)
on National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS) Lands.

Since 1884, MSGA has been dedicated to finding proactive solutions
to the most difficult challenges facing Montana's ranching families.
MSGA represents landowners who run cattle on private, state, and
federal lands in Montana and have a significant and interminable
commitment to long-held traditions of resource management that keep
lands and wildlife healthy.

Since the earliest settlement of the West, and particularly
Montana, the main responsibility of the Montana Public Lands Council
has been to develop and coordinate unified policy positions and
regulatory actions that most effectively represent Montana public lands
grazing users. MPLC is a leading state organization in monitoring,
initiating and coordinating actions on priority public lands issues in
the state.

Of all the western states, Montana alone has a statutory network of
State Grazing Districts, cooperative areas of diverse ownership that
allow for the greatest use of range forage while conserving limited
natural resources. Grazing districts are non-profit, cooperative
associations of ranchers and farmers who raise cattle.
The value of livestock grazing for healthy lands.

We represent producers who graze livestock on public land across
the state of Montana and our organizations work to protect grazing
lands and permits. As such, we voice serious concerns regarding the
proposed NWRS BIDEH policy revision because of the important and
positive impact of cattle grazing on NWRS lands. Montana is home to
many national wildlife refuges, including the well known Charles M.
Russell National Wildlife Refuge, and our organizations include
producers who have grazed cattle on refuge lands for generations.There
is a mutually beneficial relationship between wildlife habitat and
cattle grazing, one that is tended to by producers who prioritize land,
soil, and habitat health. Further, cattle grazing is especially
valuable in terms of fuel load reduction for fire prevention efforts.
In the proposed policy revisions it is stated that agricultural uses
are, ``prohibited unless determined necessary to meet statutory
requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure biological integrity,
diversity, and environmental health, and where we cannot achieve refuge
management objectives through natural processes.'' MSGA, MPLC, and
MASGD are extremely concerned with the language that illustrates cattle
grazing as a secondary or last ditch effort for management if natural
processes do not work. As written, it appears that cattle grazing could
legally be removed from NWRS lands and other species introduced to the
landscape instead. Our organizations request that the final rule text
includes explicit assurances that existing cooperative agriculture
agreements will not be amended to preclude domestic livestock species
like cattle and that cattle will not be indirectly, or directly, forced
off allotments.
Translocation of species not currently present on refuge lands.

This rule change includes the ability for the agency to translocate
species to the refuge, and consequently, increase their presence on
surrounding lands. The proposed Service Manual revisions state ``[The
NWRS] may allow the introduction of a species outside its current range
to avoid extinction or extirpation; restore a species; reestablish a
specific ecological function lost to extinction or extirpation; or, in
accordance with Sec. 17.81(a) of this chapter, when necessary to meet
statutory requirements, fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure biological
integrity, diversity, and environmental health.'' While we recognize
that the USFWS has the authority to manage refuge acres for the benefit
of wildlife, including federally protected species, we request the
agency to include extensive public engagement, concerted efforts to
mitigate depredation and appropriate coordination between state and
federal agencies to ensure proper compensation for depredation losses,
before translocating predator species to refuge lands. We further ask
for the same diligence and public engagement process when the agency is
considering the introduction of non-predator species translocation.
It's important to note that when species are translocated to a wildlife
refuge, there is a legitimate probability that these species will
migrate off the refuge at one point or another, thereby affecting the
communities, lands, and livestock operations of the surrounding areas.
Impact to local communities.

Not only will the above stated changes affect the communities
surrounding the 580 NWR's in the United States, so will USFWS intent to
``acquire lands when necessary.'' As land is absorbed into wildlife
refuges it is removed from production and from the available private
land base. Young and beginning producers, as well as producers looking
to expand their operations in order to remain sustainable are already
strapped in terms of access to land. Removing more acreage from the
available land base will only exacerbate this issue, increasing the
already climbing rate of producers leaving the industry. Without these
ranches, employment will decrease, the tax base will decrease and rural
communities will suffer, as will local, state, and federal economies.
Additionally, food and fiber production will continue to decrease,
driving prices up for consumers and creating avoidable commodity
shortages. While we understand that there are many factors at play in
this situation, regulations such as the one proposed often have a
domino effect on the livestock industry. We encourage the USFWS NWRS to
utilize every other possible option to meet statutory requirements,
fulfill refuge purposes, and ensure biological integrity, diversity,
and environmental health, before ever considering land acquisition.
This includes entering into new cooperative agriculture agreements to
continue to ensure productive acres remain as such.
Economic Analysis and NEPA Review

The current rulemaking and revisions package is currently being
viewed under the assumption these changes do not constitute as a major
rule under 5 U.S.C. 804(2). Our organizations believe that there is the
potential for a significant economic and environmental impact
nationally if the rules are adopted. The rule changes open up a host of
questions yet to be answered surrounding cattle grazing, protected
species, land values and access on and around wildlife refuges. It
would be prudent to study the potential economic impacts if all rules
and policy revisions are carried out. It is noted that a NEPA process
would be triggered on a case-by-case basis. We request clarification on
what those cases would be and why a preliminary, overarching NEPA
analysis should not be implemented before passage of the rule changes.
Producers who graze cattle on national refuges take land health very
seriously and manage resources for healthy soils and clean water. As
land stewards, ranchers work hard to keep the location an excellent
habitat for wildlife, knowing that wildlife and livestock have a
mutually beneficial relationship when all are managed correctly. It is
unwise to minimize a valuable tool for land health, fire suppression,
and economic viability from the management of wildlife refuge lands.

MSGA, MASGD and MPLC appreciate USFWS for reviewing our comments
and evaluating our concerns as your agency works through the rulemaking
process surrounding biological integrity, diversity, and environmental
health on refuge lands.

Sincerely,

Ellie K. Brighton
Government Affairs
Specialist
Montana Stockgrowers
Association

Executive Staff
Montana Association of
State Grazing Districts

Executive Staff
Montana Public Lands
Council

______

Statement for the Record
National Mining Association

America's mining industry supplies the essential materials
necessary for every sector of our economy--from technology and
healthcare to energy, transportation, infrastructure and national
security. The National Mining Association (NMA) is the only national
trade organization that serves as the voice of the U.S. mining industry
and the hundreds of thousands of American workers it employs before
Congress, the federal agencies, the judiciary and the media, advocating
for public policies that will help America fully and responsibly
utilize its vast natural resources.

We work to ensure America has secure and reliable supply chains,
abundant and affordable energy, and the American-sourced materials
necessary for U.S. manufacturing, and national and economic security,
all delivered under world-leading environmental, safety and labor
standards. The NMA has a membership of nearly 300 companies and
organizations involved in every aspect of mining, from producers and
equipment manufacturers to service providers.

The NMA appreciates the opportunity to provide the subcommittee
with written testimony on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's (FWS)
proposed rule and policy revision on the National Wildlife Refuge
System; Biological Integrity, Diversity, and Environmental Health
(BIDEH).\1\ The NMA is concerned that without significant changes, the
proposals could impede mining activities and create further delays in
the administration's stated goal of reducing vulnerabilities in U.S.
supply chains.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 89 Fed. Reg. 7,345 (Feb. 2, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Introduction

The NMA's members have a long-standing record of supporting
biological integrity, diversity and environmental health in all of the
areas in which they operate. They are routinely at the forefront of
engagement in the conservation and recovery of threatened and
endangered species and improvement of their habitats. These values are
reflected in the sustainable land management practices used at the core
of their business models. Additionally, the NMA's members have
reclaimed millions of acres of land, much of which is restored to serve
as prime species habitat, which prior to operations, were unsuitable
for species. As such, our concerns with the proposed rule should not be
read as opposition to conservation activities or the incorporation of
BIDEH within the Refuge System.
The Proposals Will Cause Delays and Mission Creep by the FWS

The proposed rule and policy changes sought by the FWS would
incorporate an overarching statement in support of the Refuge System's
conservation mission and includes a legal standard for managing refuges
that would apply when the FWS refers to a management action being
necessary to ensure BIDEH. The NMA is concerned that the proposed rule
and policy changes are directly related to the FWS's increased use of
conservation areas to restrict development and therefore could have
serious implications for mining projects. For example, the NMA recently
commented on an unprecedentedly large proposed 5.7-million-acre
conservation area in Montana where valid existing mining claims are
within the proposed boundary.\2\ Because conservation areas are managed
as units of the Refuge System, this type of management can delay and
even block domestic mining activities, leading to a further increase in
our nation's reliance on foreign sources of mined materials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ FWS, Proposed Establishment of the Missouri Headwaters
Conservation Area. https://www.fws.gov/project/proposed-missouri-
headwaters-conservation-area.

This concern is substantiated by FWS's own assertions that
conservation areas are managed as units of the Refuge System. As
recently evidenced in the establishment of the Lost Trail Conservation
Area (LTCA), management as a Refuge System can stymie mining
activity.\3\ For example, in the LTCA, FWS would only allow mineral
extraction or development on Refuge System lands if there is a valid
existing right to engage in such activities.\4\ Yet, determining the
presence of valid existing rights is a lengthy, cumbersome and
expensive process.\5\ The NMA is concerned that the FWS underestimates
the burden and difficulty of demonstrating valid existing rights by
both the mining claim owners and the federal government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, e.g., FWS, Final Land Protection Plan for the
Establishment of the Lost Trail Conservation Area (``The Lost Trail
Conservation Area'' will be a new unit of the National Wildlife Refuge
System . . ., as authorized by the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956.).
\4\ 612 FW 1 at 1.7 (emphasis added); see also 1.7(C) (``The
Service should work with BLM, the agency responsible for conducting
formal mineral examinations, to verify that a valid mining claim
exists.'').
\5\ Am. Law of Mining Sec. 14.04[1] (2023); see also Cameron v.
U.S., 252 U.S. 450 (1920) (explaining the burdens imposed upon the
federal government to provide mineral claim holders notice and an
opportunity to be heard with respect to mining claim rights
determinations).

Further, the NMA is concerned that this proposal will similarly
lead to mission creep and the expanded use of conservation areas beyond
the intended use, and put highly mineralized lands off limits. Caution
is needed when assessing the use of conservation areas in the future
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
under these BIDEH proposals.

As we are entering the most mineral-intensive era in human history,
preventing new mining activities jeopardizes the Biden-Harris
administration's objectives to secure our minerals supply chains to
meet its clean energy goals. The NMA strongly urges the FWS to
recognize that mining and mineral exploration and development can occur
concurrently or sequentially with other responsible resource uses,
including conservation of wildlife and their habitats. Given the vast
amount of federal lands already closed to mining operations, the FWS
should not use incorporation of BIDEH within the Refuge System as
another way to block resource development activities.
The FWS has Limited Authority Outside of the Refuge System

Another troubling issue is that the proposed policy change would
take a more aggressive approach to protecting units of the Refuge
System from actions outside of refuges that may--even in some small
part--impact refuge lands or waters. While there are various acts of
Congress that correctly authorize FWS to acquire and manage areas of
land, water, and interests to promote the conservation of wildlife,
these acts have conditions and regulatory provisions which apply and
oftentimes restrict the agency's purchasing and management activities.
The FWS has no authority to manage land uses outside of units of the
Refuge System and any attempt to do so would be unlawful. To allow FWS
this authority could render the entire U.S. as a refuge under the
National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997 (Improvement
Act).

The FWS policy change would also require the use of all available
tools to protect refuge resources from unacceptable impacts to adjacent
refuge lands. However, the term ``unacceptable impacts'' is undefined
in both the policy change and the proposed rule. The policy further
states that the FWS may take appropriate action within their legal
authorities to obtain an appropriate remedy when an action outside of a
refuge may result in those unacceptable impacts. Yet, the FWS provides
no explanation or guidance as to what ``appropriate actions'' may be in
this circumstance. Moreover, the policy change requires refuge managers
to encourage compatible adjacent land uses by actively participating in
the planning and regulatory processes of other federal agencies, and
Tribal, state, and local governments that have jurisdiction over public
or private property affecting the refuge.

Despite recent efforts to inappropriately control lands outside of
the Refuge System,\6\ the FWS cannot act as the wildlife czar to
control land activities on private lands or other lands outside of the
Refuge System. The NMA is concerned that the new BIDEH proposals will
only embolden Refuge System employees to criticize every land use
project within an undefined radius of a unit of the Refuge System.
Accordingly, the NMA urges the FWS to withdraw its proposal, provide
the appropriate statutory authority (if one exists), and if it decides
to proceed with a rulemaking or policy changes, to provide clear
definitions and explanations as to how these changes will be
implemented. The FWS has not done so in this proposed rule and policy
revisions, and therefore should not proceed with the BIDEH proposal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See letter from Secretary Deb Haaland to Governor Brian Kemp
urging Georgia to not move forward with mining proposal near Okefenokee
National Wildlife Refuge, available at https://
subscriber.politicopro.com/eenews/f/eenews/?id=0000018a-6b72-d88e-a7fa-
7b7bfcd00000 (last visited Mar. 4, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The BIDEH Proposals Will Increase Regulatory Uncertainty

The BIDEH proposals are vast in scope and highly consequential.
Given this expansive nature, it is almost certain to create regulatory
uncertainty for both FWS and the regulated community--which the NMA is
concerned could be by design.
The concepts and priorities encompassed in the proposals represent
a complete overhaul and stark departure from how lands are currently
managed within the Refuge System. This will inevitably lead to
permitting delays at a time where mining products are needed more than
ever. Furthermore, changing the rules of the game will impact the U.S.'
ability to attract investment in mining projects on federal lands. As
the World Bank has cautioned, ``[G]overnments need to adopt the
fundamental principle of `no surprises' if they are to avoid developing
a reputation for sovereign risk, thus affecting investment in their
countries.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Mining Royalties: A Global Study of Their Impact on Investors,
Government, and Civil Society, James Otto et al., the World Bank
(2006).

Regulatory certainty must be the cornerstone of responsible
minerals and land use policies to enable the ramping up of domestic
production and processing under our rigorous environmental and safety
standards. Doing so will ease our nation's bureaucratic paralysis to
provide for greater economic competitiveness and growth while
maintaining environmental protections and safeguards.
Conclusion

The NMA appreciates the opportunity to provide written testimony to
the subcommittee related to the FWS's BIDEH proposals. The proposals
will result in costly, speculative, and untimely decisions that will
only obstruct the needed production of minerals and coal in the United
States. These impacts will have a significant impact on the Biden-
Harris Administration's ability to pursue--let alone, reach--their
climate goals. The NMA strongly urges the FWS to withdraw or
significantly modify its proposals to address stakeholder concerns.

The NMA looks forward to working with Congress and the
administration to support conservation solutions that support the
responsible development of our nation's mineral endowment--a goal that
is not mutually exclusive.

[all]
