- H.R. 5015, H.R. 5499, H.R. 6085, H.R. 6209, H.R. 6547, AND H.R. 7006

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 5015, H.R. 5499, H.R. 6085,
H.R. 6209, H.R. 6547, AND H.R. 7006

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Wednesday, March 20, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-105
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-272 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO   Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA       CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ   Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS   Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA   Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID   Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN   Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI   Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL   Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA   Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU   Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, March 20, 2024........................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2
Neguse, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado................................................     4
Panel I:

Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     8
Boebert, Hon. Lauren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     9
Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................    11

Titus, Hon. Dina, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Nevada..................................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    16

Miller-Meeks, Hon. Mariannette, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Iowa.....................................    17

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Wolff, Culver Nada, Principal Deputy Director, Bureau of Land
Management, Washington, DC.................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Questions submitted for the record.......................    25
French, Chris, Deputy Chief for the National Forest System,
U.S. Forest Service, Washington, DC........................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    29
Questions submitted for the record.......................    31

Panel III:

Poschman, Hon. Greg, Commissioner, Board of County
Commissioners, Pitkin County, Aspen, Colorado..............    41
Prepared statement of....................................    43
Sgamma, Kathleen, President, Western Energy Alliance, Denver,
Colorado...................................................    46
Prepared statement of....................................    48
McConkie, Michelle, Director, State of Utah School and
Institutional Trust Lands Administration, Salt Lake City,
Utah.......................................................    51
Prepared statement of....................................    52
Bingham, Eric, Land Use Director, Sweetwater County, Green
River, Wyoming.............................................    54
Prepared statement of....................................    56
Lillywhite, Jay M., Assistant Dean for Economic and Rural
Development, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New
Mexico.....................................................    58
Prepared statement of....................................    59
Garrett, Wade, Vice President for Advocacy and Strategic
Relations, Utah Farm Bureau Federation, Sandy, Utah........    63
Prepared statement of....................................    64

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

Recreational vehicle associations, Letter to the
Committee in support of H.R. 5499......................    34
Recreational vehicle associations, Letter to the
Committee in support of H.R. 6085......................    71
Hayden Ballard, Utah Public Lands Policy Coordinating
Office, Statement in support of H.R. 7006..............    36
National Parks Conservation Association, Letter to the
Committee in opposition of H.R. 5499...................    79

Submissions for the Record by Representative Neguse

Various organizations, Letter to the Committee in
opposition of H.R. 6547................................     6
Backcountry Hunters & Anglers, Letter to the Committee in
opposition of H.R. 5499................................    80
Conservation Lands Foundation, Letter to the Committee in
support of H.R. 6209...................................    82
Environment America, Letter to the Committee in
opposition of H.R. 5499, H.R. 6085 and H.R. 6547.......    84
Friends of Nevada Wilderness, Letter to the Committee in
support of H.R. 6209...................................    85
Muley Fanatic Foundation, Letter to the Committee in
opposition of H.R. 6085................................    86
The Wilderness Society, Letter to the Committee in
opposition of H.R. 5499, H.R. 6085, H.R. 6547 and H.R.
7006...................................................    87
Various conservation organizations, Letter to the
Committee in opposition of H.R. 5499...................    90
Multiple Letters in support of Alternative F Draft SEIS..    92

Submissions for the Record by Representative Titus

Clark County, Nevada, Letter to the Committee in support
of H.R. 6209...........................................    14
Southern Nevada Water Authority, Letter to the Committee
in support of H.R. 6209................................    15

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 5015, TO AMEND THE INFASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENT AND JOBS ACT TO AUTHORIZE THE SECRETARY OF
AGRICULTURE, ACTING THROUGH THE CHIEF OF THE FOREST SERVICE, TO
ENTER INTO CONTRACTS, GRANTS, AND AGREEMENTS TO CARRY OUT
CERTAIN ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION ACTIVITIES, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES, ``SEEDLINGS FOR SUSTAINABLE HABITAT RESTORATION ACT
OF 2023''; H.R. 5499, TO AMEND THE ANTIQUITIES ACT TO INCREASE
CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT WITH RESPECT TO THE DESIGNATION OF
NATIONAL MONUMENTS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``CONGRESSIONAL
OVERSIGHT OF THE ANTIQUITIES ACT''; H.R. 6085, TO PROHIBIT THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DRAFT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN AND
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT FOR THE ROCK SPRINGS RMP
REVISION, WYOMING, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES; H.R. 6209,TO AMEND
THE SLOAN CANYON NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA ACT TO ADJUST THE
BOUNDARY OF THE SLOAN CANYON NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``SLOAN CANYON CONSERVATION AND LATERAL
PIPELINE ACT''; H.R. 6547, TO PROHIBIT THE SECRETARY OF THE
INTERIOR FROM IMPLEMENTING THE DRAFT RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN
AND DRAFT SUPPLEMENTAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT FOR THE
COLORADO RIVER VALLEY FIELD OFFICE AND GRAND JUNCTION FIELD
OFFICE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANS, ``COLORADO ENERGY PROSPERITY
ACT''; AND H.R. 7006, TO PROHIBIT NATURAL ASSET COMPANIES FROM
ENTERING INTO ANY AGREEMENT WITH RESPECT TO LAND IN THE STATE
OF UTAH OR NATURAL ASSETS ON OR IN SUCH LAND

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Tiffany, Bentz, Curtis; Neguse,
Porter, and Leger Fernandez.
Also present: Representatives Boebert, Hageman, Miller-
Meeks; and Titus.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to consider six bills:
H.R. 5015, by Representative Leger Fernandez, the Seedlings for
Sustainable Habitat Restoration; H.R. 5499, Representative
Miller-Meeks' Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act;
H.R. 6085, Representative Hageman, to prohibit the
implementation of the Draft Resource Management Plan and
Environmental Impact Statement for the Rock Springs RMP
Revision in Wyoming; H.R. 6209, Representative Titus, the Sloan
Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act; H.R. 6547, by
Representative Boebert, the Colorado Energy Prosperity Act; and
H.R. 7006, by Representative Curtis, to prohibit Natural Asset
Companies from entering into any agreement with respect to land
in the state of Utah or natural assets on or in such land.
I ask unanimous consent that the following Members be
allowed to participate in today's hearing from the dais: the
gentlewoman from Nevada, Ms. Titus; the gentlewoman from
Wyoming, Ms. Hageman; the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms.
Boebert, and the gentlewoman from Iowa, Mrs. Miller-Meeks.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. This week, in this Subcommittee and on the
House Floor, House Republicans will continue our fight against
the Biden administration's disastrous policies that harm our
nation's economy, national security, and energy dominance.
The legislation under consideration today will put an end
to the egregious and out-of-touch policies coming out of the
White House that are hurting rural economies and ignoring the
very people who live, work, and recreate on public land.
Ultimately, we will hold this Administration accountable and
stand firm against their attempts to remove the public from
public lands.
There is an orchestrated attack on public lands by this
Administration. We and our constituents see the tools the
Administration is using or, better put, mis-using to carry out
a misguided preservationist policy that is hurting Americans in
forms of higher energy costs, less access to lands, and fewer
jobs.
The list of anti-energy policies advanced under this
Administration is simply staggering. Added to this is an
attempted ban on oil and gas leasing; 3.5 million acres in new
national monument designations; proposed conservation leases
that would allow anyone, including hostile foreign nations, to
lock up energy and mineral resources; and the recently-proposed
sage-grouse management plans.
Of course, these all point back to President Biden's flawed
and unscientific 30x30 agenda. This is bureaucracy doing what
bureaucracy does: a small group of people in DC making
decisions that affect places and people they refuse to visit
and hear from. Today, we are addressing this mismanagement of
Federal lands and aiming to restore a balanced, thoughtful
approach to land management through common-sense legislation
offered by four of my Republican colleagues.
The first bill is H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the
Antiquities Act. The Antiquities Act is an outdated and
obsolete law that allows presidents of both parties to ignore
local communities and create confusion, uncertainty, and
frustration around land use planning.
Look at the case of the Grand Staircase-Escalante National
Monument in Utah. Nearly 30 years ago, President Clinton
designated this national monument during a ceremony he held out
of state in Arizona, and without consulting anyone in Utah.
This national monument shut off mineral resources worth an
estimated $330 billion, including 62 billion tons of coal and
270 million barrels of oil. Instead of becoming a booming hub
for energy production, the state lost over 1,100 jobs.
Decades later, county commissioners declared a state of
emergency for public schools in the area due to low enrollment.
The monument itself has fared no better, receiving limited
Federal funding and being subject to increased vandalism and
resource destruction.
Since taking office only 3 years ago, President Biden has
already designated 3.5 million acres of land as national
monuments, including enlarging the footprint of Grand
Staircase. Without further checks and balances such as those
offered by H.R. 5499, current and future presidents could lock
up millions of additional acres with a stroke of a pen behind
closed doors.
Next, we will consider H.R. 7006, legislation from
Representative Curtis that would prohibit Natural Asset
Companies from operating on Utah's public lands. After
oversight and strong opposition spearheaded by this Committee,
the SEC withdrew the proposed Natural Asset Companies Rule
earlier this year. However, given the obvious linkage between
this rule and the BLM's so-called Landscape Health and
Conservation Rule, there are still outstanding concerns that
Natural Asset Companies could re-emerge, perhaps under a
different name.
Allowing Natural Asset Companies to operate on public lands
would prevent the land from being used to produce natural
resources, including fossil fuels, mining, timber harvesting,
and grazing. This could also open the door for a company
controlled by a foreign adversary like China to hold rights to
U.S. land and resources. This is also incompatible with
statutory mandates for these lands, which direct them to be
managed for multiple use and sustained yield for the benefit of
the American people.
Finally, we will consider two bills from Representatives
Hageman and Boebert: H.R. 6085 and H.R. 6547, that would
nullify preservationists and resource management plans in their
states that would restrict oil and gas development on a
collective 3.4 million acres.
A resource management plan should offer a balanced
management plan for all multiple uses and interested
stakeholders. However, these plans have been weaponized as a
partisan tool to remove industries and uses that the
Administration does not like, in complete disregard of the
facts, data, and science. I am deeply concerned that the
written testimony we received in advance of today's hearing
also shows the BLM is flagrantly disregarding their statutory
mandate to coordinate with local government in developing these
plans.
For my constituents back home in Wisconsin who may be
watching this, or any other member of the public who doesn't
live out West, make no mistake, the legislation we are
discussing today has a direct effect on you. If we end multiple
use out West, that will disrupt our energy, food, and mineral
supplies, which will drive up prices for everybody. One only
needs to look at our allies in Europe to see what happens when
we allow ourselves to become dependent on hostile foreign
nations.
American energy is inexpensive, reliable, clean, and
abundant. That is why one year ago, House Republicans passed
H.R. 1, the Lower Energy Costs Act, on the House Floor. When we
go back to the Floor this week for Energy Week, we will once
again be fighting for policies that lower prices at the pump
and keep American energy dominant.
With that, I would like to thank the witnesses for joining
us today, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
I now recognize Ranking Member Neguse for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE NEGUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As always, I am
pleased to be back in front of the Federal Lands Subcommittee.
I am certainly looking forward to hearing from my Democratic
colleagues about their bills on our agenda today.
I was encouraged by what we heard from my colleagues in the
last hearing that we held in this Subcommittee, emphasizing the
importance of local support for public lands and conservation
legislation. However, I would be remiss to say that I am not
deeply disappointed that today we are considering legislation
that would do the opposite, and that would take us backwards in
our efforts to protect and preserve our nation's public lands,
efforts that are overwhelmingly supported by local communities.
And to the Chairman I would just simply say I happen to be
from the West. I am a Westerner. I represent a congressional
district that is larger than nine states on the eastern
seaboard, a district that includes three national forests,
incredible public lands. And I can tell you firmly that my
constituents oppose the efforts that, unfortunately, this
Subcommittee is considering today. My counterparts continue to
insist on discussing legislative measures that, first and
foremost, conflict with congressional intent and, in my view,
contravene public opinion.
On today's agenda is another bill that attacks the
Antiquities Act. Now, it is labeled as ``congressional
oversight,'' but what this bill essentially does is strip the
President of the executive authority to declare national
monuments on existing Federal land. Further, it denies any
chance of the proposed monument being considered under the
Antiquities Act for the next 25 years.
Monuments designated through the Antiquities Act prioritize
the protection of naturally, culturally, and historically
significant places. H.R. 5499 would roll back over 100 years,
think about that, a century, of precedent and congressional
intent, threatening our ability to protect these lands and
recognize the cultural value that they often hold for
Indigenous communities, in particular.
The Antiquities Act was passed in 1906 to permit exactly
what this bill is trying to undermine, allowing for presidents
to bypass congressional gridlock and protect critical Federal
lands and resources. And here is the most salient fact to me in
this entire debate: Since 1906, all but three presidents have
utilized the Antiquities Act to declare at least one national
monument. All but three presidents in 100 years: Republican
presidents, Democratic presidents. Apparently, the only people
who believe that we shouldn't be designating national monuments
are House Republicans.
And even if the Grand Canyon was initially designated
administratively, it wasn't until 11 years later that Congress
designated it as a national park. So, despite the contentious
arguments and the Republican efforts to block public land
conservation legislation, national monuments continue to be
deeply popular.
In fact, annual polls conducted by Colorado College just
last year have consistently found that an overwhelming majority
of voters, of constituents, of citizens in the West in
particular, support monument designations. Last year's poll,
just by way of example, found that 84 percent of Western
citizens, including more than 70 percent of Republicans, 70
percent, are supportive of using administrative action to
create new monuments.
An example of one of these monuments is in my district. In
2022, President Biden designated the Camp Hale Continental
Divide National Monument. Protections for this site have been
overwhelmingly supported by the local community for over a
decade: county commissioners, city council, every local
stakeholder that you could conceive of petitioning the Congress
for decades to get this done. We passed the bill five times. I
was here all five times in the House when we passed it. But
congressional gridlock prevented it.
The new monument that the President designated celebrates
Camp Hale as a vital part of our nation's history, and
recognizes the contributions of the 10th Mountain Division, who
trained there during World War II, ensuring that their stories,
their service, their heroic sacrifice to the United States will
never be forgotten. And I have had the privilege of meeting and
spending time with some of those veterans and their descendants
who have been some of the most influential advocates for our
public lands. This bill would preclude, prevent, and eliminate
the ability of the President of the United States, Republican
or Democrat, from taking the step that he did 2 years ago.
We are also considering a bill regarding modifications to
draft Resource Management Plans in both Colorado and Wyoming.
The existing management plans are decades old. They are no
longer adequate to address modern conditions. The resource
management plans that these bills are attempting to stall are
still only in the draft phase, so they are in an early stage of
their process. And by limiting the Department of the Interior's
ability to carry out their planning processes, the bills would
be detrimental to continued resilience, in my view and in the
view of many others of our public lands.
Again, I think it is disappointing that my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle are trying to hold up necessary
agency action intended to ensure that our lands are being
managed appropriately, with balance between all potential uses.
And I want to ask unanimous consent to enter letters of
opposition to H.R. 6547 into the record.
Mr. Tiffany. Without objection.

[The information follows:]
March 19, 2024

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse:

On behalf of the 20 undersigned organizations, and our 86,500
members and supporters across Colorado, we write to urge you to oppose
H.R. 6547 offered by Rep. Boebert, which would circumvent a court
ordered public process that would chart management for public lands in
western Colorado for decades to come.

Our organizations are deeply invested in western Colorado's public
lands, and we represent members and supporters who live near, recreate
on, and otherwise enjoy and benefit from the public lands in the Bureau
of Land Management (BLM) Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction Field
Offices. This landscape contains wilderness-quality lands, important
wildlife habitat, cultural resources, recreation opportunities, and
other natural resources that community members and staff from our
organizations have spent decades developing field knowledge about,
engaging stakeholders around, and working to protect and restore. We
are grateful for the work by the planning team at the BLM to improve
management prescriptions throughout the field offices.

The BLM is conducting a public process for this planning effort as
the result of a U.S. District Court for Colorado ruling and subsequent
settlement agreement. The Court found that the BLM violated the law
with respect to their environmental analysis during the previous
planning process for the Colorado River Valley Field Office, and
ordered the BLM to revisit that plan by broadening the range of
alternatives with respect to what lands are available for oil and gas
leasing and conducting a more robust analysis of air quality impacts.
The new plan also considers areas of tribal significance for increased
protection. The Grand Junction plan suffered from the same legal
deficiencies, and a challenge to that plan was settled between the
parties and included with the Colorado River Valley plan for additional
analysis. The Court ordered no additional oil and gas leasing until the
supplemental planning process is complete.

This landscape also accounts for much of the production of fossil
gas from BLM-managed lands and minerals in Colorado. Of the 8.3 million
acres of surface lands and 27 million acres of minerals the BLM
oversees in Colorado, the BLM currently manages 4,712 leases totaling
3.7 million acres.\1\ Valid existing leases and producing wells in the
western Colorado planning area would not be affected by this planning
process, and would continue regardless of the outcome.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ BLM Colorado Oil & Gas. https://www.blm.gov/programs/energy-
and-minerals/oil-and-gas/about/colorado Last visited March 8, 2024.

We are deeply troubled by Rep. Boebert's attempt to circumvent a
Court order and dismiss the public input from western Colorado
residents the BLM continues to consider as it completes its work on
this planning effort. Further, this legislation would have the
unintended consequence of prohibiting the BLM from issuing any new oil
and gas leases in these field offices because the Court-mandated
supplemental process would never be completed. Should this legislation
pass, the BLM would be forced to disregard our comments on the draft
plan, as well as comments from municipalities, counties, and the State
of Colorado, and feedback received through formal tribal consultation.
We urge the committee to reject this ill-conceived legislation and
allow the BLM to complete their public process and finalize new
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
management plans for western Colorado.

Sincerely,

Daly Edmunds                  Tracy Coppola
Director of Policy and
Outreach                      Colorado Senior Program Manager
Audubon Rockies               National Parks Conservation
Assoc.

Scott Braden                  Alison Gallensky
Director                      Conservation Geographer
Colorado Wildlands Project    Rocky Mountain Wild

Brien Webster                 Mark Pearson
Public Lands Campaign
Manager                       Executive Director
Conservation Colorado         San Juan Citizens Alliance

Kara Matsumoto                Mason Osgood
Public Lands Policy
Director                      Executive Director
Conservation Lands
Foundation                    Sheep Mountain Alliance

Michael Browning              Jim Ramey
Advocacy Committee Co-Chair   Colorado State Director
Eagle Summit Wilderness
Alliance                      The Wilderness Society

Ellen Montgomery              Emily Hornback
Public Lands Campaign
Director                      Executive Director
Environment Colorado          Western Colorado Alliance

Sherry Schenk                 Kyle Tisdel
Leadership Team-Grand
Junction                      Climate & Energy Program Director
Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    Western Environmental Law Center

Sallie Thoreson               Hannah Stevens
Leadership Team-North San
Juan                          Executive Director
Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    Western Slope Conservation Center

Louise van Vonno              Delaney Rudy
Broadband Leader-South San
Juan                          Colorado Director
Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    Western Watersheds Project

Jennifer Thurston             Will Roush
Director                      Executive Director
Information Network for
Responsible Mining            Wilderness Workshop

______

Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I close, I do want to take a moment to highlight my
fellow Democratic colleagues' bills for today's Subcommittee
hearing.
H.R. 5015, the Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat
Restoration Act of 2023, from my dear friend and a leader here
in the House from New Mexico, a Subcommittee member,
Congresswoman Leger Fernandez, would amend the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Omnibus Public Land Management Act
of 2009 to support the development of native seed repositories
and nurseries. The bill represents a proactive example of
multiple use policy that would benefit the health of our
forests and protect native seeds to promote re-vegetation, and
I am so grateful to Congresswoman Leger Fernandez for her
leadership in bringing this bill forward.
Secondly, H.R. 6209, the Sloan Canyon Conservation and
Lateral Pipeline Act, from my dear friend, Congresswoman Titus
of Nevada, who has been fighting the good fight for years. And
this bill would expand the Sloan Canyon National Conservation
Area. It would authorize the Horizon Lateral Water Pipeline.
Having access to clean water is vital for our communities, and
Congresswoman Titus has been a leader on that front as part of
the Colorado River Caucus, in particular, and I am looking
forward to hearing from her about the importance of the Sloan
Canyon National Conservation Area and the value that this
project would bring to her community.
Again, I want to thank all the witnesses for traveling to
Washington, DC. We appreciate you being here.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you to the Ranking Member. I will now
recognize Representative Leger Fernandez for 5 minutes on H.R.
5015.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Ranking Member, for pointing out this bill and the importance
that this bill places.
Sadly, this bill comes out of a very tragic event in New
Mexico, as we know. But the tragic event that befell New Mexico
with regards to its horrific wildfires affects our states
across our Western landscape and, as we are going to be seeing,
across our entire country. And as every member of this
community knows, following devastating wildfires we have a
desperate need for reforestation.
The Hermits Peak/Calf Canyon Fire burned 341,471 acres, but
it was not the only fire in New Mexico. That year, New Mexico
saw numerous wildfires. And we will hear later today how that
one fire, though, focusing on the Hermits Peak, we need 12
million seedlings, 12 million seedlings to reforest the burn
scar.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill passed by the 117th
Congress included billions of dollars for reforestation and re-
vegetation. The BIL called on the Department of the Interior
and the U.S. Forest Service to procure and plant millions of
seedlings, but unfortunately did not support the facilities nor
the research needed to produce this amount of seedlings to make
sure they survived.
Currently, there is an inadequate supply of native
seedlings, and non-native seedlings procured from nurseries
outside of the Southwest have only a 25 percent rate of
survival. In comparison, when a locality grows their own
seedlings, survival rate might be as high as 80 percent. So, my
legislation strengthens the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law by
providing the Forest Service the authority to enter into
contracts, grants, and agreements with state forestry agencies,
local private or non-profit entities, institutions of higher
education, and multi-state coalitions.
My bill would also make clear that institutions of higher
education are eligible recipients for reforestation grants.
Thankfully, when we first introduced this bill, we were having
a hard time. There was some confusion about the authorities
that the Forest Service had regarding this. Since its
introduction, we have identified ways in which the Forest
Service can actually find the authority and can grant
reforestation funds to institutions of higher education.
Because of this, higher institutions like New Mexico State
University, go Aggies, are able to continue their incredibly
important and exciting work on seedling production at the John
T. Harrington Forestry Research Center in Mora, New Mexico.
I am grateful to have doctor Jay Lillywhite here, who will
testify to the Committee on the groundbreaking research and
results that have been seen at the research center.
Since introducing the Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat
Restoration, I have also worked with Senator Lujan and the New
Mexico State University to identify further opportunities with
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to allow for that seedling
production. In light of this, I have a discussion draft here
which I have shared with the Committee and the Forest Service.
This draft includes additions to make clear that seedling
production is considered a component of ecosystem restoration.
The urgency of reforestation and native seedling production
cannot be overstated. Our landscapes, communities, and wildlife
habitats continue to bear the scars of devastating wildfires. I
know that the Ranking Member has suffered this within his own
district, and you look around this Committee and we know we
have all experienced that and we need swift and effective
action.
I love the story when is the best time to plant a tree, 30
years ago, but if you can't, let's do it today, and that is
what we want to make sure we have, is the seedlings to do that
today.
So, the seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration Act
is sensible and a crucial step forward in strengthening
reforestation efforts that are already contained in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, a law that I need to say I am so
glad when I go out in my rural areas and talk about it, because
it is one of the biggest investments in rural America we have
seen in generations. And I just love that law for its emphasis
on rural areas.
I am looking forward to the stories that will emerge today,
and I welcome the opportunity to work with my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle and the Administration to make the
necessary adjustments to the bill as we move forward in this
process.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, for being open to that and
supportive of these kinds of efforts.
And with that, I yield back because I think we are going to
together sow the seeds of renewal.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Leger Fernandez, and
I now recognize Representative Boebert for 5 minutes on H.R.
6547.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LAUREN BOEBERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Ms. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. In particular, Kathleen Sgamma
from Western Energy Alliance.
Ms. Sgamma, thank you so much for everything that you do on
behalf of America's hard-working energy producers.
Colorado's Western Slope used to have a booming energy
economy. Unfortunately, we have been regulated into poverty by
bad Democrat policies. I remember our booming economy because
roughnecks used to come into my restaurant, and I knew I was
having a good day when I would find mud on the floor from their
boots. They were coming and patronizing my business and
spending money there, but they were all forced out of our areas
and onto other parts of America. There used to be 112 rigs on
the Western Slope, but now we only have 4 drilling rigs. Now,
not-in-my-backyard extremists and job-killing Federal policies
have driven away those good-paying jobs.
The Bureau of Land Management's draft Resource Management
Plan for the Colorado River Valley Office and Grand Junction
Field Office is the latest fossil fuels attack. This proposed
land grab could remove over 1.6 million acres of public lands
in Colorado from future oil and gas leasing, and establish nine
different areas of critical environmental concern on over
100,000 acres of BLM land. If this proposal is finalized, the
United States will lose access to vital energy resources, many
more than the 600 fewer wells projected by the agency to be
lost by 2043. The consequences will be felt far beyond the
state of Colorado, where residents will lose their livelihoods
and see increased gas and energy prices.
BLM is proposing to close all areas with no known low and
moderate oil and gas development potential, and is basing its
analysis of the oil and gas potential on out-of-date
information that does not take into consideration modern
technology. The Permian Basin was once thought to be low to
medium, and now it is the highest producing oil field in the
world. As a result, the Permian Basin would be closed if this
proposal had been in place in New Mexico and Texas prior to the
significant amount of production that is now occurring. This
proposed land grab is nothing short of partisan politics meant
to further restrict access to the oil and natural gas
development that could reinvigorate the economy of Colorado and
help ensure energy security for all Americans.
There are already stringent standards and requirements in
place for oil and gas producers that aim at reducing
environmental and cultural impacts. And guess what? No one does
it better than American oil and gas workers. We produce the
world's cleanest, safest, most efficient energy in the world.
This proposed rule is yet another blatant land grab
designed to dismantle the fossil fuel industry and force a
Green New Deal transition funded by you, the taxpayers, by the
way. Closing the door on over 1.6 million acres of vital public
lands for energy development is not just an issue of economics,
it is a threat to our nation's energy independence and
security. And we should be pursuing energy dominance. We have
the capability to export freedom around the globe.
This proposed RMP goes beyond necessary environmental
considerations, and instead seeks to restrict access to
promising resources, hindering the potential for economic
growth and prosperity, particularly in the Western Slope of
Colorado. Rogue bureaucrats at the BLM shouldn't be
unilaterally locking up more land in Colorado. It is urgent
that we block this overreach and prioritize responsible energy
production to lower gas prices, utility bills, and protect
good-paying jobs in Colorado and throughout America.
In this Committee, we hear a lot of extremists pushing the
Green New Deal agenda, and I believe that it is very
disingenuous because they don't want to pursue nuclear, which
is the greenest and cleanest of them all. They don't want to
address the carbon emissions that are produced by wildfires,
and allowing us to be good stewards of our land and managing
our forests, and instead would rather have 40,000 children
mining with their bare hands for cobalt in the Congo and China-
owned mines rather than producing the world's best, cleanest
energy right here in America.
Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Boebert. I now
recognize Representative Hageman for 5 minutes on H.R. 6085.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to testify
on my bill to prohibit the finalization of the draft Resource
Management Plan, or RMP revision, and its associated Draft
Environmental Impact Statement from the Bureau of Land
Management that would severely restrict grazing, mining, oil
and gas development, recreation, and other activities on 3.6
million acres in Wyoming.
As everyone in this Committee is aware, BLM field districts
are required to update their resource management plans in
accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act, or
FLPMA. In 2011, the Rock Springs Field Office began the process
of updating its own plan. Prior to release of the new draft
plan, the Rock Springs Field office had used and implemented
the existing RMP since 1997. The new draft, however, that was
released for public comment in 2023 is gaining national
attention for its unprecedented attack on land access and use.
The RMP contains four alternatives for the planning area,
including Alternative A, which is the no action alternative;
BLM's preferred Alternative B, which would have tremendous
negative consequences for the state of Wyoming, our nation,
energy independence, access to millions of acres of land, and
national security; Alternative C, which severely restricts
recreational activities; and Alternative D, which attempts to
balance various uses with the development and conservation, but
also significantly hinders existing projects on Federal lands.
To say that the draft plan is bad is an understatement, and
Alternatives B and C are especially bad for Wyoming, which was
why there was so much opposition from my constituents. In
typical fashion, the Federal Government has chosen the very
alternative that has the most community opposition and would do
the most damage.
In total, under the preferred alternative, about 2.5
million acres of land would not be available for new rights-of-
way. This would be an increase of more than 480 percent placed
off limits for such things as power lines, pipelines, and
maintaining roads. The RMP severely restricts vehicle access,
including upwards of 4,500 miles of existing roads and trails
of all uses, and would remove about 10,000 miles of routes from
the transportation network. The plan even calls for limiting
vehicles to designated roads across the landscape, but it
doesn't clarify what roads it will designate for travel.
The draft RMP designates 1.8 million acres of the planning
area as Areas of Critical Environmental Concern, or ACECs,
which undermine all opportunities for economic development,
particularly as it relates to energy production, grazing, and
mineral extraction. This is an increase of 1.3 million acres
compared to what is currently in the plan.
The preferred alternatives significantly impact Wyoming
energy production, which is essential to the state and local
economy, as well as to national energy independence and
security. According to the Department of the Interior, in
calendar year 2022, leasable minerals in Sweetwater County
alone netted over $32 million in revenue for the Federal
Government and $433 million in total for the state of Wyoming.
This is not just about mining or energy and mineral
extraction, however. This is one of the largest land grabs we
have ever seen, and an all-out assault on every vital Wyoming
industry and the rule of law. Wyoming ranchers are facing a ban
on livestock grazing in big game habitat during the birthing
season, prohibiting range improvement projects such as troughs,
reservoirs, and fences, and suspending AUMs that are currently
authorized within the planning area. The Wyoming Stock Growers
Association highlighted many of the specific impacts this
proposed alternative would have on grazing, including the
ability to control noxious weeds and other invasive plant
species.
Most disheartening about this RMP is the fact that it
ignored stakeholder input over the past 12 years. The
Administration continues to insert itself into every community
in America under the guise of claiming to do good, only to
outright ignore the community's needs and to pursue bad
policies in the pursuit of political goals for this
Administration, goals that are not shared by Wyoming, and goals
that are not in the best interests of our country.
In a letter to the Rock Springs Field Office, Wyoming
Sweetwater County Commissioners highlighted the fact that
``behind closed doors, and without any coordination with the
county or other cooperating agencies, the BLM has taken a
completely politically-driven reversal from its original
direction, and released a proposed RMP and DEIS that eliminates
multiple use within the Rock Springs Field office and, in turn,
Sweetwater County.''
Mr. Chairman, we have seen this kind of thing happen in
other areas, including within the Bears Ears Monument
designation in Utah and others in Colorado and Arizona. We need
to put a stop to these illegal land grabs, administrative
overreach, and outright violation of our Federal land
management laws. We need to protect our communities. The
alternatives laid out in the Rock Springs RMP, particularly
Alternative B, will destroy Wyoming's local economy.
We cannot go on like this. I urge my colleagues to support
my bill, which would nullify the implementation of this
monstrosity of a plan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and with that I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Hageman. I now
recognize Representative Titus for 5 minutes on H.R. 6209.
Welcome to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DINA TITUS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEVADA

Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for allowing
me to sit in, and also Ranking Member Neguse, for the
opportunity to testify today on H.R. 6209. It is the Sloan
Canyon Conservation and Lateral Project Pipeline Act.
This bill would allow a portion of the Southern Nevada
Water Authority's horizontal lateral water pipeline project to
tunnel underneath Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area. The
project will increase water reliability for over a million
southern Nevadans. It will fortify the region's water
infrastructure against potential outages, and it will minimize
disruptions and impacts to communities in my district in
southern Nevada, all while enhancing the preservation of the
surrounding desert landscape and unique habitat.
Currently, 40 percent of southern Nevada's drinking water
is provided by the South Valley Lateral, a 27-mile pipeline
that has been in service since the 1990s. Unfortunately, the
line doesn't have the redundancy that is needed to ensure
continued water services during a disruption or system
emergency. This vulnerability became apparent in 2017, when the
SVL, Southern Valley Lateral, underwent emergency repairs and
was subsequently shut down, forcing local agencies to
temporarily adjust water delivery operations.
In recent years, public planning engagements with all the
stakeholders at the table have resulted in two options for an
additional pipeline. The first is known as the Northern
Alignment, and it would involve years of construction through
neighborhoods in Henderson, Nevada, causing significant traffic
congestion and disrupting multiple neighborhoods and
businesses.
The second option, known as the South Alignment, would be
constructed on undeveloped land, including a nearly 7-mile
stretch beneath the Sloan Canyon NCA. Not only would this
preferred option minimize disruptions in surrounding
communities, but it would also be better positioned to meet a
targeted completion date of 2030, and it would save ratepayers
at least $200 million compared to the Northern Alignment.
In order for this project to move forward in a permanently
protected area, congressional authorization is required. That
is why I introduced H.R. 6209. It is the House companion of
Senator Cortez Masto's legislation, which the Senate Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources passed unanimously last year.
In addition to granting a right-of-way to the Southern
Nevada Water Authority for constructing this pipeline, the bill
ensures additional habitat protections by expanding the current
NCA by 9,290 acres. This would ensure connectivity for bighorn
sheep between the protected areas, including the recently
designated Avi Kwa Ame National Monument.
The language also includes insurances that the right-of-way
will minimize ecosystem disruptions by ensuring that the
Horizon Lateral cannot have a permanent adverse effect on
resources, and that the pipeline cannot go underneath the
wilderness area within the Sloan Canyon.
I am proud to say that this legislation has secured wide
support from Clark County and the City of Henderson, as well as
local conservation organizations, labor unions, and business
associations. Letters of support from these groups have been
submitted to the Committee, and I would ask unanimous consent
that they be made part of the record.
Mr. Tiffany. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

CLARK COUNTY, NEVADA

March 18, 2024

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support for the Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act
(H.R. 6209/S. 2042)

Dear Chair Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse:

On behalf of the Clark County Board of County Commissioners , I
express support for the Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline
Act (H.R. 6209/S. 2042). The legislation expands the Sloan Canyon
National Conservation Area (SCNCA) by 9,290 acres. This expansion will
elevate the conservation, wildlife and outdoor recreation values the
SCNCA brings to our community. In addition. this legislation would
enhance the redundancy of southern Nevada's water system by granting
important rights-of-way to the Southern Nevada Water Authority (SNWA)
for the Horizon Lateral water infrastructure project.
This timely passage of this bill is important. Clark County is home
to over 2 million people hosting millions of visitors each year. In
southern Nevada, part of our region relies upon a single water
transmission line known as the South Valley Lateral (SVL). The SVL
delivers 40 percent of our region's drinking water, but it lacks
redundancy to provide continual water service in case there are system
emergencies or outages. After years of studies, discussion, and
engagement with SNWA, the community and its leaders have expressed
strong support for the South Alignment of the Horizon Lateral project.
The South Alignment of the Horizon Lateral project avoids urban
areas by tunneling under the SCNCA, reducing major public impacts.
Alternatively, the Northern Alignment would cause significant
disruptions to due to the density of existing development, including
businesses, apartments, homes, medical facilities, childcare and
educational facilities, roads, utilities--all at great cost of $200
million. We have seen SNWA produce successful outcomes with tunneling
under federal land during development of the Third Intake for Lake Mead
and Low Lake Levels Pumping Station. We know the same care would be
taken underneath the SCNCA to ensure there were no discernable surface
disturbances during the development of the Horizon Lateral Project.
H.R. 6209 will augment the conservation efforts of our community
and facilitate important infrastructure needs that will enhance water
system redundancy, reliability and improve public safety. We appreciate
Congresswoman Dina Titus for her leadership on this bill and the Nevada
congressional delegation for their support. Thank you for your
consideration of this important legislation.

Sincerely,

Kevin Schiller,
County Manager

______

SOUTHERN NEVADA WATER AUTHORITY

March 20, 2024

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse:

Thank you for agreeing to hold a legislative hearing on H.R. 6209,
the Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act. As detailed
below, the legislation will help remedy a substantial vulnerability
within our existing water transmission system, ensuring the reliability
of water service for Southern Nevada residents, and expanding the Sloan
Canyon National Conservation Area.
The Southern Nevada Water Authority (SNWA) is responsible for
acquiring and managing the community's regional water supplies,
developing, and administering regional water conservation programs,
maintaining and protecting water quality, building and operating major
facilities and protecting environmental resources. SNWA maintains a
vast network of transmission facilities that provides reliable water
service to Southern Nevada's 2.3 million residents and more than 40
million annual visitors. In general, this system includes redundancies
that enable us to isolate pipeline segments to make repairs and move
water from other parts of our system, allowing for uninterrupted
service to our customers.
However, at present, a significant portion of residents and
businesses in Southern Nevada receive water exclusively from the South
Valley Lateral, a lone transmission line constructed 25 years ago. The
South Valley Lateral, unlike other major system components, lacks
interconnections with the rest of our regional infrastructure and it is
imperative that we secure the ability to shut the lateral down for
maintenance or emergency situations. To be clear, a failure or
disruption within this part of the system could have severe
consequences for our community and pose risks to public health and
economic stability. In fact, the South Valley Lateral serves
approximately 1,000,000 people and 40 percent of the businesses in the
Las Vegas Valley, including the City of Henderson.
To help solve for this problem, H.R. 6209 would require the Bureau
of Land Management to grant the Southern Nevada Water Authority a
right-of-way across a portion of the Sloan Canyon National Conservation
Area to install the Horizon Lateral Water Pipeline. Critically, the
construction of the Horizon Lateral would occur underneath the NCA (50
to 2,000 feet below), will not be seen or heard, and will not
compromise in any way the natural values that the NCA was specifically
designated to protect. The extremely minimal surface disturbance that
would occur would be temporary access to drill seventeen, 6'' diameter
geotechnical boreholes to ensure the sound operation of the tunnel
boring machine. The drilling will occur on 50' x 140' temporary pads
and the equipment necessary to carry out that work will be air-lifted;
those areas will be returned to their pre-drilling conditions upon
completion.
The legislation would also expand the Sloan Canyon National
Conservation Area by 9,290 acres, increasing its total acreage to
57,728 acres. The legislation also maintains the existing management
plan for the Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area as established in
Sec. 16 U.S.C. 460qqq. Finally, H.R. 6209 also ensures that Federal
Land Policy and Management Act requirements for environmentally
protective terms and conditions in right-of-way grants and BLM's right-
of-way regulations are followed, as previously provided by Congress.
The construction of the Horizon Lateral is endorsed by the City of
Henderson, Clark County Board of Commissioners, Clark County Department
of Aviation, Dignity Health--St. Rose Dominican Hospitals, Henderson
Chamber of Commerce, International Union of Operating Engineers Local
12, Las Vegas Asian Chamber of Commerce, Las Vegas Global Economic
Alliance, Latin Chamber of Commerce--Nevada, LiUna! Laborers' Local No.
872, Nevada Governor's Office of Economic Development, Nevada Resort
Association, Nevada State AFL-CIO, Regional Transportation Commission
of Southern Nevada, Retail Association of Nevada, Southern Nevada Home
Builders Association, Teamsters Local 631 and Vegas Chamber.
H.R. 6209 not only reflects the strong support from the above-
listed organizations in Southern Nevada, but it also reflects input
from the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. As you know,
the Senate companion legislation, S. 2042, was reported favorably to
the Senate by majority voice vote during an open business session in
September 2023.
SNWA appreciates the leadership from Congresswoman Dina Titus in
authoring H.R. 6209 and the leadership from its Senate delegation in
helping to advance this measure. As appropriate, SNWA would be happy to
answer any questions on this measure from the House Committee on
Natural Resources.

Sincerely,

John Entsminger,
General Manager

______

Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would urge my
colleagues on the Committee to support this legislation, doing
well by doing good.
I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Titus follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Dina Titus, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Nevada

Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on H.R. 6209, the Sloan Canyon
Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act. My bill would allow a portion of
the Southern Nevada Water Authority's (SNWA) Horizon Lateral water
pipeline project to tunnel underneath Sloan Canyon National
Conservation Area (NCA), while expanding the NCA by 9,290 acres. This
project will increase water reliability for over a million Southern
Nevadans, fortify the region's water infrastructure against potential
outages, and minimize disruptions and impacts to communities in my
District, all while enhancing the preservation of the surrounding
desert landscapes and unique habitat.
Currently, 40 percent of Southern Nevada's drinking water is
provided by the South Valley Lateral (SVL), a 27-mile pipeline which
has been in service since the 1990s. Unfortunately, the line does not
have the redundancy needed to ensure continued water services during a
disruption or system emergency. This vulnerability became apparent in
2017 when the SVL underwent emergency repairs and was subsequently shut
down, forcing local agencies to temporarily adjust water delivery
operations.
In recent years, public planning engagements have resulted in two
options for an additional pipeline:
The first, also known as the ``Northern Alignment'', would involve
years of construction through neighborhoods in Henderson, Nevada,
causing significant traffic congestion and disrupting multiple
neighborhoods and businesses.
The second option, known as the ``South Alignment'', would be
constructed on undeveloped land, including a nearly seven mile stretch
beneath the Sloan Canyon NCA. Not only would this preferred option
minimize disruptions in surrounding communities, but it would also be
better positioned to meet a targeted completion date of 2030 and would
save ratepayers at least $200 million compared to the Northern
Alignment.
In order for this project to move forward in a permanently
protected area, Congressional authorization is required. This is why I
introduced H.R. 6209, the House companion to Senator Cortez Masto's
legislation which the Senate Committee on Energy & Natural Resources
passed unanimously last year. In addition to granting a right-of-way to
the Southern Nevada Water Authority for constructing the pipeline, the
bill ensures additional habitat protections by expanding the current
NCA by 9,290 acres to ensure connectivity for bighorn sheep between
protected areas--including the recently designated Avi Kwa Ame National
Monument. The language also includes assurances that the right-of-way
will minimize ecosystem disruptions by ensuring the Horizon Lateral
cannot have a permanent adverse effect on resources, and that the
pipeline cannot go underneath the wilderness area within Sloan Canyon.
I am proud to say this legislation has secured wide support from
Clark County and the City of Henderson, as well as local conservation
organizations, labor unions, and business associations. Accordingly, I
urge my colleagues on this committee to support this legislation.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Titus. I now
recognize Representative Miller-Meeks for 5 minutes on H.R.
5499.
Welcome to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARIANNETTE MILLER-MEEKS, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF IOWA

Mrs. Miller-Meeks. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and I want
to thank you for allowing me to waive on to this important
hearing today. I would like to speak in support of my
legislation, H.R. 5499, the Congressional Oversight of the
Antiquities Act, which I am grateful is under consideration in
this legislative hearing.
The Antiquities Act was enacted in 1906 to authorize the
President to protect antiquities or objects of historic
interest under imminent threat. The plain language of the law
requires that all designations be confined to the smallest area
compatible with proper care and management of the objects to be
protected.
The Minority party would like you to believe that the
country hasn't changed in over 100 years. This Act has never
been updated since 1906, and I think that we can all agree that
the United States has drastically changed and progressed since
Teddy Roosevelt was president. Compare the language of the law
and the historically obvious intent of the Congress that passed
it. At the time, it was even debated whether the law should
limit designations to 320 or 640 acres.
With its abuse over the last half century, presidents,
regardless of what party, have repeatedly flouted the rule of
law and usurped the powers of Congress to arbitrarily block off
millions of acres of land. President Theodore Roosevelt was the
first president to use the Act. He used it 18 times to reserve
a total of 1.5 million acres of land. President Barack Obama
used it 37 times to designate 553.6 million acres of land.
Make no mistake, this Act does not prevent a president of
either party from declaring a national monument or setting land
aside. In August 2023, President Biden unilaterally restricted
access to almost 1 million acres of land surrounding the Grand
Canyon. Actions such as these are not the rule of law. It is an
arbitrary rule by one person.
To vest one person with the unfettered power, regardless of
what political party, to make these decisions with no
congressional check or local input, should be offensive to each
and every Member of Congress who has taken an oath to support
and defend the Constitution and the impartial rule of law.
H.R. 5499 is simple. It requires congressional approval of
presidential monument or reservation declarations within 6
months, or before the end of the last session of Congress it
was introduced, whichever comes first. If not approved by
Congress, the monument cannot be designated again by the
president for 25 years.
I thank Chairman Tiffany for including this legislation in
the hearing today. I encourage my colleagues to support this
important update to the Antiquities Act of 1906, and I yield
the balance of my time.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Representative Miller-
Meeks. We are now going to move on to our second panel.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
First, I would like to introduce Ms. Nada Wolff Culver,
Principal Deputy Director for the Bureau of Land Management.
Principal Deputy Director Culver, you are recognized for 5
minutes. Welcome to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF NADA WOLFF CULVER, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY DIRECTOR,
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Culver. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, and members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to provide testimony for today's hearing. Again, I
am Nada Wolff Culver, Principal Deputy Director at the Bureau
of Land Management.
The BLM manages approximately 245 million surface acres,
located primarily in 12 western states, as well as 700 million
acres of subsurface mineral estate under the Federal Land
Policy and Management Act, or FLPMA. The BLM is committed to
its core multiple use and sustained yield mandate, which
provides for a careful balancing of many uses and resources for
the benefit of all people.
First, the Biden-Harris administration strongly opposes
H.R. 5499, which would require congressional approval of
presidential proclamations of national monuments within a very
short time frame, and otherwise preclude protection of those
same lands for 25 years.
Enacted over 100 years ago, the Antiquities Act is a key
tool used by 18 presidents of both political parties to
preserve and protect critical natural, cultural, historical,
and scientific resources on Federal lands for future
generations. Designations under the Antiquities Act apply only
to lands owned or controlled by the Federal Government, subject
to valid existing rights. They place no restrictions on private
property or lands owned by state or local governments.
While national monuments can be established legislatively,
Congress has frequently chosen to enhance or expand protections
initially established through a presidential proclamation under
the Antiquities Act. Congressional action, however, often
occurs many years, even decades after presidents first took
action.
The BLM currently manages 30 national monuments designated
by presidential proclamation. The most recently designated BLM
national monument, co-managed with the Forest Service, is the
Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni Ancestral Footprints of the Grand
Canyon National Monument in Arizona. This incredible monument
protects approximately 900,000 acres of plateaus, canyons, and
tributaries, supporting a remarkable diversity of wildlife and
plants, and preserves the area's spiritual, cultural,
prehistoric, and historic legacy.
As Congress intended, the Antiquities Act provides the
necessary flexibility for Presidents to respond expeditiously
to impending threats to resources, while striking an
appropriate balance between legislative and executive decision-
making. Maintaining this established balance is critical to
protecting our shared national resources now and for future
generations.
The BLM also strongly opposes H.R. 6085 and H.R. 6547,
which would halt ongoing land use planning efforts in Wyoming
and Colorado, respectively, where draft plans have been issued
for public input. These bills contravene FLPMA, and would
prevent the BLM from managing public land resources on millions
of acres.
The Colorado planning effort, in particular, is in response
to litigation. FLPMA requires the BLM to ``develop, maintain,
and, when appropriate, revise Resource Management Plans to
manage a wide range of public land resources under the
principles of multiple use and sustained yield.'' These plans
serve as blueprints for keeping public landscapes healthy and
productive. The BLM balances and ensures opportunities for
commercial, recreation, and conservation activities on public
lands.
To prepare plans, the BLM invites local voices and diverse
views, works closely with state and local governments, respects
the ties that Native and traditional communities have to the
land, and develops partnerships that lead to successful
resource stewardship. All of these efforts are already underway
in Wyoming and Colorado, reflecting thousands of hours of
engagement by many people who care about their public lands.
If enacted, H.R. 6085 and H.R. 6547 would undermine the
public's right to provide input on management of public lands,
as well as the BLM's ability to steward them.
Regarding H.R. 6209, the BLM supports the expansion of the
Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area in Nevada. However, we
are concerned that the bill's mandate of a permanent, free
right-of-way to construct and maintain an underground water
pipeline across the NCA and direction to permit additional
activity within existing transmission and utility corridors
could compromise the natural values of this area. We would like
to work with the sponsor on changes to the bill and associated
legislative map to address those concerns.
Finally, the Department defers to the Securities and
Exchange Commission on the potential impacts associated with
H.R. 7006.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on these
bills. I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Culver follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nada Wolff Culver, Principal Deputy Director,
Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 5499, H.R. 6085, H.R. 6209, H.R. 6547, and H.R. 7006

Introduction

Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the bills on
the hearing agenda related to the Bureau of Land Management (BLM).
The BLM manages approximately 245 million surface acres, located
primarily in 12 western states, and approximately 700 million acres of
subsurface mineral estate. The Federal Land Policy and Management Act
(FLPMA) sets forth the BLM's multiple-use mission, directing that
public lands generally be managed for a broad range of uses, such as
renewable and conventional energy development, livestock grazing,
timber production, hunting and fishing, recreation, wilderness, and
conservation--including protecting cultural and historic resources.
FLPMA also requires the BLM to manage public land resources on a
sustained-yield basis for the benefit of current and future
generations.
This multiple-use, sustained yield mission enables the BLM to make
tremendous contributions to economic growth, job creation, and domestic
energy production, while generating revenues for Federal and State
treasuries and local economies and allowing for a thoughtful, science-
based approach to management of our public lands and waters. Lands
managed by the BLM also provide vital habitat for more than 3,000
species of wildlife and support fisheries of exceptional regional and
national value. In addition, as recognized by the Biden-Harris
Administration's America the Beautiful initiative, many uses of our
lands and waters, including working lands, are consistent with the
conservation of the nation's natural resources, contributing to the
long-term health and sustainability of natural systems.
H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act

H.R. 5499 would require congressional approval of presidential
proclamations of national monuments, and reservations of parcels of
land as a part of national monuments, within six months of a monument's
establishment or before the end of the current session of Congress,
whichever is earlier. Under the bill, if the designation or reservation
is not extended or modified by statute during this limited time frame,
or the designation or reservation is otherwise rejected by statute, the
lands in question cannot be designated as or added to an existing
monument by a President for a period of 25 years. The Administration
strongly opposes H.R. 5499.
Analysis

Enacted over 100 years ago, the Antiquities Act has repeatedly been
used by 18 presidents of both political parties as an instrument to
preserve and protect critical cultural, historical, and scientific
resources on Federal lands for future generations. The Antiquities Act
authorizes presidents to establish national monuments on Federal lands
to protect historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and
other objects of historic or scientific interest on those lands and to
reserve lands as part of such monuments to ensure the proper care and
management of the objects to be protected. Designations under the Act
apply only to lands owned or controlled by the Federal government; they
place no restrictions on private property or lands owned by State or
local governments. Designations are also subject to valid existing
rights. Several of the nation's most treasured national parks,
including Grand Canyon, Joshua Tree, and Death Valley, were first
protected as national monuments through presidential action under the
Antiquities Act.
Congress already has effective tools to modify or even eliminate a
national monument it deems inappropriate. For example, in 1926 Congress
enacted legislation removing certain lands from the Casa Grande
National Monument. Congress has also eliminated national monuments when
it determines that they are no longer necessary, as it did when it
eliminated the Old Kassan National Monument in Alaska. These actions
demonstrated the efficacy of this approach. Under well-established
principles of law, a national monument proclamation is effective unless
and until Congress modifies or revokes a monument proclamation. H.R.
5499 would turn this approach on its head--instead of allowing the
president to act quickly in order to allow Congress the opportunity to
deliberate and refine a monument, it would make new monument
proclamations contingent on congressional ratification in six months or
less.
Within the Department of the Interior, the BLM currently manages 30
national monuments designated by presidential proclamation, three of
which are co-managed with the National Park Service (NPS) and six of
which are co-managed with the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest
Service (USFS). The most recently designated national monument, Baaj
Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni-Ancestral Footprints of the Grand Canyon National
Monument in Arizona, protects approximately 900,000 acres of plateaus,
canyons, and tributaries supporting a remarkable diversity of wildlife
and plants, and preserves the area's spiritual, cultural, prehistoric,
and historic legacy. The NPS currently manages 55 national monuments
established by presidential proclamation, including the iconic Devils
Tower, Muir Woods, and the Statue of Liberty. Finally, the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service administers eight presidentially proclaimed
national monuments, two of which are co-managed with the NPS. Though
some national monuments may have been established amidst controversy,
they are now recognized as renowned symbols of America's beauty and
legacy, exemplifying the wisdom of retaining the Antiquities Act in its
current form.
The designation of national monuments regularly builds upon decades
of efforts from Tribal Nations; State and local officials;
conservation, civil rights, and outdoor recreation advocates; local
business owners; and Members of Congress to recognize and conserve
objects of historic or scientific interest in perpetuity. Historical
data demonstrates an increase in economic growth in communities near
national monuments.
Without the President's authority under the Antiquities Act, it is
unlikely that places like Petrified Forest National Monument or Navajo
National Monument, both of which faced imminent threat of destruction,
would have been protected. The Antiquities Act provides the necessary
flexibility to respond expeditiously to impending threats to historic
landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects of
historic or scientific interest, while striking an appropriate balance
between legislative and executive decision making. Maintaining the
established balance is critical to protecting our shared national
resources for future generations.
H.R. 6209, Sloan Canyon Conservation & Lateral Pipeline Act

H.R. 6209 would amend the Clark County Conservation of Public Land
and Natural Resources Act of 2002 by expanding the Sloan Canyon
National Conservation Area (NCA) in Clark County, Nevada, to include
approximately 9,000 additional acres of public land managed by the BLM.
The bill would also require the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary)
to grant a free, permanent right-of-way (ROW) to the Southern Nevada
Water Authority (SNWA) for a water pipeline through the Sloan Canyon
NCA within one year of enactment. The bill would also allow SNWA to use
any displaced sand and gravel resources generated by the installation
of an underground water pipeline within the ROW without cost. Finally,
the bill would permit additional activity within existing transmission
and utility corridors or transmission ROWs, including authorizing new
utility facility ROWs.
Analysis

Clark County, located in southern Nevada, is home to over 2.2
million people, as well as significant historic, cultural, and
paleontological treasures. The BLM manages approximately 2.6 million
acres of public lands within Clark County for a wide range of uses.
These include various recreational activities, such as hiking, camping,
horseback riding, and off-highway vehicle (OHV) riding, renewable
energy projects, rights-of-ways for utilities, and mineral development.
Notably, Clark County contains iconic BLM-managed national conservation
lands, including the Red Rock Canyon NCA, Sloan Canyon NCA, Gold Butte
National Monument, and Avi Kwa Ame National Monument.
Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area

In 2002, Congress designated 48,438 acres of BLM-managed lands in
southern Nevada as the Sloan Canyon NCA to preserve and protect the
natural and cultural resources located in the southern Mojave Desert.
The Sloan Canyon NCA provides outstanding opportunities for visitors
who wish to experience the unique scenic and geologic features,
remarkable cultural resources, and diverse recreation possibilities
within the area.
In addition, the Sloan Canyon NCA includes the Sloan Canyon
Petroglyph Site and the North McCullough Wilderness. The Sloan Canyon
Petroglyph site is one of the most significant, scenic, and important
cultural resources in southern Nevada, containing more than 300 rock
art panels and nearly 1,700 designs representing native cultures dating
from the Archaic period to the modern era. The 14,763-acre North
McCullough Wilderness lies entirely within the Sloan Canyon NCA and
contains unique and spectacular natural resources, including thousands
of acres of land that remain in a natural condition. The wilderness is
located only a few miles from Las Vegas and the City of Henderson,
Nevada, and provides opportunities for solitude and a primitive and
unconfined type of recreation in close proximity to two of the busiest
and most densely populated cities in the state.
H.R. 6209 would expand the existing NCA by adding over 9,000 acres
of BLM-managed public lands. The BLM notes that the majority of the
lands identified for inclusion in the NCA are currently being used for
dispersed recreation, OHV use, and recreational shooting. The BLM
generally supports expanding this NCA but would like to work with the
sponsor to ensure use of any lands included would be consistent with
the stated purpose of the NCA.
Rights-of-Way

Under FLPMA, the BLM issues ROWs for a variety of uses that are in
the public interest. A ROW grant authorizes certain uses of public
lands for a specified period appropriate for the life of the project.
FLPMA also generally requires the BLM to charge rental fees that
reflect the value of the uses authorized by the ROW. Pursuant to the
Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1998, upon application,
SNWA, defined as a regional governmental entity in that Act, shall be
issued a ROW on Federal lands in Clark County, Nevada, that is valid in
perpetuity and shall not require the payment of rental or cost recovery
fees.
H.R. 6209 would grant a permanent, free ROW to SNWA to construct
and maintain an underground water pipeline. The bill would further
authorize the Secretary to include reasonable terms and conditions as
necessary to protect the resources in the NCA, prohibits construction
activities that would permanently adversely affect surface resources,
and prohibits locating the ROW in or under any area designated as
wilderness. In 2021, BLM rejected a similar ROW request from SNWA for
the construction of an underground water pipeline in the Sloan Canyon
NCA as inconsistent with the purposes of the NCA as designated by
Congress.
The Department appreciates the inclusion of language in the bill
that could help reduce impacts from the construction of the water
pipeline but is still concerned that the bill's mandate for a permanent
ROW could compromise the natural values that the NCA was specifically
designated to protect, despite what we understand to be the Sponsor's
intent. The permanent ROW granted by the bill is for the underground
water pipeline and associated infrastructure, which would involve
surface-disturbing activities. In addition, the BLM is concerned that
the language in section 3(c) of the bill could be interpreted as
allowing for significant expansion and authorization of surface-
disturbing activities within the NCA, and notes that this section does
not include some of the protective language provided with the
authorization of the ROW in section 3(b). The Department would like to
work with the Sponsor to clarify their intent as to the provisions in
section 3(c) and to ensure that the bill as written does not
inadvertently allow for activities beyond the envisioned scope, as the
Department remains committed to ensuring the core values and resources
identified for protection by the creation of the Sloan Canyon NCA
remain protected.
If the bill moves forward, the Department would like to work with
the Sponsor to ensure that any ROW issued by the BLM follows the
established requirements for ROWs, and that the legislative map
referred to in the bill is updated to reflect current utility corridors
and related authorizations in the area and to clarify where the
proposed access road ROW will be located. The Department also notes
that the one-year time frame to issue the ROW provided by the bill is
insufficient to complete adequate Tribal consultation and environmental
analysis.
Federal Minerals

The Materials Act of 1947 authorized the disposal of certain
widespread minerals of common occurrence, such as sand and gravel, and
made them subject to disposal through sale or permit. The Materials Act
established a process to provide the taxpayer with a fair return for
those minerals that are disposed of through sale. The BLM shares a
portion of the revenues from the sale of mineral materials with the
state where the minerals are produced.
H.R. 6209 would allow SNWA to use any displaced sand and gravel
resources generated by the tunneling of the water pipeline in the ROW
created by the bill without cost. The Department would like to work
with the Sponsor on modifications to ensure that taxpayers receive a
fair return for the use of mineral materials by the SNWA.
H.R. 6085, Prohibiting Implementation of the Rock Springs RMP Revision

H.R. 6085 would prohibit the Secretary from finalizing,
implementing, administering, or enforcing the Draft Rock Springs
Resource Management Plan (RMP) Revision and associated Draft
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). The BLM strongly opposes H.R.
6085.
Rock Springs Planning Area & RMP Revision

The BLM manages approximately 3.6 million acres of surface land and
3.7 million acres of mineral estate in the Rock Springs Field Office
(RSFO) planning area, which encompasses portions of Lincoln,
Sweetwater, Uinta, Sublette, and Fremont counties in southwestern
Wyoming. The agency administers various programs within the planning
area, including mineral exploration and development, renewable energy,
wildlife habitat, outdoor recreation, wild horses, livestock grazing,
and historic trails. Resources on lands within the RSFO are currently
managed under the 1997 Green River RMP, as amended. In the 26 years
since the completion of that plan, new laws have been enacted and there
have been considerable changes to development patterns and technology
used for the development of oil and gas, renewable energy, coal, and
trona resources, which have led to conflicts with other multiple uses.
These changes, along with emerging issues and management concerns
(e.g., renewable energy and transmission corridors, impacts of other
activities on wildlife migration, and increased interest in
recreation), have culminated in a years-long effort to revise the
outdated existing plan, informed by public input and extensive work
with cooperating agencies, including the State of Wyoming and affected
counties.
When completed, the Rock Springs RMP Revision will provide an
updated, comprehensive, and environmentally sound framework for
managing and allocating uses of public lands and resources administered
by the RSFO. The revised plan will address the changing needs of the
planning area by updating information and revising management goals,
objectives, and decisions while ensuring that public lands are managed
according to the principles of multiple use and sustained yield.
Further, the revised plan will account for valid existing rights and
other obligations already established in the area. The revised RMP will
address issues that have been identified through extensive input from
other Federal agencies; State, local, and Tribal governments; and
members of the public.
The BLM released the Draft RMP Revision and associated Draft EIS
(Draft RMP/EIS) for a 90-day public comment period on August 18, 2023,
and extended the comment period for an additional 60 days to ensure
that the public had ample time for review. The BLM received valuable
and specific feedback during the extended comment period and through a
series of public meetings. Additionally, on January 10, 2024, the
Governor of Wyoming's Task Force on the Rock Springs RMP (Task Force)
provided a detailed set of recommendations regarding the draft
revision. The BLM is carefully reviewing the Task Force's
recommendations, as well as other comments received during the public
comment period. Once all the comments received are considered, the BLM
will prepare the Final EIS and Proposed RMP.
Finally, it is important to note that in developing a proposed land
use plan, the BLM may modify the alternatives presented--or may develop
a new alternative from within the range of alternatives considered--in
the draft plan. In preparing a proposed RMP, the BLM considers public
comments on the draft plan and feedback from cooperating agencies. The
identification of a preferred alternative in a draft RMP does not
constitute a commitment or a decision in principle. It is required in
BLM's planning regulations and serves as the most useful starting point
from which the BLM could construct the proposed plan. As a result,
proposed RMPs may differ significantly from the preferred alternative
identified in the draft.
Analysis

H.R. 6085 is contrary to FLPMA, which requires the BLM to
``develop, maintain, and, when appropriate, revise'' RMPs to manage a
wide range of public land resources under the principles of multiple
use and sustained yield. RMPs serve as blueprints for keeping public
landscapes healthy and productive for current and future generations,
and along with planning decisions, they are the basis for every on-the-
ground action that the BLM takes. The BLM's RMPs allocate resources and
determine appropriate multiple uses for the public lands; provide a
strategy to manage and protect resources; and establish systems to
monitor and evaluate the health of resources and effectiveness of
management practices over time.
As plans are prepared, the BLM invites and values local voices and
diverse views; respects the ties that native and traditional
communities have to the land; and develops partnerships that lead to
successful resource stewardship. As a result, we have a strong history
of ensuring opportunities for and the balance of commercial,
recreational, and conservation activities on public lands, including in
the RSFO. The BLM is committed to achieving the balance between its
multiple use and sustained yield mandate and addressing local
conditions and concerns through continued collaboration with the public
and our many partners. We appreciate the Task Force's recommendations
on the Draft RMP Revision and are incorporating them into the plan,
where appropriate. If enacted, H.R. 6085 would preclude these efforts
and undermine the public's right to provide input on management of
public lands.
H.R. 6547, Colorado Energy Prosperity Act

H.R. 6547 would prohibit the Secretary from finalizing,
implementing, administering, or enforcing the Draft RMPs and associated
Supplemental EIS for the Colorado River Valley Field (CRVFO) Office and
the Grand Junction Field Office (GJFO) in Colorado or any substantially
similar documents. The BLM strongly opposes H.R. 6547.
Background

The BLM manages approximately 494,200 surface acres and
approximately 695,200 acres of Federal mineral estate in the CRVFO
planning area, which includes portions of Eagle, Garfield, Mesa,
Pitkin, and Routt Counties. In the GJFO planning area, which includes
portions of Garfield, Mesa, Montrose, and Rio Blanco Counties, the BLM
manages approximately 1.06 million acres of surface lands and
approximately 1.23 million acres of Federal mineral estate. Combined,
these planning areas total approximately 1.56 million acres of BLM-
managed public lands and approximately 1.92 million acres of Federal
mineral estate. Both field offices currently manage resources on lands
within their respective planning areas under RMPs approved in 2015.
The BLM is currently preparing a Supplemental EIS to comply with an
adverse 2018 Federal District Court ruling and subsequent settlement
agreement for litigation of the CRVFO RMP and with a settlement
agreement for litigation of subsequent oil and gas leasing in both the
CRVFO and GJFO. The BLM is also developing the Supplemental EIS to
respond to a court-approved voluntary remand of the GJFO RMP to address
the same deficiencies identified by the Court in the 2018 court ruling.
The Supplemental EIS, developed with input from the public and
cooperating agencies (including the State of Colorado and affected
counties), considers an expanded range of alternatives for oil and gas
leasing throughout the two field offices and provides additional air
quality analysis for the fluid mineral management alternatives
considered in the original plans. Decisions in both RMPs unrelated to
fluid mineral leasing remain in effect as the BLM prepares the
Supplemental EIS. The BLM released the Draft Supplemental EIS for a 90-
day public comment period on August 4, 2023. The BLM is currently
considering comments received during the public comment period. Once
all the comments received are considered, the BLM will prepare the
Final Supplemental EIS.
Analysis

As directed by the 2018 Federal court ruling and the court-approved
voluntary remand, the BLM must complete the Supplemental EIS to rectify
issues with the environmental analysis associated with the 2015 RMPs.
Additionally, the BLM committed as part of the settlement agreements to
resolve the litigation involving the 2015 RMPs and subsequent oil and
gas lease sales to consider new information. The bill, as currently
drafted, would not obviate the BLM's need to comply with issues
identified in the Federal court ruling, nor would it relieve the BLM
from its obligation to meet the commitments outlined in the settlement
agreements to resolve that and other litigation. Rather, it would
undermine the efforts of the BLM and cooperating agencies, along with
the right of the public to provide input on the management of public
lands.
H.R. 6547 is also contrary to FLPMA, which requires the BLM to
``develop, maintain, and, when appropriate, revise'' RMPs to manage
public lands under the principles of multiple use and sustained yield.
The BLM opposes efforts to limit the agency's ability to allocate
resources and determine appropriate multiple uses for public land
resources so that they remain available to present and future
generations.
Finally, the BLM notes the Records of Decision for the CRVFO and
GJFO RMPs were signed in June 2015. All the management decisions and
actions outlined in the 2015 RMPs--with the exception of their oil and
gas leasing decisions--are currently in effect. The bill's language
appears to prevent the implementation of any new decisions that would
be informed by the Supplemental EIS or substantially similar documents.
If enacted, H.R. 6547 would prevent State and local governments and
members of the public from providing any input on the management of
resources within the CRVFO or GJFO for both current and future planning
efforts. The bill would also result in the BLM being unable to
implement any oil and gas leasing within either field office going
forward.
H.R. 7006, Prohibiting Natural Asset Companies in Utah

H.R. 7006 would prohibit ``natural asset companies,'' as defined in
the Security and Exchange Commission's (SEC) withdrawn proposed rule
regarding the New York Stock Exchange, or substantially similar
companies, from entering into any agreement with respect to land in the
State of Utah or natural assets on or in such land. The Department was
not involved in the withdrawn SEC proposal and defers to the SEC on the
potential impacts associated with H.R. 7006.
H.R. 5015, Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration Act

H.R. 5015 would support USFS ecosystem restoration activities and
modify the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Collaborative Forest
Landscape Restoration Program to expand opportunities for the
collection and maintenance of native seeds. The Department defers to
the USDA regarding the potential impacts associated with H.R. 5015.
Conclusion

Thank you again for the opportunity to provide testimony on these
bills.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Nada Wolff Culver, Principal
Deputy Director, Bureau of Land Management

Ms. Wolff Culver did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. When does the Bureau of Land Management plan to publish
the so-called ``Conservation and Landscape Health Rule''?

Question 2. Are you aware of any national monuments the President
is planning to designate before the end of his term? If so, can you
please list what monuments are under consideration, and in which
states?

Question 3. Has the BLM been asked to provide any technical
assistance, including creating maps or to hold public listening
sessions, on any potential national monument designations by the White
House?

Question 4. When a new monument is designated and BLM is directed
to manage it, what funding is provided by the President to carry out
the management?

Question 5. What is the last Resource Management Plan finalized by
the Bureau of Land Management that created a net increase in land
available for oil and gas production?

Question 6. How is the BLM abiding by its statutory multiple use
mandate when the agency is consistently restricting energy development
across millions of acres of land without opening up any new acres to
oil and gas leasing?

Question 7. The Committee received testimony that the BLM is using
decades-old data to justify restrictive land designations. In the case
of the Wyoming RMP, the BLM has overestimated potential oil and natural
gas development by a staggering 1,867 percent to justify locking up
more than 2 million acres ofland in one of the top energy-producing
states in the nation.

Can you please explain how the BLM came to the assumption that 336
wells would be drilled per year in the case of the Rock Springs RMP?

Question 8. The Committee has heard concerns from several
stakeholders and constituents that significant decisions are being made
at the agency via internal memos to staff, bypassing publication in the
Federal Register and avoiding opportunity for public comment or
notification to Congress.

8a) Has the Bureau of Land Management distributed internal memos or
internal direction to staff regarding Natural Asset Companies or
conservation leases?

8a) Can you please discuss BLM's policy regarding what is sent via
internal memorandum to staff, versus what the agency seeks public
comment on?

Question 9. When the President designated the Grand Staircase-
Escalante National Monument in Utah and directed the BLM to manage it,
were any additional funds provided to BLM to carry out this
responsibility?

Question 10. When the President designated the Bears Ears National
Monument in Utah and directed the BLM to manage it, were any additional
funds provided to BLM to carry out this responsibility?

Question 11. When the President designated the Avi Kwa Ame National
Monument in Nevada and directed the BLM to manage it, were any funds
provided to BLM to carry out this responsibility?

Question 12. Please provide the number of incidents of vandalism
and/or resource destruction at Bears Ears National Monument from 2013
(prior to the designation) to 2023.

Question 13. Please provide the number of incidents of vandalism
and/or resource destruction at Grand Staircase-Escalante National
Monument from 2013 to 2023.

Question 14. When the President designated the Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah
Kukveni-Ancestral Footprints of the Grand Canyon National Monument in
Arizona and directed the BLM to manage it, were any funds provided to
BLM to carry out this responsibility?

Question 15. Please provide the annual funding allocated to manage
Bears Ears National Monument from 2013 (prior to the designation) to
2023.

Question 16. Please provide the annual funding allocated to manage
Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument from 2013 to 2023.

Question 17. In reference to national monument designations under
the Antiquities Act, BLM's testimony states: ``They place no
restrictions on private property or lands owned by State or local
governments.''

17a) How many acres of private land are included in the
designations made by President Biden of each of the following
monuments:

i. Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument

ii. Bears Ears National Monument

iii. Avi Kwa Ame National Monument

iv.  Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni-Ancestral Footprints of the Grand
Canyon National Monument

17b) How many acres of state or locally owned land are included in
the designations made by President Biden of each of the following
monuments:

i. Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument

ii. Bears Ears National Monument

iii. Avi Kwa Ame National Monument

iv.  Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni-Ancestral Footprints of the Grand
Canyon National Monument

Question 18. Does the BLM use the most accurate and recently
available data when developing Resource Management Plans?

Question 19. Why are the two Draft RMPs impacting the Western Slope
in Colorado using a 2002 U.S. Geological Survey Resource Assessment
instead of a more recent assessment done in 2016?

Question 20. Does the BLM conduct an economic analysis when
developing and updating RMPs?

Question 21. Regarding the formulation of RMPs and the energy
sector:

21a) Does the BLM consider technological advances in oil and gas
production with the same due diligence that it affords to updated
ecological studies?

21b) Do the BLM's decisions adequately reflect how these
technologies have made oil and gas extraction feasible in new areas?

21c) Does the agency recognize the potential such developments have
to create new jobs and support local economies?

Question 22. Is the BLM aware their draft RMP for Rock Springs,
Wyoming will cut $5.6 million of revenue to local schools?

Question 23. Is the BLM aware their draft RMP for Rock Springs,
Wyoming will cause 2,900 people to lose their jobs?

Question 24. The RMPs proposed a combined 25 new Areas of Critical
Environmental Concern (ACECs). These are open to public comment. Is the
public comment period for ACECs important to BLM?

Question 25. On June 22, 2023, BLM appeared before this Committee
and testified, in the context of H.R. 3049, that you appreciated ``the
good work and good faith'' of Utah state officials, especially those
working for SITLA. It only seems fair, then, that stakeholders should
expect the same from the BLM. Does the BLM's conduct in formulating the
Rock Springs RMP reflect ``good work and good faith?'' I am
specifically referring to the BLM's abrupt and unusual decision to
pursue the most preservation-heavy plan, or Alternative B, despite
spending years telling local stakeholders that the agency would likely
proceed with the more balanced approach described in Alternative D.

Question 26. According to the testimony of another witness familiar
with the Rock Springs RMP, the BLM abruptly selected Alternative Bas
the agency's preferred alternative, despite representing Alternative
Das the preliminary preferred alternative for many years prior. While
the BLM retains exclusive authority to select a preferred alternative,
is so abrupt a change consistent with the principles of collaboration,
as described in BLM Handbook H-1601-1?

Question 27. In your testimony, you state that the BLM extended the
comment period for the Rock Springs RMP ``to ensure that the public had
ample time for review.'' Why should stakeholders believe that the BLM
values their comments, when the agency has proved so willing to
disregard past comments, as indicated by switching abruptly from
Alternative D to Alternative B?

Question 28. In your responses to questions at the hearing, you
stated that the BLM would fully vet applications for conservation
leases issued under the proposed Conservation and Landscape Health Rule
to ensure that nefarious parties, including companies controlled by
America's foreign adversaries, do not acquire such leases.

28a) Does the BLM currently have the capability and expertise to
vet corporate applicants, including for any potential national security
concerns they may pose?

28b) If so, please describe the departments or teams that are
tasked with such work.

28c) If not, please describe, in detail, the BLM's plans to acquire
this capability by the time the Conservation and Landscape Health Rule
is finalized.

Question 29. In your responses to Member questions, you stated that
the BLM had no contact with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) in connection with the SEC's proposal to allow natural asset
companies (NACs) to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange.

Given the complementary nature of, and probable interactions
between, NACs and BLM conservation leases, was this lack of
coordination with the SEC appropriate?

Question 30. What resources are available to the public that allow
them to communicate to the BLM that they are interested in pursuing a
land exchange?

Question 31. If a party contacts the agency about acquiring a
parcel of BLM land, how long does it take on average for the BLM to
determine whether the parcel is suitable for disposal?

Question 32. When considering the suitability of a parcel's
disposal, how does the BLM weigh public benefits such as economic
growth and job creation?

Question 33. How many firefighters does the BLM have employed as of
March 25, 2024?

Question 34. How many firefighters does the BLM plan to hire ahead
of the 2024 fire season?

Question 35. Does the BLM anticipate the National Guard or other
military assets will be needed to augment federal firefighting
resources this fire year?

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Director Culver. I would like to
now introduce Mr. Chris French, Deputy Chief of the National
Forest System for the U.S. Forest Service.
Deputy Chief French, you have 5 minutes. Welcome back to
the Committee.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS FRENCH, DEPUTY CHIEF FOR THE NATIONAL FOREST
SYSTEM, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. French. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany and
Ranking Member Neguse. I am Chris French, the Deputy Chief for
the National Forest System at the U.S. Forest Service. I have
been with the agency for more than 30 years, and I am here to
discuss USDA's views on the Congressional Oversight and
Antiquities Act, the Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat
Restoration Act, and prohibiting Natural Asset Companies in
Utah.
H.R. 5015, Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration
Act, really focuses on a large issue that we have across this
country on our National Forest System lands, which is
essentially our ability to reforest lands that are impacted by
wildfire. I want to show my sincere appreciation to Congress
for the reforestation provisions that are under IIJA, in
particular the REPLANT Act, which focuses on post-disturbance
reforestation needs, and sets a mandate for us to address the
backlog of reforestation needs across the National Forest
System over the next 10 years.
The provisions in IIJA have enabled the Forest Service to
increase the pace and scale of restoration to address existing
needs and anticipate future events. H.R. 5015 amends this in
the ecosystem restoration section of IIJA to allow the Forest
Service to enter into contracts, grants, or agreements with
state forestry agencies, local, private, or non-profit
entities, institutions of higher education, or multi-state
coalitions for the collection and maintenance of native seeds,
and for the production of seedlings for re-vegetation.
For some of these ecosystem restoration activities in this
section of IIJA, particularly those that are funding work on
the National Forest System, we have some of these authorities
to enter into contracts and agreements with these entities.
However, for activities on non-Federal lands under IIJA's
ecosystem restoration section, it expands the range of projects
and partners potentially requesting funding under this section.
It would also modify the funding requirements for Forest
Service landscape restoration proposals under the Collaborative
Forest Landscape Restoration Program. Though H.R. 5015 does not
seem to expand or change those authorities, it would broaden
the framing around the program to explicitly include academic
institutions and seed collection and seedling production
activities as part of potential projects. This is in line with
existing agency program guidance and is helpful.
USDA recognizes the importance of native seed collection,
the maintenance and seedling production to support the goals
that are within this bill, and we would like to work with the
Committee to provide some technical assistance.
With regards to H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the
Antiquities Act, it would amend the Antiquities Act such that
the presidential establishment or modification of a national
monument would only be temporary unless the action is ratified
by Congress through statute. If Congress does not act quickly
to ratify the action by statute, the action would be void. A
failure to ratify also bars the acreage from future
consideration under the Antiquities Act for the next 25 years.
The National Forest System administers 15 national
monuments in eight states. Some of these were designated by the
President through proclamation under the Antiquities Act, while
others were established by an Act of Congress. We co-manage
several of these monuments with the BLM. Roughly 5 million
acres of National Forest System lands within these monuments
represent a very small fraction of the 193 million acres of all
the National Forest System lands. These national monuments
protect historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric
structures, and other objects of historic or scientific
interest on Federal lands for future generations.
The Administration strongly opposes H.R. 5499 because of
the restrictions it places on the establishment or modification
of national monuments. Regardless, USDA will continue to
administer lands as national monuments, whether designated by
the president or by Congress, or them working in concert.
Finally, regarding H.R. 7006, prohibiting Natural Asset
Companies in Utah, USDA was not involved with the withdrawn SEC
rule to adopt listing standards for Natural Asset Companies,
and we defer to the SEC on the potential impacts associated
with H.R. 7006.
Again, thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse,
and members of the Subcommittee. That concludes my remarks, and
I am ready to take any questions. Thanks.

[The prepared statement of Mr. French follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chris French, Deputy Chief, National Forest
System, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
on H.R. 5015, H.R. 5499, and H.R. 7006

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the
Administration's views on H.R. 5499, the ``Congressional Oversight of
the Antiquities Act,'' H.R. 5015, ``Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat
Restoration Act of 2023,'' and H.R. 7006, ``Prohibiting Natural Asset
Companies in Utah''.
H.R. 5015, ``Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration Act of
2023''

H.R. 5015 amends the Infrastructure Investment and Job's Act's
(IIJA) ecosystem restoration section (16 U.S.C. 6592a) to allow the
USDA Forest Service to enter into contracts, grants, or agreements with
State forestry agencies, local private or nonprofit entities,
institutions of higher education or multistate coalitions for the
collection and maintenance of native seeds and for the production of
seedlings for revegetation to carry out the ecosystem restoration
activities under section 16 U.S.C. 6592a(b).
For some of the ecosystem restoration activities described in
subsection (b), particularly those funding work on the National Forest
System, the agency already has the authority to enter into contracts
and agreements with these entities for collection and maintenance of
native seeds and the production of seedlings for revegetation. For this
set of activities, this legislation would not augment our authorities
for these existing programs. Using IIJA funds, the Forest Service has
engaged with partners on availability of native seed for restoration
through partnership agreements and contracts, and we have broad
authority to do so with a range of partners. The list of agency
partners is broad and includes Tribes who are not specifically
mentioned in H.R. 5015.
For activities on non-federal lands under subsection (b)(9) of
IIJA's ecosystem restoration section (16 U.S.C. 6592a), however, this
bill would expand authorities. Currently the Rural Forestry Assistance
section (16 U.S.C. 2102) of the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act
gives the agency authority to award financial assistance via grants and
cooperative agreements to state foresters or equivalent state officials
for the production of tree seed and seedlings to benefit non-federal
lands. H.R. 5015 appears to expand this authority to include native
plants and would expand eligible entities beyond state foresters and
equivalent state officials. H.R. 5015 may therefore significantly
expand the range of projects and partners potentially requesting
funding under subsection (b)(9), which will require the Forest Service
to prioritize and manage expectations of eligible partners.
H.R. 5015 would also modify requirements for forest landscape
restoration proposals for funding under the Collaborative Forest
Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP) (16 U.S.C. 7303(b)(7)). Though it
does not seem to expand or change authorities, it would broaden the
framing around the program to make explicit that seed collection and
seedling production activities could be part of what projects are
proposed to benefit local economies. This is in line with existing
agency program guidance. In addition, the bill adds institutions of
higher education to the list of entities that may provide employment or
training opportunities under a proposal. Although academic institutions
are already among the entities that provide local employment and
training in collaboration with the Forest Service at CFLRP landscapes,
this bill explicitly includes them.
USDA recognizes the importance of native seed collection and
maintenance and for seedling production for revegetation. We support
the goals of this bill and would like to work with the Committee to
better understand its intent and to provide technical assistance.
H.R. 5499, ``Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act''

Presidents of both parties have used 54 U.S.C. 320301 (commonly
known as the ``Antiquities Act'') for over 100 years to protect
historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other
objects of historic or scientific interest on Federal lands for future
generations. National monument designations under the Antiquities Act
place no restrictions on non-federal property and are subject to valid
existing rights.
The National Forest System administers 15 national monuments
(including two national volcanic monuments) in eight states (Alaska,
Arizona, California, Colorado, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, and
Washington) comprising 5,150,746 acres. Some of these were designated
by the President through proclamation under the Antiquities Act while
others were established by an act of Congress. Some are co-managed with
the Bureau of Land Management.
H.R. 5499 would amend the Antiquities Act such that the
establishment of a national monument, or reservation of a parcel of
land as part of a national monument, would only be a temporary
designation unless it is subsequently enacted through legislative
action within the earlier of six months or the last day when Congress
is in session for the Congressional term. Moreover, if a statute to
extend or modify the designation is not enacted within this time, the
acreage would be prohibited from establishment or inclusion in a
national monument designated by the President under the Antiquities Act
for the next 25 years.
The Administration strongly opposes H.R. 5499. Congress already has
the ability to enact legislation revising or even eliminating a
national monument that was created improvidently or that is no longer
needed. Legislation modifying national monuments has been used
sparingly but effectively for over a century, and the Administration
believes this time-tested approach remains the appropriate tool for
evaluating monuments.
The Administration believes that, as has been the case since
enactment of the Antiquities Act in 1906, national monuments should be
treated as valid unless a court of competent jurisdiction determines
otherwise, or Congress, acting with deliberative care, concludes that a
monument is unnecessary. H.R. 5499 reverses 118 years of practice to
make national monument proclamations presumptively invalid unless
proclamations are ratified by Congress. This change is counter to the
core purpose for enacting the Act. The Antiquities Act recognized that
threats to objects of historic and scientific interest that are found
on lands that are owned or controlled by the Federal government may
arise quickly. The Act also recognized that swift action may be needed
to protect objects of historic or scientific interest, and that the
President, acting under delegated authority and with the advantage of
both administrative agency expertise and procedural efficiencies, is
best positioned to address these threats. And as already noted,
Congress can already modify any national monument proclamation as
necessary and appropriate. The Administration believes this time-tested
approach strikes an appropriate balance, allowing for prompt action to
protect irreplaceable objects of historic or scientific interest while
retaining multiple avenues to deliberatively evaluate, and if
necessary, revise national monument proclamations.
Furthermore, section 2(c)(2) would prohibit a President from
protecting as a national monument the land or property included within
the boundaries of a monument that is not ratified by Congress. This
prohibition would extend for a period of 25 years and raises at least
two significant concerns. First, section 2(c)(1) may not provide
Congress with adequate time to carefully consider and vote on a
legislation ratifying a national monument proclamation. A needed
monument may therefore fail to secure ratification for reasons having
nothing to do with the worthiness of resource protection. Second,
prohibiting a President from proclaiming a national monument on covered
lands for the next quarter-century leaves future Presidents powerless
to respond to new information or changed conditions, including both the
discovery of new objects of historic or scientific interest, or
recognition of emergent threats to irreplaceable objects of historic or
scientific interest on public lands. Under either scenario, the outcome
is difficult to square with the overall purpose of the Antiquities Act.
For these reasons, the Administration strongly opposes H.R. 5499.
H.R. 7006, ``Prohibiting Natural Asset Companies in Utah''

H.R. 7006 would prohibit ``natural asset companies,'' as defined in
the Security and Exchange Commission's (SEC) withdrawn proposed rule
regarding the New York Stock Exchange, or substantially similar
companies from entering into any agreement with respect to land in the
State of Utah or natural assets on or in such land. USDA was not
involved in the withdrawn SEC proposal and defers to the SEC on the
potential impacts associated with H.R. 7006.
Thank you for the opportunity to present the views of the
Administration.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Chris French, Deputy Chief
for the National Forest System, U.S. Forest Service

Mr. French did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Are you aware of any national monuments the President
is planning to designate before the end of his term? If so, can you
please list what monuments are under consideration, and in which
states?

Question 2. Has USFS been asked to provide any technical
assistance, including creating maps or to hold public listening
sessions, on any potential national monument designations by the White
House?

Question 3. When a new monument is designated and USFS is directed
to manage it, what funding is provided to carry out the management?

Question 4. When the President designated the Camp Hale-Continental
Divide National Monument in Colorado and directed the USFS to manage
it, were any funds provided to USFS to carry out this responsibility?

Question 5. In your responses to Member questions, you stated that,
to your knowledge, USFS bad no contact with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) in connection with the SEC's proposal to
allow natural asset companies (NACs) to be listed on the New York Stock
Exchange. Given the substantial effects that NACs could have on USFS
land, was this lack of coordination with the SEC appropriate?

Question 6. As we are approaching the upcoming wildfire season, we
are hearing reports that USFS is having challenges filling seasonal
vacancies for wildland firefighters in California.

6a) Please provide an update on the current staffing levels for the
2024 wildfire season in California and other states.

6b) What are the total number of available wildland firefighter
positions in each USPS region, both permanent and seasonal?

6c) How many of these positions have been filled, and how many
remain to be filled?

6d) What is the agency's plan to fill these positions by July 1,
2024?

6e) What is the agency's plan if remaining vacancies are not filled
by July 1, 2024?

6f) Will National Guard or other military resources be needed to
augment USFS resources?

Question 7. Last year, a federal judge in Montana directed USPS to
obtain a Clean Water Act permit for the discharge of fire retardant
from aerial assets. Please provide an update on the status of this
Clean Water Act permit process, the current schedule for publication of
any relevant NEPA documents, and the plan to engage affected States and
other stakeholders on the development of this Clean Water Act permit.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Deputy French. I now recognize
Members for 5 minutes for questions. First, we will turn to
Representative Leger Fernandez for 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so very much for your
testimony, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am struck reading the testimonies about the amount of
acreage and what we actually need to reforest what has been
burned. Could you elaborate a little bit more on that, Mr.
French, how much acreage we are seeing as lost, and what we
would require to grow our forest back with these seedlings?
Mr. French. You bet.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And how long would it take us if we
didn't actually invest more in this effort?
Mr. French. Yes, I appreciate the question, Congresswoman.
I think it is important to look historically at the agency
and how our reforestation programs were established. They were
really set up to mimic the consequence of forest management. As
that has changed over time, and whereas we see the largest
disturbance that is occurring across our national forests is
really being driven by wildfire, we have had a major backlog of
reforestation needs across the country.
One thing to remember is about a third of all acres that
experience wildfire usually have burned at such intensities,
given conditions that we have right now, that they don't
naturally regenerate. So, if we don't go back in and plant
seedlings, we will lose that forest, this is a much higher
number in places like California than that one-third.
We estimate over the next 10 years that we will need around
60 million seedlings a year to keep up with the reforestation
efforts that we see right now. Current nursery production
within the Forest Service is around 28 million seedlings per
year. And then we really rely on other institutions and private
nurseries to help us overcome those gaps. We continue to make
those investments in our nursery system, it is one of the big
pieces of the REPLANT Act, as well as working with states and
partners in investments in non-Federal nursery systems.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. One of the things that I like about
what we did in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and what we
are trying to build on with regards to our legislation is the
importance of, actually, those kinds of partnerships that you
raised, right, that in order to really get this done, we need
to both expand partnerships that actually create jobs in rural
communities with people who actually know how to work the land.
This is something that they are intimately familiar with.
We are going to have our New Mexico State University speak
later, but can you add your perspective to the importance of
these partnerships with educational institutions, and then
other private organizations, people who actually know the land,
foresters, local foresters?
Mr. French. You bet. Your points earlier were very
accurate. Collecting native seeds from the area in which trees
are going to grow is really a key piece of long-term success
that those trees will continue.
I think we are also recognizing right now that some of the
trees that have species that have been in certain areas are
going to change over time as we are seeing temperature regimes
change under climate change.
So, working with universities and working with other
partners in order to identify what are the right seedlings,
what is the right genetic stock, what is the right composition
of species that you want to bring into these areas so they have
the longest chance for persistence is super critical and
helpful.
We know, working with the private sector, a nursery system,
that there are a number of species that just aren't economical
for them to produce. So, it really comes down to university
systems, our own Federal nurseries to produce things like
whitebark pine, as an example, that we need to reforest in
areas because it is not available commercially.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Chair, with that I will yield back. I could talk all
day about forest and trees, but I know we have lots of bills
before us.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlewoman yields.
I ask unanimous consent the following letters supporting
H.R. 5499, the Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act,
be added to the record for today's hearing.
The letter from three different organizations representing
stakeholders involved in the power sports industry notes
recreationists are left out of the process when massive
national monument designations are carried out under
questionable interpretations of the Antiquities Act.
Specifically, these groups include the Motorcycle Industry
Council, Specialty Vehicle Institute of America, and the
Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

March 18, 2024

The Honorable Mariannette Miller-Meeks
U.S. House of Representatives
1034 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Representative Miller-Meeks:

On behalf of the Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC), Specialty
Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA), and Recreational Off-Highway
Vehicle Association (ROHVA)--together referenced as the Associations, I
write in support of H.R. 5499, the Congressional Oversight of the
Antiquities Act. As you know, H.R. 5499 would require congressional
approval of presidential declarations of National Monuments within six
months or before the end of the last session of the Congress it was
introduced, whichever comes first.
The Antiquities Act of 1906 grants the President the authority to
designate ``. . . historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric
structures, and other objects of historic or scientific interest that
are situated upon the lands owned or controlled by the Government of
the United States to be national monuments.'' The Antiquities Act also
holds that national monuments should be ``. . . confined to the
smallest area compatible with proper care and management of the objects
to be protected . . .,'' yet multiple Presidents have, in our view,
inappropriately designated enormous swaths of public lands as national
monuments.
The Associations, off-highway vehicle enthusiasts, and other
recreationists strive to support collaborative processes to develop
consensus on management of shared public lands. Too often when
collaborative processes are complicated, or otherwise breakdown, some
attempt to restrict recreational access by urging the current
Administration to designate the area as a National Monument. It is no
secret that those most affected by land use decisions are those who
live, recreate, and make their livelihoods on or near the public lands
in question, and they should have a say in the management of those
lands. As a result, it is imperative that Congress enact National
Monument reform like H.R. 5499 which would provide for maximum public
input and local involvement.
Thank you for your consideration.

Sincerely,

Duane Taylor,
Director of Safe and Responsible Use Programs

______

Mr. Tiffany. I now recognize the gentleman from Colorado,
the Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today and, as always, for your
service. And I appreciate the opportunity to talk a bit about
some of the bills that are before us today.
Deputy Director Culver, I want to talk a bit about your
testimony regarding the Resource Management Plans and the bill
that we are considering that I vehemently disagree with, and
think would undermine the BLM, it would undermine broader
agency rulemaking, and a public process that is literally
ongoing as we speak. So, I think it is important for us to kind
of clarify for the record.
The development of the draft Resource Management Plan and
the supplemental Environmental Impact Statements that are
targeted for repeal, are those plans final?
Ms. Culver. Thank you for the question. No, they are not.
They are draft plans.
Mr. Neguse. And that is an important distinction, because
they remain draft plans. And to the extent that Members of
Congress care to opine on them or play a role in elevating the
voices of stakeholders and their constituents, they are welcome
to do so, right?
Ms. Culver. Correct.
Mr. Neguse. And that actually would be the proper venue,
the proper avenue to do that, as opposed to, in my view,
impairing and impinging on the hard work done by dedicated
career public servants at our agencies.
Now, there has been a lot of misinformation, I think, about
the opportunities for stakeholder input. Has there been an
opportunity for the public and interested stakeholders to
comment on the proposal?
Ms. Culver. Yes, there have been numerous opportunities,
scoping meetings in person, opportunities to submit written
comments. The draft plans were available for a 90-day, 3-month
comment period. There were numerous public meetings. And if
people request a meeting, the BLM will also hold one.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Deputy Director. And what I found
fascinating, it is a shame our colleague from Wyoming isn't
here, but in the case of the Rock Springs RMP plan, my
understanding is that the public comment was extended at the
request of the Governor of Wyoming, who is a Republican. But
irrespective of party affiliation, requests came in from the
Governor, and the BLM generously extended that public comment
period. Is that right?
Ms. Culver. Correct. We extended it by an additional 60
days. So, the comment period was about 5 months on that plan.
Mr. Neguse. Well, I think that is good to hear. And
clearly, you all are deeply engaged in a thoughtful process, a
lot of public meetings, a lot of opportunities for stakeholders
to weigh in, and then for you all to consider a balancing of
the equities, which is what we charge your agency to do. So, I
am grateful to you.
And I would just say if there is one silver lining, it is
that this bill, I don't think, is ultimately going to get to
the President's desk. And, of course, he will have every
opportunity to express his will if it were to get to his desk.
But I doubt that that is going to happen. And I hope that this
is not par for the course, and doesn't become standard practice
over here, because you all have important work to do, and your
door has always been open, and Members are free to engage you
in these processes, rather than introducing legislation to stop
it in its tracks.
I know we want to have a number of other witnesses who are
ready to testify, so I will yield the balance of my time.
But I will just say before doing so to you, Mr. French,
that I am grateful for your agency's work with respect to the
Camp Hale National Divide Monument, which I spoke a bit about
during my opening remarks, because I think it crystallizes to
me everything that the Antiquities Act is designed to preserve
and to protect, and we ought to be proud of that. That is, I
think, a legacy that we ought to build on. And clearly, the
bill that we are considering with respect to the Antiquities
Act, that does quite the opposite.
But anyway, I will yield back the balance of my time. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I ask unanimous consent
the following testimony supporting H.R. 7006, sponsored by
Representative Curtis, be added to the record for today's
hearing.
The testimony submitted by Hayden Ballard on behalf of the
Utah Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office shares the concern
many Western stakeholders have with the actions and proposals
from the Biden administration. Referencing the Natural Asset
Companies Proposed Rule, the testimony states the natural asset
rule, coupled with the conservation rule, would have provided
the necessary financing for those who wish to remove multiple
uses from our Federal lands through the purchase of
conservation leases.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
Statement for the Record
Hayden L. Ballard, Legal Counsel
Utah Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office

Chairman Tiffany, Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to participate in the hearing today through the submission
of this written testimony.
My name is Hayden Ballard, and I serve as Legal Counsel to the
State of Utah's Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office (``PLPCO''). As
the name implies, the role of our agency is to coordinate with federal
agencies, other state agencies, the public and other stakeholders to
further the State of Utah's adopted policies regarding federal land
management. Through this coordination, we seek to find practical
solutions to the array of challenges facing Utah's public lands.
We strongly support H.R. 7006, a bill ``to prohibit natural asset
companies from entering into any agreement with respect to land in the
State of Utah or natural assets on or in such land.'' While the overall
text of this bill is brief, the benefits of prohibiting natural asset
companies from entering into any agreement with respect to land in the
State of Utah, are great. This bill is a direct response to a proposed
rule put forth by the Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC''),
just last fall, to allow the New York Stock Exchange (``NYSE'') to
adopt a new listing standard for the listing of Natural Asset
Companies'' \1\ or ``NACs''.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 88 FR 68811.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While this notion of authorizing NACs seems harmless enough on its
face, we were extremely concerned when the SEC proposed this rule, and
just as relieved when the SEC withdrew the same. The concern arose from
the fact that the proposed rule had many latent, and potentially
extremely harmful consequences to Utah's federal land and federal land
users. Chief among these harmful consequences was that this proposed
rule would have created a funding vehicle for the implementation of the
BLM's proposed ``Public Lands Rule'' or ``Conservation and Landscape
Health Rule'' \2\ (or simply the Conservation Rule) which was proposed
last year as well. While this testimony is specific to Congressman
Curtis's bill H.R. 7006, and the prohibition of NACs from acquiring any
interests in Utah, it is impossible to discuss the negative effects of
NACs in Utah without also discussing this Conservation Rule. In short,
hand-in-hand, the NAC Rule coupled with the Conservation Rule would
have provided the necessary financing for those who wished to remove
``multiple-uses'' from our federal lands through the purchase of
conservation leases. Allow me to explain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 88 FR 19583.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In terms of high-level understanding, the BLM's ``Conservation
Rule,'' attempts to redefine the BLM's multiple-use mandate under the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (``FLPMA'') \3\ to
include ``conservation'' as a use (in the process unilaterally
bypassing Congress to amend this statute) and placing conservation on
par with other multiple-uses of the land such as livestock grazing,
recreation, energy development, etc.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 43 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 1701-1785.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To implement ``conservation'' as a use on par with the other
statutorily defined multiple-uses, the BLM intends to issue
``conservation leases'' to businesses, organizations, individuals, and
arguably government bodies, who would hold the leases to further
conservation purposes.\4\ During the Clinton Administration, the BLM
tried to amend its grazing regulations to allow for the issuance of
leases solely for conservation. This provision in the regulations was
struck down by the 10th Circuit Court of Appeals in 2000, as ``the
court found that the Secretary of the Interior (acting through the BLM)
lacked the statutory authority to issue grazing permits intended
exclusively for ``conservation use.'' \5\ While the BLM was thwarted in
its attempts then to issue permits and/or leases solely for
conservation purposes, it has again made this attempt through its own
separate rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 88 FR 19600; Proposed Rule Sec. 6102.4(a).
\5\ Public Lands Council v. Babbitt, 167 F.3d 1287, 1308 (10th Cir.
1999), aff'd, 529 U.S. 728 (2000).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The burning question left unanswered through this rulemaking
process has been where would the money come from to purchase these
conservation leases? Surely some companies, organizations and
individuals would have the capital available to simply purchase
conservation leases outright, but without a way of receiving a return
on that ``investment'' it seems that there was a missing piece as to
how these leases would be funded. Enter stage left the SEC's NAC rule.
In brief, the SEC's proposed rule on NACs stated that a proposed
NAC could issue shares in a publicly traded company, that would then
acquire ecological performance rights, or EPRs, by obtaining a license
concerning such rights from a government entity or a private landowner.
For purposes of the SEC's Proposed Rule on Natural Asset Companies, the
BLM's Conservation Rule would arguably open the door for businesses to
purchase a conservation lease (conveniently for a period of 10 years,
the same as the licensing requirements imposed by the SEC's Proposed
Rule) \6\ and thereby become eligible for NAC listing as they now hold
ecological performance rights on federal land.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 88 FR 68815.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the public comment period, the State of Utah submitted
comments adamantly opposing the implementation of the SEC's NAC Rule,
and urged the SEC amend the proposed rule in a manner that would
prohibit companies seeking to qualify as NACs from using the purchase
of BLM Conservation Leases to qualify as ecological performance rights.
Allowing NACs to purchase BLM Conservation Leases as ecological
performance rights simply allows companies to make money off of the
well-meaning public (via an Initial Public Offering or the subsequent
trading of stocks) to then purchase these leases from the BLM, all for
taking that land completely out of use and allowing it to remain
untouched and fallow. This allows the BLM to make money for doing
nothing, and allows the NAC to make money for doing nothing, all at the
expense of the American people who are being misled into believing
they're making a difference.
Further, this interlocking scheme imperils the viability of our
western livestock grazers, as these conservation leases (if purchased
on top of existing federal grazing allotments) threatens to put them
out of business if they are seen as being incompatible with the terms
of the newly created conservation lease. This could be done even though
a growing body of scientific research points to the fact that removing
all use of the land (particularly grazing animals) results in greater
desertification in western, arid landscapes.\7\ In short, not only
would removing grazing NOT improve the environment, the allowance of
conservation leases to qualify as EPRs is simply the funding mechanism
necessary for the implementation of the BLM's disastrous conservation
leasing scheme in general.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See generally Alan Savory, Holistic Management: A Commonsense
Revolution to Restore our Environment, Third Edition, Island Press,
Library of Congress Control Number 2016941253 (2016); see also Peter
Byck, Roots so Deep Trailer, available at: www.rootssodeep.org (2023);
see also Peter Byck, et. al, Improvements in soil properties under
adaptive multipaddock grazing relative to conventional grazing,
Agronomy Journal, available at: https://carboncowboys.org/images/
published_research/pdfs/Agronomy_Journal_2022-Mosier-
Improvements_in_soil_
properties_under_adaptive_multipaddock_grazing.pdf (2022); see also
Bill Weir, Hamburgers and steaks are a big climate problem. Could new
grazing practices be the answer?, CNN, available at: https://
www.cnn.com/2023/07/03/us/climate-crisis-cattle-amp-grazing/index.html
(2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As highlighted up to this point, the SEC's NAC rule contained the
latent ability to completely turn on its head the proper functioning
working landscapes on federal/public lands. Relatedly, the SEC's
Proposed Rule threatens Utah's ability to properly provide food, fiber
and fuel to its citizenry through the noblest of human endeavors--
agriculture itself.
This threat arises from the fact that the SEC NAC rule imposed
various reporting requirements on potential NACs, as well as ongoing
restrictions on what types of activities may be engaged in by the NAC.
For example, the proposed rule stated that ``the NAC will be prohibited
from engaging directly or indirectly in unsustainable activities.''
What was defined as being an ``unsustainable activity'' included the
term ``perpetuating industrial agriculture'' and the rule provided that
the NAC would be ``prohibited from using its funds to finance such
unsustainable activities''.\8\ If an NAC were to willfully or
unwillingly venture into an unsustainable activity, then ``the NAC will
be subject to delisting from the NYSE.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 88 FR 68814.
\9\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The problem here is that the proposed rule never attempted to
define what constituted ``perpetuating industrial agriculture'' or to
justify why this undefined term was an ``unsustainable activity''. This
could mean a wide variety of operations, both large and small,
including family livestock ranchers and crop farmers. There simply was
no attempt to define what was meant by industrial agriculture. Further,
the term could encompass suppliers, such as a feed store, as that could
seen as a business that was ``perpetuating'' industrial agriculture.
This ambiguity could very well be exploited by a potential NAC to
purchase a private farm or ranch and then take it out of production as
to remain eligible for listing as an NAC. In short, when coupled with
the BLM's Conservation Rule, the SEC NAC rule would have provided the
funding necessary to purchase conservation leases on top of existing
grazing allotments and other uses, and take those lands out of
production. When used on private ground, the rule would have allowed
for the same outcome on private farms and ranches. At a time when less
than 2% of the nation's population is engaged in agriculture, and in a
time when food costs are skyrocketing, purposefully taking working
lands out of production, in the name of acquiring ecological
performance rights, is a danger to our nation's agriculture and her
citizens.
In addition to these concerns, the SEC's NAC rule contained no
prohibition on the foreign ownership of NACs, which raises yet another
concern. At a time when many states are banning the foreign ownership
of our agricultural lands, this rule would have opened the door for
foreign adversaries to purchase controlling shares in NACs (or create
them outright) and then purchase ecological performance rights (whether
on public or private ground) and take those lands out of production--
artificially controlling our natural resources and food production.
For the reasons outlined, our agency opposed the implementation of
the SEC's NAC rule last year, and were relieved to see its ultimate
withdrawal.
It is for the same reasons we are now extremely supportive of
Representative Curtis's bill that takes a proactive approach to ensure
that NACs are not imposed on Utahns in the future. We thank
Representative Curtis for his dedicated work to move this bill forward
and urge your support for this bill.
I again thank the subcommittee for the opportunity to participate
and voice these concerns and make known our support.

______

Mr. Tiffany. I am going to take 5 minutes to ask some
questions here.
Mr. French, so the U.S. Forest Service had no contact with
the SEC in regards to the natural asset rule?
Mr. French. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Tiffany. Same question, Ms. Culver.
Ms. Culver. I know the BLM did not have any contact with
the Securities and Exchange Commission regarding the rule.
Mr. Tiffany. When does the Bureau of Land Management plan
to publish the so-called Conservation and Landscape Health
Rule?
Ms. Culver. We are working to finalize the rule based on
input we received on the proposed rule, and hope to publish it
in the coming months.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you know how soon?
Ms. Culver. I don't have a specific date.
Mr. Tiffany. You say the coming months, but 2 months, 3
months?
Ms. Culver. I don't have a specific date. It goes through a
review process with the Office of Management and Budget.
Mr. Tiffany. What role do you see the BLM having with the
Natural Asset Companies? What role would the BLM play in
regards to the conservation leasing system proposed under the
Conservation and Landscape Health Rule, how would they work
together?
Ms. Culver. Thank you for the opportunity to clarify that.
The BLM has no role with regard to the establishment,
definition, regulation of Natural Asset Companies. Under the
proposed Public Lands Rule, the BLM would issue leases for
restoration or mitigation activities based on the terms and
conditions that we would develop, and entities could apply for
those leases. They would not be guaranteed to be issued upon.
Mr. Tiffany. So, what would stop a company controlled by
the Chinese Communist Party from purchasing a conservation
lease?
Ms. Culver. Again, the way the proposed rule is set up, an
entity or a non-profit or a state or local agency could apply,
propose to apply for a lease to restore or mitigate public
lands. The BLM would evaluate whether or not the proposal was
for specific activities that were suitable for that area,
whether or not the proposal was held by an entity that was
qualified to carry out the activities, and exercise discretion
as to whether or not to grant such a lease.
Mr. Tiffany. Why is the Bureau of Land Management
considering selling off our natural assets to perhaps our
foreign adversaries like Communist China or Russia?
Ms. Culver. The BLM is not considering selling off
America's public lands to foreign countries.
Mr. Tiffany. But based on your description there, if
somebody has invested in one of those companies, they would
become, in effect, a part owner of that natural asset.
Ms. Culver. No, the BLM grants leases and permits to
entities upon application. We have foreign companies that mine
on public lands that hold oil and gas leases in the National
Petroleum Reserve, Alaska.
In terms of the leases that we are proposing in the Public
Land Rule, we heard a lot in public comment about concerns as
to whether----
Mr. Tiffany. So, you are going to fully vet any application
to make sure that there are not interests from the Communist
Chinese that are going to be part owners of our land in
America.
Ms. Culver. We will fully vet applications for leases to
ensure those----
Mr. Tiffany. You will guarantee that we will not see the
Communist Chinese buying our public lands.
Ms. Culver. We are not selling public lands to foreign
entities, nor will we.
Mr. Tiffany. Did you read the testimony of Eric Bingham,
Land Use Director for Sweetwater County, Wyoming?
Ms. Culver. I have not. I have seen a summary. I skimmed
it.
Mr. Tiffany. You did not get a chance to read it.
Ms. Culver. I skimmed it, but I did not read every single
word.
Mr. Tiffany. He describes working with the Bureau of Land
Management for a decade on what the county was told would be a
preferred alternative, and now the rug has been pulled out from
under them, it sounds like there are four alternatives. Is this
how the BLM is working with state partners at this point, state
and local partners?
Ms. Culver. Thank you for the opportunity to clarify. The
Rock Springs draft plan, the alternatives were created working
with cooperating agencies like Sweetwater County through seven
week-long meetings. And we----
Mr. Tiffany. So, you talk about these meetings, and I am
sorry to interrupt, but you talk about having these meetings,
and the Ranking Member talked about the extension, that you
were so generous to give this extension for public comment. But
are you actually coordinating with those counties, which, as
you know, is a separate process, right, in Federal law?
Ms. Culver. Under the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act and the National Environmental Policy Act, they serve as
cooperating agencies. They help us to create these alternatives
that are out now for public comment.
Mr. Tiffany. So, why did you do this with these four other
alternatives, when they had been working through the process?
And they were surprised, some people would say they were
backstabbed, by the Bureau of Land Management with these
alternatives when they thought they were headed in a much
better direction.
I mean, as a coordinating partner, wouldn't you try to
prevent that from happening?
Ms. Culver. Again, all of the co-operators had a chance to
create those alternatives. The alternatives themselves were not
changed, but things have changed on the ground as these
alternatives have been developed. And the difference, I think,
that he was referring to is which alternative was proposed as
the preferred in the draft plan for comment.
Mr. Tiffany. Isn't it the case that the only change is not
on the ground out in Wyoming, it is the change on the ground
here in Washington, DC, with a change of administration? Isn't
that the change?
Ms. Culver. I think there are changes on the ground and in
the state of Wyoming, as well.
Mr. Tiffany. Can you name the last Resource Management Plan
finalized by the Bureau of Land Management that created a net
increase in land available for oil and gas production? When is
the last one that was approved by the Bureau of Land
Management?
Ms. Culver. I would have to look at that and get back to
you.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, could you get us an answer to that? We
would really like to know.
How much additional land is enough for the Federal
Government? How much is enough?
Ms. Culver. As an employee of the Bureau of Land
Management, I work to steward the 245 million acres that the
BLM is charged with managing.
Mr. Tiffany. We hear about the failures, infrastructure is
falling apart. I mean, we hear those stories when we go out and
visit various facilities that are held under public management
by the Federal Government. Why would we want to have more land
come under Federal control when the Federal Government can't
manage what it has now?
Ms. Culver. At the Bureau, we seek to manage all the lands,
the 245 million acres that we are charged with. We appreciate
Congress' support in bills like the Great American Outdoors Act
which allow us to continue to maintain and upgrade our
infrastructure, and we continue to work to do that.
Mr. Tiffany. But we do have facilities that are not up to
par, right? And we continue to acquire more land as we see
these proposals.
Ms. Culver. Again, I work to manage the land that the BLM
currently has under our jurisdiction.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. French, how much land is enough? How much
land under public ownership by the Federal Government is
enough?
Mr. French. I am not equipped to answer that for you, sir.
That is a really, I think, the purview of Congress and the
Administration.
Mr. Tiffany. I have exceeded my time significantly for
questioning. I want to thank you very much for taking our
questions and providing your testimony. It is greatly
appreciated.
And now we will move on to our next panel.
While the Clerk resets our witness table, I will remind the
witnesses that under Committee Rules, they must limit their
oral statements to 5 minutes, but their entire statement will
appear in the hearing record.
I would also like to remind our witnesses of the timing
lights, which will turn red at the end of your 5-minute
statement, and to please remember to turn on your microphone.
As with the second panel, I will allow all witnesses to
testify before Member questioning.
[Pause.]
Mr. Tiffany. I would now like to introduce the Honorable
Greg Poschman, Chair of the Board of County Commissioners in
Pitkin County, Colorado.
Commissioner Poschman, you have 5 minutes. Did I pronounce
your name correctly?
Mr. Poschman. You did, and thank you very much.
Mr. Tiffany. Good. You have 5 minutes for your testimony.
Welcome to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GREG POSCHMAN, COMMISSIONER, BOARD OF
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS, PITKIN COUNTY, ASPEN, COLORADO

Mr. Poschman. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking
Member Neguse, and members of the Committee. I am Greg
Poschman. I am a native Coloradan, an active outdoorsman, and a
Pitkin County Commissioner in western Colorado. I am speaking
on behalf of my constituency of Pitkin County citizens. I thank
you for the opportunity to testify in opposition to H.R. 5499
and H.R. 6547, and to express Pitkin County's strong support
for one of our bedrock Federal laws, the Antiquities Act.
Eighty years ago, my father shipped out to chase the Nazis
from northern Italy. In the early spring of 1945, he and his
fellow ski troopers of the 10th Mountain Division fought
heroically in battle after battle in the Apennine Mountains,
suffering one of the highest casualty rates of the war. They
took Riva Ridge, Della Spe, Mount Belvedere, pushing the
Germans across the Po Valley until their surrender at Lake
Garda, Italy. Though never as famous as the storming of
Normandy, taking northern Italy away from the Nazis helped win
the war and defeat fascism.
Seventy-seven years after their epic battles, Camp Hale,
Colorado, their training ground, was designated a national
monument under the Antiquities Act. It was a proud moment for
my family and all the descendants of the 10th Mountain
Division. Although my father was not around to celebrate it
with us, he would have been grateful to see America finally
honor his comrades, the ones who came back alive and the ones
who didn't.
The Antiquities Act of 1906 has led to the designation of
about 160 important monuments. Of 18 presidents who declared
national monuments, 9 were Republican and 9 were Democrat. This
is clear testimony to its effectiveness and value for all
Americans. Camp Hale monument, like our Thompson Divide area in
Pitkin County, had widespread public support for many, many
years, if not decades, before it was designated.
H.R. 5499 proposes to weaken a law that has worked well for
100 years. Given the deep divisions in Congress, places needing
protection might easily be lost to cynical political arguments.
If passed, this bill would make permanent designation of places
like Camp Hale near impossible.
Remember, Congress already has the power to pass
legislation creating, revoking, or modifying national monuments
on a case-by-case basis, so this legislation is completely
unnecessary.
Polling has consistently demonstrated public support for
national monuments. Eighty-four percent of Westerners support
the president's ability to designate existing public lands as
national monuments: H.R. 5499 is, quite frankly, out of step
with American values.
Regarding BLM Resource Management Plans, my community is
surrounded by Federal lands that will be directly impacted by
the BLM's Colorado River Valley Resource Management Plan. Over
83 percent of Pitkin County is Federal land. It is home to the
White River National Forest and the iconic 14,000-foot Maroon
Bells. These lands contribute to our world-class outdoor
recreation experiences and make our economy thrive. Grazing
allotments on BLM and Forest Service lands maintain the
historic ranching cultural identity alongside the tourism and
ski resorts.
H.R. 6547 would prohibit the implementation of the Colorado
River Valley in Grand Junction management plans. The BLM is
conducting a public process to update its management plans
because a Federal court found the agency violated the law in
approving the prior version of these plans. By halting this
process, this bill would prohibit the agency from considering
the extensive and broad public input it has received.
A recent analysis shows the industry has had access to
lease more than 90 percent of BLM lands nationwide. In
Colorado, that number is 94 percent. The industry has been
stockpiling leases, with more than 6,700 approved leases going
unused. Of the 36 million acres under lease across all BLM
lands, only 35 percent are in production, leaving 23 million
acres locked up by the industry. The BLM's proposed plans for
these areas are emblematic of what a balanced, multiple use
management plan should look like, where lands with no or low
oil and gas potential and lands with important ecological and
cultural resources are closed to future oil and gas leasing
while existing leases and development would be able to
continue.
Now, I just want to say in 2021, oil and gas provided about
20,000 jobs in Colorado. Outdoor recreation provided close to
125,000 jobs, six times as many.
In conclusion, I want to commend the BLM staff for leading
an inclusive process to update our RMP. They have conducted
extensive outreach to solicit input from all stakeholders. As
our population grows rapidly, energy development, recreation,
and tourism continue to grow with it. In our part of Colorado,
the Antiquities Act and updated management plans are critical
tools for preserving America's historical, cultural sites and
treasured landscapes for future generations. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Poschman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Greg Poschman, Pitkin County Commissioner
on H.R. 6547

INTRODUCTION

Good morning, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members
of the Committee. My name is Greg Poschman. I am a native Coloradan, an
active outdoorsman and a Pitkin County Commissioner on the western
slope of Colorado. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in
opposition to H.R. 5499 and H.R. 6547 and to express Pitkin County's
strong support for one of our bedrock federal laws, the Antiquities
Act. Also, thank you for the opportunity to express our strong support
for modernizing the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM) Resource
Management Planning process.

NATIONAL MONUMENTS & THE ANTIQUITIES ACT

Eighty years ago, my father shipped out to chase the Nazis out of
northern Italy. Through a cold late winter and spring in 1945, he and
his fellow ``Ski Troopers'' of the 10th Mountain Division fought
heroically in battle after bloody battle in the Apennine mountains,
suffering one of the highest casualty rates of the war. They took Riva
Ridge, Mt. Della Spe, and Mt. Belvedere, pushing the Germans across the
Po Valley until their surrender at Lake Garda, Italy. Though never as
famous as the storming of Normandy, taking northern Italy away from the
Nazis helped win the war and defeat fascism. Seventy-seven years after
their epic battles, Camp Hale, Colorado, their training ground, was
designated a National Monument under the Antiquities Act. It was a
proud moment for my family and the descendants of the 10th Mountain
Division. Although my father was no longer alive to celebrate the new
monument, he would have been grateful to see America finally honor his
comrades, the ones who came back alive and those who didn't.
Like many Americans and visitors to the United States, I have had
the great good fortune to visit the Grand Canyon with my family and
witness its glorious scenery. As you know, President Theodore Roosevelt
established the Grand Canyon as one of the earliest National Monuments
under the Antiquities Act just two years after the act became law.
Today, it is a national park, but like many of our great national
parks, the path toward that designation started as a national monument.
In short, this act, signed into law in 1906, has led to the
designation of more than 160 monuments, protecting our cultural
heritage and some of our most treasured natural wonders. Of the 18
presidents who have declared national monuments, nine have been
Republicans, and nine have been Democrats. This is clear testimony to
its effectiveness and value for both parties and all proud Americans.
What I fear about the proposed legislation, H.R. 5499, is that it
will weaken and water down a law written more than 100 years ago and a
law that has worked so well for many years. Given Congress's deep
divisions, land, statues, or buildings that need protection might
easily be lost due to thoughtless and cynical political arguments. H.R.
5499 would sunset monument designations if not approved by Congress
within six months or the end of that Congress (whichever is earlier).
If passed, this bill would make permanent designations of places like
Camp Hale much more challenging to achieve and a slap in the face to
our veterans and to those who appreciate their sacrifice.
I want to remind you that Congress already has the power to pass
legislation creating, revoking, or modifying national monuments on a
case-by-case basis, so this cynically written legislation is completely
unnecessary.
Polling has consistently demonstrated public support for national
monuments. The supermajority of Westerners love national monuments and
support their protections--84 percent of Westerners support presidents
continuing to use their ability to designate existing public lands as
national monuments to maintain public access and protect the land and
wildlife for future generations.
People understand that a monument designation protects land from
various types of industrial development and can help support their
local economy. We can't let anti-conservation efforts undermine the
president's ability to use the Antiquities Act. Bills like H.R. 5499
attempting to weaken the act are out of step with American conservation
values.

BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT'S RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANS

H.R. 6547 would render useless essential updates to the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM) RMPs, taking us back to a time and place that no
longer exists. The job of the BLM land in the West is no longer to
lease exclusively for extractive potential. Growing populations in
Colorado and the West are making new demands on our public lands. We
have more ways to visit, enjoy, and utilize it and more sophisticated
and comprehensive perspectives on protecting these essential public
resources. The BLM draft resource management plans, as written, reflect
a deeper understanding of the land and the diverse and growing
population on it than previously.
What the BLM draft RMPs do, quite frankly, is modernize and correct
a long-standing and narrow policy of taking land from the American
people and leasing it to extractive boom and bust industries.
H.R. 6547 would prohibit the implementation of the Draft Resource
Management Plan and Draft Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
for the Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction field offices. The BLM
controls more federal land than any other agency--close to 245 million
acres nationwide. A recent analysis by The Wilderness Society shows the
oil and gas industry has had access to lease more than 90% of this vast
expanse of land. That number is even higher in Colorado: 94% of the 8.3
million acres in Colorado.
After over 111 years of federal subsidy with the people's money,
the oil and gas industry has been stockpiling leases, and currently,
more than 6,700 approved leases are going unused. Of the 36 million
acres under lease across all BLM lands, only 12.6 million acres (35%)
are in production, leaving more than 23 million acres of American land
locked up by the oil and gas industry and under real threat of
degradation.
This is an industry that does not go light on the land. Anyone who
has ever flown over, driven, or hiked the west where leases have been
developed will see a vast network of roads, settling ponds, pipes, and
compressor stations. What were once pristine landscapes are now heavily
industrialized, ruining vast stretches of wildlife habitat, hunting
country, and what might have been great areas for American recreation.
With our current essential focus on reducing carbon emissions, it has
been discovered that thousands of these wells and pipelines are leaking
methane and other greenhouse gasses, exacerbating an existential
problem.
With the BLM's Draft RMPs and Supplemental Environmental Impact
Statement, the agency is finally right-sizing its planning process to
balance other uses, including conservation and recreation, which have
become more valuable to the American people. H.R. 6547 would prohibit
the agency from considering the extensive input it received through
public comment.
The BLM's proposed management plans seek to fairly consider
important stakeholders that represent significant value beyond the oil
and gas industry. Among those stakeholders are the tens of thousands of
men and women whose livelihood depends on the recreational uses on BLM
land. Consider this: In 2021, oil and gas provided about 20,000 jobs in
Colorado. Outdoor recreation provided more than sixfold that number at
close to 125,000 jobs. And, of course, over 40 million Americans
downstream depend upon clean water that flows from these lands, for
they are our national ``water towers,'' containing the mountain
aquifers and streams that support our lives and livelihoods.
One of the goals of Pitkin County, the Colorado General Assembly
and the nation at large is to address climate change's imminent and
obvious dangers. Whether you're a rancher or farmer witnessing severe
droughts, a tourism operator worried about dry summers and about
winters shortened by over a month, or a wildlands firefighter risking
your life to fight repeated and disastrous fires on federal lands, the
dangers of climate change caused by the continued use of carbon-
intensive oil and gas cannot be denied by any but those most willfully
refusing to study the science, and those who profit from intentional
neglect. To wit, a 2023 study by the Union of Concerned Scientists
found that 37% of the area burned by forest fires in the western U.S.
and southwest Canada since 1986 can be attributed to heat-trapping
emissions from the world's largest fossil fuel producers.
My community is surrounded by federal lands that will be directly
impacted by the BLM's Colorado River Valley RMP.
Over 83 percent of Pitkin County is federal public land. It is home
to the White River National Forest and the iconic 14,000-foot Maroon
Bells. These public lands contribute to our world-class outdoor
recreation experiences and help ensure our local economy thrives.
Numerous grazing allotments on BLM and Forest Service lands maintain
the historic ranching cultural identity alongside tourism and ski
resorts throughout Pitkin County.
Our public lands, farming, ranching heritage, and thriving outdoor
recreation economy make Pitkin County a uniquely desirable place to
hunt, fish, ski, hike, bike, and raft. However, our public lands are
challenged by a changing climate, continued population growth, and
increased demand for natural resources, development, and outdoor
recreation.
Oil and gas leases last at least ten years whether the company
drills or not and if wells are drilled, then leases can be extended for
decades, precluding other activities like recreation, cattle grazing or
hunting. The lands under lease also take away the opportunities to
manage these lands for conservation purposes, including protecting
watersheds and wildlife habitat.
It's important to note that the BLM is conducting a public process
to update its management plans because a federal court found the agency
violated the law in approving the prior version of these plans. H.R.
6547 would prohibit the agency from considering the extensive input it
received through public comment from Pitkin County and the general
public by prohibiting the agency from finalizing this process.
As stated in an article by E&E News, ``One of the primary
explanations BLM offers for reducing oil and gas access is to protect
specific cultural and Native American sites from drilling, roads and
pipelines that could damage them, reflecting their larger stated goal
of increasing tribal consultation and answering a long-standing
complaint of Native American leaders.''
Most of Colorado's oil and gas-producing regions have been in
production for decades, some for over 50 years. The industry has had
plenty of time to lock up as many federal lands for oil and gas leasing
as it has desired. The BLM's proposed new plan for these areas is
emblematic of what a balanced, multiple-use management plan should look
like from the agency, where lands with no, low and moderate potential
and lands with significant ecological or cultural resources are closed
to future oil and gas leasing; and existing leasing and development
would be able to continue.
It is important to stress that our region's economies are changing
and diversifying. A 2023 report by the Colorado Fiscal Institute shows
that continuing the BLM's status quo oil and gas leasing process could
negatively impact Colorado's economy and recreation economy in
particular.
The report illustrates that winter recreation in Colorado, like
skiing, ``generated about $1.3 billion in economic activity in 2021, or
about a quarter of snow sports' $5.2 billion in economic output in the
entire country.''
Notably, the report states that, unlike oil and gas extraction,
winter recreation sports don't ``require the cleanup and plugging of
abandoned wells. Also, the outdoor recreation industry doesn't
contribute to climate change and the increasing severity of forest
fires as the fossil fuel industry does.
The report concludes, among other things, ``that in choosing to
downsize oil and gas development in tourist areas of Colorado, the BLM
will fall in line with recent climate goals set by Congress and the
Colorado General Assembly to address `the harmful impacts that the oil
and gas industry have on our health, economy, and climate' and,
possibly, help protect one of Colorado's most important economic
drivers.''
Protecting our natural resources while maintaining a thriving
economy is a balancing act. The BLM's Resource Management Planning
process is critical for achieving this balance. It considers the input
of all stakeholders on how a BLM area should be managed. It helps
elected officials like me and my constituents to work with the BLM in
managing the delicate ecosystems we rely on for clean air and water for
recreation and agriculture. Protecting these areas by recognizing their
actual value to a diverse population of beneficiaries is especially
important with the imminent threats to western water and the increased
wildfire dangers. RMPs promote the BLM's multiple-use mission and allow
collaboration among users, including timber, grazing, extraction,
mining, and recreation--for the benefit of all.
The BLM's Resource Management Plans (or RMPs) are a critical
planning tool for managing landscapes for multiple use. However, many
of the BLM's RMPs are woefully outdated and don't reflect current
conditions on the ground or adequately address current needs.
Eighty-five percent of BLM lands in our Colorado River Valley Field
Office have been open to oil and gas development for decades. These
include popular recreation and wildlife areas on the Colorado and Eagle
Rivers.
These BLM lands are essential in supporting world-class recreation
opportunities that create Colorado's $9.6 billion outdoor recreation
economy. Tourism and outdoor recreation account for over 50% of Pitkin
County's annual revenues. Pitkin County has worked hard to create a
diversified economy that includes and balances development while
conserving our public lands. We rely on having federal land management
partners that work with us to balance these needs.
If enacted, H.R. 6547 would tie the hands of the BLM, undermining
the agency's ability to manage critical public lands in my county,
across western Colorado, and around the West.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, I commend the BLM agency staff for leading an
inclusive public process to update our RMP. They have conducted
extensive outreach to solicit public comments from all stakeholders.
H.R. 6547 would undo all that work.
I support the Antiquities Act and modernizing the BLM's Resource
Management Planning process. As climate change, energy development, and
recreation and tourism continue to grow in Pitkin County and Colorado,
the Antiquities Act and updated RMPs are critical tools for preserving
America's historic and cultural sites and treasured landscapes for
future generations.
Thank you.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Commissioner. I now recognize Ms.
Kathleen Sgamma, President of the Western Energy Alliance.
You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN SGAMMA, PRESIDENT, WESTERN ENERGY
ALLIANCE, DENVER, COLORADO

Ms. Sgamma. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am glad the
Commissioner brought up the Camp Hale monument designation,
because that is a good example of why H.R. 5499 is so
necessary. The Ute Indian Tribe was very upset by that
designation of a monument, because it didn't have a chance to
weigh in on that monument designation. And that is the problem
with the Antiquities Act, it is a fiat from on high from the
president, without the public participation that normally
accompanies public land management decisions. And as such, the
Ute Indian Tribe and its historical ties to that area were
completely forgotten in the national monument designation.
We are also concerned about the use of the Antiquities Act,
which to date has not resulted in large areas that are
productive for oil and natural gas being locked off, but that
remains a concern, especially with the President, who has
pledged no Federal oil and natural gas. So, that is why we are
concerned about the Antiquities Act and we support H.R. 5499.
In regards to the Resource Management Plans that are the
subject of bills before the Committee today as well, we are
very concerned by both of those because they lock away huge
amounts of land to oil and natural gas and, although they are
not yet finalized, we know how well BLM listens during the
public comment process, although we are hopeful that the
Colorado BLM is listening to stakeholders and is perhaps
looking at another alternative that would be more balanced,
because the locking away of the huge amount of acreage to oil
and natural gas in the Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction
RMP is just based on old information. It is not necessary. It
is not the least restrictive means to protect other resource
values, and it would lock away about 1.5, almost 1.6 million
acres to oil and natural gas, which is very extreme.
Likewise, with the Rock Springs RMP, we are talking about
an RMP in an area that is a major oil and natural gas-producing
area in one of the major oil and natural gas-producing states
in the country. And the shock that that alternative produced in
Wyoming from the legislature to the county commissioners to
stakeholders was quite profound. That RMP would lock away about
2.5 million acres, or 2.1, 2.2 million acres, depending on
which chart in the RMP you read, it is not clear, it is a
little bit concerning that BLM would have that inconsistency in
that RMP. That would lock away about 59 percent of the mineral
estate, again, in that planning area in which that economy is
very dependent on oil and natural gas.
So, that is a very extreme RMP, as well, so we support both
those bills to revoke those RMPs.
And finally, with the Natural Asset Company bill, I applaud
that Mr. Curtis has put that bill forward. We only wish that it
applied not just to Utah, but all across the country, and
particularly on Federal and tribal lands. I was disappointed
that the Deputy Chief French and Deputy Director Culver both
just deferred to the Securities and Exchange Commission on that
rule, on those bills, because it was clear when SEC put forward
that bill or that rule, that it had not done any coordination
with Federal land managers, and didn't consider the effect of
that rule on Natural Asset Companies on Federal or tribal
lands.

And that is a bit concerning, because there are things like
FLPMA, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act, that discuss
how Federal lands should be managed, and how oil and natural
gas, ranching, and mining are principal uses of those Federal
lands, yet the SEC rule would have precluded those productive
uses, those multiple uses of Federal lands on Federal land. And
that is antithetical to existing law like FLPMA.

I really appreciate the opportunity to comment today and I
look forward to questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Sgamma follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kathleen Sgamma, President, Western
Energy Alliance
on H.R. 5499, H.R. 6085, H.R. 6547, and H.R. 7006

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Committee Members,
thank you for the opportunity to testify. I will address four of the
bills before the committee today as they would help provide reasonable
access for oil and natural gas development and production on non-park,
non-wilderness public lands.
Western Energy Alliance is the leader and champion for independent
oil and natural gas companies in the West. Working with a vibrant
membership base for over 50 years, our expert staff, active committees,
and committed board members form a collaborative and welcoming
community of professionals dedicated to abundant, affordable energy and
a high quality of life for all. Alliance members lease and regularly
operate in an environmentally responsible manner on public lands in the
West.
H.R. 6085 and H.R. 6547

On January 27, 2021, just a week into his presidency, President
Biden issued a moratorium on new leases on federal lands and waters.
Lacking the power to do so, this Biden leasing ban was fairly easily
overturned in court. BLM is now using the public land use planning
process to preclude leasing on vast swathes of land across the West, in
effect serving as the Biden leasing ban by other means. In five RMPs
that are currently being updated across the West, BLM is proposing to
close 6,723,418 acres to oil and natural gas leasing.\1\ While we
strongly support H.R. 6085, Rep. Hageman's bill to prohibit the
implementation of the Rock Springs RMP revision and H.R. 6547, Rep.
Boebert's bill to prohibit the implementation of the RMP revision for
the Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction field offices, Congress
should also consider these other RMPs that contain large closures in
Colorado, North Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Draft Resource Management Plan Supplemental Environmental
Impact Statement Colorado River Valley Field Office and Grand Junction
Field Office, BLM, August 2023; Rock Springs Field Office Draft
Resource Management Plan Revision and Draft Environmental Impact
Statement, BLM, May 2023; Gunnison Sage-Grouse Resource Management Plan
Amendment--Draft Environmental Impact Statement, BLM, November 2023;
Draft Resource Management Plan Amendment and Environmental Impact
Statement for Big Game Habitat Conservation for Oil and Gas Management
in Colorado, BLM, October 2023; North Dakota Draft Resource Management
Plan and Environmental Impact Statement, BLM, January 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my 18 years at the Alliance, I cannot recall but a few isolated
examples where a standard RMP amendment did not result in more
protections being put in place and more lands being locked away from
leasing. Whether the Bush, Obama, Trump, or Biden administrations,
almost every time BLM opens up an RMP for revision, it finds new
reasons to impose more restrictions on oil and natural gas development
and production or to close areas to leasing. It almost never goes the
other way despite the fact that expanded use of horizontal drilling
reduces surface disturbance by up to 70%.\2\ Once lands are closed to
leasing, they remain that way. I understand that to a certain extent,
as there are other resource values on public lands that must be
protected, but the extent of the current proposed land closures and
restrictions is at an unprecedented level, with the ultimate effect
being a ban on leasing in large parts of the federal mineral estate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Oil and gas impacts on Wyoming's sage-grouse: summarizing the
past and predicting the foreseeable future,'' Human-Wildlife
Interactions Vol. 8 No 2, Dave H. Applegate and Nick L. Owens, 2014, p.
284-290.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With the Colorado RMP amendment, BLM would close 1,566,300 acres to
oil and natural gas leasing out of a planning area of 1,921,660, or 82%
of the federal mineral estate. BLM's justification is that the lands
have no-known, low, or medium potential for oil and natural gas. BLM
used an analysis of the potential based on a 2002 U.S. Geological
Survey (USGS) resource assessment despite the existence of a 2016 USGS
resource assessment that found a 318% increase in natural gas and a 23%
increase in oil resources. The justification for BLM to close the areas
to leasing because of poor potential is based on two-decades-old data.
Since 2002, oil and natural gas technology has advanced exponentially
and we are accessing new shale resources that were previously
completely inaccessible.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Comments on the Draft Resource Management Plan and
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for the Colorado River
Valley Field Office and Grand Junction Field Office, Western Energy
Alliance, West Slope Colorado Oil and Gas Association, and COGA,
November 1, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even with BLM's incorrect assumption about the oil and natural gas
potential, closing the lands to leasing would violate the law. The
Energy Policy Act of 2005 and Energy Policy Conservation Act Amendments
of 2000 require federal land management agencies to use the least
restrictive means necessary to protect other resource values. BLM has
many means at its disposal to protect wildlife, cultural, air, water,
recreation, and other resources. Those means include lease stipulations
that range from timing limitations on when oil and natural gas activity
can occur, to controls on the use of the surface, to the most extreme
restriction, which is no surface occupancy (NSO). NSO means that no oil
and natural gas equipment, such as a drilling rig, can be placed on a
lease whatsoever. The lease must be accessed from adjacent lands using
horizontal or directional drilling. Since the lateral reach of
horizontal wells is about two to three miles at a maximum, NSO can
result in isolating lands that are beyond reach, and therefore, should
be used sparingly. However, even NSO restrictions are less extreme than
the blanket closure of 82% of the federal mineral estate in the
planning area.
The Rock Springs RMP revision is likewise extreme.\4\ BLM is
proposing to close 2,186,218 acres to leasing, out of a planning area
of 3,718,451 acres of federal mineral estate, or 59%. Of the 1,532,233
acres of the planning area that would remain open, 813,354 or 53% would
carry the most restrictive NSO designation. This area of Wyoming is one
of the major oil and natural gas production areas in a state that is
one of the major oil and natural gas states in the nation. For the
1,772,213 acres currently leased, BLM is proposing that these lands are
closed to leasing once the terms of the leases expire.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See Comments on the Rock Springs Draft Resource Management Plan
and Environmental Impact Statement for the Rock Springs RMP Revisions,
Petroleum Association of Wyoming and Western Energy Alliance, January
17, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, BLM grossly overestimates the number of wells that will
likely be developed in Rock Springs in order to justify closing this
extreme amount of acreage. Using outdated assumptions from 2010, BLM
projects 6,719 new wells will be drilled over the 20-year life of the
RMP, an average of 336 wells per year. This flawed ``reasonably''
foreseeable development scenario is used to quantify the projected
impacts to surface disturbance, air quality, water quality, surface and
ground water usage, cultural resources, invasive species, wildlife
habitat, visual resources and just about every resource analyzed in the
RMP.
In fact, BLM's own data show that in 2022, 33 Applications for
Permits to Drill were received, 21 approved, 13 are pending, and 18
wells were actually spud.\5\ Such recent data show BLM's assumptions to
be very wide of the mark. Rather than 336 wells drilled a year, it is
more likely that 360 wells will be drilled over the entire 20-year life
of the final RMP. The more realistic assumption of 18 wells drilled per
year indicates that BLM is overestimating likely oil and natural gas
development in the planning area by 1,867%, with that extreme
overestimation causing commensurate exaggeration in the impacts to
other resources. Only by exaggerating these impacts can BLM propose to
impose such drastic restrictions on responsible oil and natural gas
development in the Rock Springs planning area.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ BLM Oil & Gas Statistics, FY2022, Table 16: Applications for
Permits to Drill (APD) Report
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is no wonder that the reaction to the release of the Rock
Springs RMP was one of shock that rippled through the State of Wyoming.
Stakeholders' input that had been collaboratively provided for 12 years
was discarded. Never before had the BLM selected an extreme
conservation alternative as the preferred alternative, one hastily
developed and contrary to the balanced objectives envisioned by those
involved in the multi-year stakeholder and cooperating agency process.
The public's reaction to the BLM's decision was proportional and
necessary.
Wyoming and the Rock Springs community rely on responsible oil and
natural gas production from public lands for economic prosperity and
job creation. Oil and natural gas development in the area has shaped
the cultural and societal fabric of the community and supports a robust
economy. Despite the fact that BLM heard overwhelmingly from members of
the community that they wished to retain access to public lands for oil
and natural gas activities, BLM seemed to listen to environmental
special interests only who do not represent the community at large.
Usually, BLM's preferred alternative strikes a balance, however
imperfect, between the most protective alternative and the most
extractive one, yet for this oil and natural gas community, BLM chose
the extreme conservation alternative. We urge Congress to pass H.R.
6085 to prevent this fundamentally flawed RMP.
H.R. 7006

Western Energy Alliance strongly supports H.R. 7006, Rep. Curtis'
bill to prohibit Natural Asset Companies (NAC) from operating in Utah.
I only wish the bill applied across the whole country and in
particular, on tribal and federal lands. As envisioned, NACs would have
been able to monetize ecosystem services and natural resource values on
public and tribal lands without an adequate system for compensating
tribal members nor the American people who collectively own public
lands. Although the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has
withdrawn the rule to list NACs on the New York Stock Exchange, H.R.
7006 is necessary because the concept is far from dead, as the
administration moves forward with its Natural Capital Accounting
strategy.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-
Economic Decisions: A U.S. System of Natural Capital Accounting
Associated Environmental-Economic Statistics, Office of Science and
Technology, Office of Management and Budget, Department of Commerce,
January 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The bill should be extended to all federal lands because the
concept of NACs conflicts with BLM's organic statute, the Federal Land
Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) and to all tribal lands, as NACs
benefiting from tribal resources is contrary to the Department of the
Interior's trust responsibility to tribes and their members. NACs are
envisioned to prevent productive activities like oil and natural gas
development off federal lands, even though FLPMA mandates that the
``principal or major uses'' of public lands include ``mineral
exploration and production.'' See 43 U.S.C. Sec. 1702(l). Please see my
recent testimony before the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee
regarding NACs.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Testimony of Kathleen Sgamma before the U.S. House Committee on
Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, March
7, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 5499

We strongly support H.R. 5499, Rep. Miller-Meeks' Congressional
Oversight of the Antiquities Act, as the Antiquities Act has been
inappropriately used over many years to create huge monument
designations that are well beyond the original intent of the law.
Enacted in 1906, the Antiquities Act served to protect historic and
cultural resources from looting, destruction, and private
appropriation. No federal laws existed at the time to protect public
lands outside of national parks and the resources on them. The original
intent of the Antiquities Act was to protect small, significant places
of national interest and the cultural resources they contain.
According to the text of the Act, monument designations are to be
made for ``historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and
other objects of historic or scientific interest,'' and the government
must reserve ``the smallest area compatible with proper care and
management of the objects to be protected.'' The clear implication of
this language is that monuments were intended by Congress to protect
specific resources and the land in their immediate vicinity that is
directly threatened, not hundreds of thousands or millions of acres.
Recent designations have far exceeded this intent.
Large monument designations are undemocratic, lacking input from
local communities and elected officials, and negatively impact state
and local economies. They are the only large actions on federal lands
that do not require analysis under the National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) and hence, are not subject to robust, transparent public
comment and consultation with elected officials. National monument
designations that affect large areas have been made over the objection
of state, local, and tribal leaders, and those who live and make a
living near the monuments.
In addition, both federal law and public appreciation of historical
sites have significantly changed since 1906 when the Antiquities Act
was enacted. With the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA),
public lands are no longer being transferred into private ownership and
special areas can be protected, with public input, through the land use
planning process. The Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979
criminalized destruction of archaeological resources, and the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990 (NAGPRA)
provided additional protections. Moreover, the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA) prevents damage to cultural resources.
The threat to our cultural heritage that the Antiquities Act was meant
to address has largely disappeared, and the Act has been used instead
as unrestrained presidential power that circumvents the will of
Congress and the needs of local communities.
Western Energy Alliance is concerned that the current president,
who has repeatedly promised to prevent federal oil and natural gas
production, or future presidents would use unrestrained monument
designations to lock away large areas that contain oil and natural gas
resources. We urge Congress to pass H.R. 5499.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ms. Sgamma. I would like to now
introduce Ms. Michelle McConkie, Director for the Utah School
and Institutional Trust Lands Administration.
Director McConkie, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHELLE McCONKIE, DIRECTOR, STATE OF UTAH SCHOOL
AND INSTITUTIONAL TRUST LANDS ADMINISTRATION, SALT LAKE CITY,
UTAH

Ms. McConkie. Chairman Tiffany, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Michelle McConkie. I
am the Director of the Utah School and Institutional Trust
Lands Administration, or SITLA, and SITLA is a state agency
that manages trust lands granted by Congress at Utah's
statehood for the financial support of public education and
other institutions.
SITLA manages approximately 3.3 million acres of surface
and subsurface trust lands, along with an additional 1 million
acres of severed mineral estate. Revenue from activities on
these lands is invested, and distributions are made annually to
every public school in the state.
When scattered state trust lands are embedded within
Federal conservation areas, the utility of these lands is
severely limited. For example, mineral development nearly
always requires areas larger than scattered 640 acres or 1-
square-mile trust land sections to be economically viable. If
the surrounding Federal lands do not allow for compatible
activities, these trust lands are unlikely to be developed for
such purposes.
One way to mitigate these management conflicts is to
undertake State-Federal land exchanges. Unfortunately, these
involve a lengthy and expensive process with political hurdles
that are magnified by monument designations that do not include
congressional oversight or seek state and local input.
A recent example of these types of difficulties is the
ongoing political wranglings associated with the designation of
the Bears Ears National Monument in southeastern Utah. This
monument was established by presidential proclamation near the
end of the time of President Obama. President Trump
subsequently reduced the footprint of the monument during his
administration. The monument boundaries were then once again
expanded by President Biden. This back and forth over the past
8 years has brought tremendous uncertainty for state trust land
inholdings within the monument boundaries, which under the
current iteration captures more than 200 scattered tracts of
trust lands and over 126,000 acres.
An exchange was contemplated shortly after President
Obama's designation, but was postponed when it became clear the
footprint would be changing once President Trump took office.
Discussions on an exchange resumed once the boundaries were
expanded by President Biden in 2021. We have spent the last
2\1/2\ years working on these efforts, which have,
unfortunately, recently been paused by continued tensions
between the State and Federal Governments over management of
the monument.
It is difficult for SITLA to work on an exchange, or for
industry to commit capital to a project on trust lands in such
circumstances. The unfortunate result is that these trust lands
often lie stagnant for years, making us unable to generate
much-needed funding for Utah's public schools.
For example, in 2019, an oil and gas company expressed
interest in leasing trust lands in the Bears Ears Monument Area
that had been included in the Obama era boundaries, were
outside the then-current Trump-era boundaries, and were
anticipated to be re-incorporated into the boundaries if Biden
were to take office. Given these uncertainties, SITLA had to
decide whether to hold the lands for potential exchange or
encumber them with leases that may never be explored or
developed. Ultimately, SITLA held off on leasing those lands,
and less than 2 years later they were back inside the re-
expanded monument boundaries.
Contrast the Bears Ears experience with trading out of
school trust lands in the San Rafael Swell area of central
Utah. The San Rafael Swell is important to many different
stakeholders who came together and worked for several years
with various administrations, Congress, and state and local
officials to put together the Emery County Public Lands
Management Act. This was later incorporated into the 2019 John
Dingell Act, which includes the establishment of recreation
areas, wilderness areas, wild and scenic river designations,
and provisions for the exchange of state trust lands out of
these new Federal designations. Though it was a difficult
process, the end result is a Federal land exchange that has
been significantly less controversial than the proposed Bears
Ears exchange. It has brought greater finality and certainty to
the uses of Federal land, and has allowed SITLA to move forward
with acquiring Federal land to fulfill its mission to fund Utah
schools.
Given the impacts monument designations on Federal lands
have on state trust lands and other surrounding landowners, it
may be helpful to have more public discussion on proposed
monuments and to have some congressional oversight on this
process.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I am
happy to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. McConkie follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michelle McConkie, Director, Utah School and
Institutional Trust Lands Administration
on H.R. 5499

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Michelle McConkie and I am the Director of the Utah
School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration (``SITLA''), a
state agency that manages state trust lands granted by Congress at
Utah's statehood for the financial support of public education and
other state institutions. In addition to public schools, beneficiaries
of Utah's trust lands grants include the University of Utah, Utah State
University, a hospital providing healthcare to disabled miners, and the
state schools for the blind and deaf. SITLA manages approximately 3.3
million acres of state trust lands, along with an additional million
acres of severed mineral estate. Revenue from school trust lands--
derived from oil and gas, mining, real estate development, and other
activities, is deposited in the Utah Permanent School Fund, a perpetual
endowment supporting public schools. The Utah Permanent School Fund has
a balance of approximately $3.2 billion. Proceeds from the fund are
distributed annually to every public school in the state to help with
each school's most pressing academic needs.
State trust lands are largely distributed in a checkerboard pattern
throughout their respective states and these scattered sections are
often surrounded by federal lands. Due to this ownership pattern, large
national monument designations under the Antiquities Act can have far-
reaching effects on school trust lands and can create serious
management conflicts when they become trapped inholdings within
monument boundaries.
Restrictive Use Designation on Federal Lands Affect Activities on State
Trust Lands

When scattered state trust land inholdings are embedded within
federal conservation areas such as national monuments and other
designations, land management conflicts arise. State trust lands were
granted by Congress at statehood with a directive to utilize them for
the financial benefit of public schools and other beneficiaries. But
when restrictive uses are designated on surrounding Federal lands, the
utility of these lands and ability to meet this Congressional directive
are severely limited.
For example, oil, gas and other mineral development activities
nearly always require development areas larger than scattered 640-acre
(1 square mile) trust lands sections to be economically viable. For
this reason, if the surrounding federal lands do not allow for
compatible development activities, these trust lands are unlikely to be
developed for such purposes. Even if industry is able to economically
develop an isolated section of trust lands, there is the added
difficulty of gaining access to the state lands over surrounding
federal lands with restrictive use designations.
Land Exchanges as a Solution to Management Conflicts

One way to mitigate these management conflicts is to undertake
state/federal land exchanges, where state inholdings within the
boundaries of restrictively-managed federal lands are traded for
federal lands with greater revenue-producing potential. Unfortunately,
land exchanges are a lengthy and expensive process with many political
hurdles. These political difficulties are often magnified when the
restrictive uses are due to a national monument designation that did
not include Congressional oversight or seek state and local input.
Uncertainties due to Changing Monument Boundaries

A recent example of these types of difficulties is the ongoing
political wranglings associated with the designation of the Bears Ears
National Monument in southeastern Utah. This monument was established
by Presidential Proclamation near the end of the term of President
Obama. President Trump subsequently reduced the footprint of the
Monument during his administration. The Monument boundaries were then
once again expanded by President Biden.
This back-and-forth over the past eight years has brought
tremendous uncertainty for state trust land inholdings within the Bears
Ears National Monument boundaries. An exchange was contemplated shortly
after President Obama's designation of the Monument but was postponed
once it became clear the footprint would likely be changing once
President Trump took office. Discussions on an exchange resumed once
the boundaries were expanded by President Biden in 2021. The current
designation of the Bears Ears National Monument captures more than 200
scattered tracts of state trust land within its outer boundaries,
totaling over 126,000 acres. We have spent the last 2\1/2\ years
working on an exchange effort for these lands, which has unfortunately
recently been paused by continued political tensions between the state
and federal governments over management of the Monument.
It is difficult for SITLA to commit resources toward working on an
exchange when there is uncertainty as to the number of acres that will
be impacted or whether the footprint will continue to change with every
new administration. In addition, industry wants certainty before
committing capital to a project and does not want to operate on trust
lands that are in the middle of an ongoing battle over monument
boundaries. The unfortunate result is that these trust lands often lie
stagnant for years and we are unable to generate much-needed funding
for Utah's public education system and other beneficiary institutions.
For example, in 2019 an oil and gas company expressed interest in
leasing some state trust lands in the Bears Ears Monument area that had
been included in the Obama-era Monument boundary but were outside the
then current Trump-era Monument boundary. Given the uncertainties
surrounding these lands as to whether they would remain outside the
Monument or be re-incorporated into the Monument in the next
administration, SITLA had to determine whether to hold the lands for
potential exchange or encumber them with leases that may never be able
to be explored or developed. Ultimately, SITLA held off on leasing
those lands and less than two years later they were back inside the
Monument once President Biden re-expanded the boundary.
Collaborative Processes Bring More Certainty and Stability in the Long
Run

Though they are also not quick or easy, more collaborative
processes on federal land management that include meaningful
involvement from state and local stakeholders, along with some
Congressional oversight, can yield more long-term stability.
SITLA's experience in managing and trying to trade out of school
trust lands in the Bears Ears National Monument can be contrasted to
the process associated with trading out of school trust lands in the
San Rafael Swell area of central Utah. The San Rafael Swell is a unique
area of Utah that is important to many different stakeholders including
local communities, recreational users, energy and mineral interests,
livestock operators, and environmental protection advocates. These
diverse interests came together and over several years of discussions
and consensus building between various executive administrations, state
and local officials, and Congress, they put together the Emery County
Public Lands Management Act. This comprehensive, grass roots
legislation, later incorporated into the 2019 John Dingell Act,
included the establishment of recreation areas, wilderness areas, wild
and scenic river designations, and provisions for the exchange of state
trust lands out of these new federal designations.
Though it was a difficult process, the end result has been a
federal land exchange that has been significantly less controversial
than the proposed Bears Ears National Monument exchange. It has brought
greater finality and certainty to the uses of federal land for
wilderness purposes in the San Rafael Swell area and has allowed SITLA
to move forward with acquiring federal land that can better help
achieve its mandate to make money for Utah's public school children.
Conclusion

Given the impacts that restrictive monument designations on federal
lands have on surrounding landowners, including state trust lands, it
may be helpful to allow for more public discussion about the purpose
and need for a monument and to also have some Congressional oversight
on this process.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I am happy to
answer any questions that members of the committee may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Director McConkie. I would now like
to introduce Mr. Eric Bingham, who serves as the Land Use
Director in Sweetwater County, Wyoming.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ERIC BINGHAM, LAND USE DIRECTOR, SWEETWATER
COUNTY, GREEN RIVER, WYOMING

Mr. Bingham. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany. Thank you for
the opportunity today to speak on H.R. 6085. My name is Eric
Bingham. I am the Land Use Director for Sweetwater County,
Wyoming. I have over 19 years of experience in land use, sub-
division, economic development, Federal land collaboration,
development codes, and growth management.
I am speaking to you today to discuss some of the
significant issues with the draft Rock Springs RMP and the
BLM's preferred alternative as they relate to the content, and
the process that they were developed. These issues include, but
are not limited to the failure of the agency to honor and
comply with the Federal Land Policy Management Act, FLPMA;
mandates for coordination with local governments in the
development of the preferred alternative; and the development
and access barriers associated with right-of-way exclusion
areas, fluid mineral closures, special designations as proposed
in the draft RMP, and the detrimental effects, socioeconomic,
of implementing the preferred alternative of the draft RMP.
FLPMA requires local government coordination to maintain
meaningful and continuous participation through the RMP
process. The following timeline illustrates the direction and
development of the alternatives through the RMP process that
co-operators were given, and the lack of continuous and
meaningful participation.
In 2012, BLM spent a short period discussing and developing
Alternatives B and C. Both alternatives were conveyed as
representing a bookend or placeholder, versus being functional
or reasonable. Alternative B was heavy on conservation,
Alternative C on resource use.
Starting in 2015, the BLM instructed cooperating agencies
to shift and focus on developing Alternative D, which BLM and
co-operators refer to as ``the balanced alternative.''
From 2017 through 2022, the BLM identified Alternative D,
balanced alternative, as the agency's preliminary preferred
alternative. Cooperating agencies spent their time and efforts
on working with the BLM to develop, refine, and focus comments
on Alternative D.
It was not until the release of the proposed RMP to the
public in August 2023, where Sweetwater County and other
cooperating agencies were made aware of the BLM's dramatic
shift in its preferred Alternative D, the balanced alternative,
to the bookend and more restrictive on resource use, which is
not reasonable nor ready for submission.
This dramatic shift in preferred alternatives to the draft
RMP negates the decade-long collaboration efforts of both BLM
and cooperating agencies. It further goes against BLM policy
requiring the BLM to collaborate with cooperating agencies to
develop and reach a consensus on a preferred alternative.
The lack of development of BLM's current preferred
alternative since 2013 resulted in management actions that do
not consider current and future development projects. For
example, the right-of-way exclusion area will prevent access to
critical infrastructure for the development of a new trona mine
facility that will create over 1,000 high-quality jobs in
Sweetwater County.
The fluid mineral closures and right-of-way exclusion areas
will shut down mineral exploration and have a catastrophic
effect on Sweetwater County's economy. For example, Sweetwater
County received $16.9 million in oil and gas production ad
valorem taxes in 2023. The draft RMP predicts a 74 percent
reduction in public revenue, decreasing revenues to $4.3
million. The biggest revenue hit will be for local school
districts, which will reduce their revenues from $8.5 million
to $2.9 million. Reducing jobs and earnings will also impact
schools by losing student enrollment.
Sweetwater County understands the importance and
significance of public lands and the contribution these lands
have to our customs, culture, and socioeconomics. We have long
worked with the BLM to balance productive uses of Federal
lands, including solid conservation efforts. The current draft
RMP requires significant additional work and further
stakeholder input to balance managing multiple uses without
compromising the economic health of communities of Sweetwater
County and Wyoming.
Co-operators are amenable to sitting at the table with the
BLM to engage in a collaborative process to develop a plan that
balances multiple uses.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Bingham follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric Bingham, Land Use Director, Sweetwater
County, Wyoming
on H.R. 6085

Good morning, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and
distinguished committee members. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
with you today concerning issues with the Rock Springs Draft Resource
Management Plan and its implementation. My name is Eric Bingham, I am
the Land Use Director for Sweetwater County, Wyoming. I have over 19
years of work experience in land use, subdivision, economic
development, federal land collaboration, development codes, and growth
management.
Sweetwater County recognizes the congressional authority you
provide to the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to manage public lands
for multiple uses. Federal Land Policy and Management Act, 1976, 43
U.S.C. Chapter 35. Sweetwater County supports managing federal land for
multiple use and sustained yield, while recognizing that public lands
are to be managed for the primary multiple uses of domestic grazing,
minerals, timber, wildlife, recreation, and rights of way. I, and other
leaders in Sweetwater County, vigorously oppose the Draft Rock Springs
Resource Management Plan (RMP) because of the federal land use
restrictions and special designations that will essentially eliminate
multiple uses and constrain economic growth and activity necessary to
maintain our quality of life in Sweetwater County and impact all
Wyoming citizens.
The Federal Government owns over 67% of the lands within Sweetwater
County; federal land use decisions and policies, especially those that
close access to public lands, directly affect our community's economic
well-being and vitality.

I am speaking to you today to discuss some of the significant
issues with the Draft Rock Springs RMP as they relate to the content
and the process by which it was developed. These issues include but are
not limited to:

1.  The failure of the agency to honor and comply with the Federal
Land Policy Management Act (FLPMA) mandates for
coordination with local governments in the development of
the preferred alternative, and

2.  The development and access barriers associated with right-of-way
exclusion areas, fluid mineral closures, special
designations as proposed in the Draft RMP, and

3.  The detrimental socioeconomic effects of implementing the
preferred alternative of the Draft RMP.

FLPMA requires local government coordination to maintain meaningful
and continuous participation throughout the RMP process. The following
timeline illustrates the direction and development of the alternatives
through the RMP process that cooperators were given and the lack of
continuous and meaningful participation:

In 2012, BLM spent a short period discussing and
developing Alternatives B and C. Both alternatives were
conveyed as representing a bookend or placeholder versus
being functional or reasonable. Alternative B was heavy on
conservation use, and Alternative C on resource use.

Starting in 2015 the BLM instructed cooperating agencies
to shift and focus on developing Alternative D, which BLM
and cooperators referred to as the ``Balanced
Alternative''. At this point all focus of further
cooperating agency meetings was on developing Alternative D
and the analysis associated with that alternative.

April 3, 2017, the BLM identified Alternative D as the
agency's preliminary preferred alternative. Cooperating
agencies spent their time and efforts on working with the
BLM to develop, refine, and focus comments on Alternative
D. Cooperators were explicitly directed not to focus on
Alternative B.

In June 2020, the BLM held a cooperating agency meeting
that continued to identify Alternative D as the preferred
alternative.

On June 22, 2022, after two years of no meetings with
cooperating agencies, the BLM provided an update on the
status of review of the Draft RMP and amendments that were
made by the BLM to the preferred Alternative D to reflect
current BLM policy and direction.

It was not until the release of the Proposed RMP to the
public, a year later in August 2023, where Sweetwater
County and other cooperating agencies were made aware of
the BLM's dramatic shift in its preferred Alternative D to
the bookend and most restrictive on resource use,
Alternative B. Alternative B is not reasonable nor ready
for submission. In addition, the cooperators had zero
involvement with the selection of Alternative B as the
Preferred Alternative.

This dramatic shift in preferred alternatives to the Draft RMP
negates the decade-long collaboration and efforts of both BLM and
cooperating agencies. It further goes against BLM's policy requiring
the BLM to collaborate with cooperating agencies to develop and reach a
consensus on a preferred alternative. See BLM Handbook 1601, Section
1.E.2.c; see id. at Section 9.2.7.3.
The lack of development of BLM's preferred alternative, since 2013,
resulted in management actions that do not consider current and future
development projects and private landownership access issues within the
checkerboard ownership. For example, right-of-way exclusion areas shown
in the Draft RMP limit access and expansion of infrastructure within
planned critical transmission corridors, which include areas of
Sweetwater County that offer the most growth potential by preventing
access to thousands of private lands. See Map 2-22 of the Draft RMP.
Right-of-way exclusions under the Draft RMP will block access to
hundreds of thousands of surface and mineral acres, even under
restrictive assumptions. See Map 2-22 Draft RMP. Right-of-way exclusion
areas infringe on private property rights by preventing the ability to
access private and state lands and to develop infrastructure (i.e.,
roads, pipelines, electric lines, etc.) on the neighboring public
lands.
The right-of-way exclusion areas conflict and will significantly
impact other development and federal land use. It will limit future
access to mineral exploration, development sites, and grazing
allotments by federal permittees. Furthermore, exclusion areas will
directly and immediately impact future large scale industrial projects.
For example, the right-of-way exclusion areas will prevent access to
critical infrastructure for the development of a new trona mine
facility that will create over a thousand high quality jobs in
Sweetwater County.
The Draft RMP also uses special designations and right-of-way
exclusions to eliminate the possibility of fluid mineral leasing on
about 70% of the 3.7 million acres. Rock Springs Field Office Draft
Resource Management Plan (RMP) Revision and Draft Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS), page ES-4. It will also eliminate an estimated 40,000
acres of trona leasing subsurface acres managed by the Rock Springs
Field Office. Id. at ES-5. Oil and natural gas development will only be
available where valid existing leases are held and will close currently
available lands when those leases expire.
The fluid mineral closures and right-of-way exclusion areas will
shut down mineral exploration and have catastrophic effects on
Sweetwater County's economy. See Maps 2-6 & 2-22 of Rock Springs Draft
RMP. All quantified economic and public revenue indicators for oil and
gas development and production are approximately 74% lower under the
Draft RMP than the current management plan. As the Draft RMP indicates,
the 74% anticipated reduction in oil and gas development will harm
local economies and public services. According to initial estimates
from the University of Wyoming. Over 55% of Sweetwater County's
valuation comes from natural gas, oil, and trona, which means the
ramifications of a loss in revenue will affect a diverse spectrum of
services county-wide.
For example, Sweetwater County received $16.9 million in oil and
gas production ad valorem taxes in 2023. A 74% reduction will result in
$12.2 million less revenue, decreasing revenue to $4.3 million. The
biggest revenue hit will be for local school districts, which will
reduce their revenue from $8.5 million to $2.9 million. Reducing jobs
and earnings will also impact schools by losing student enrollment.
Sweetwater County understands the importance and significance of
public lands and the contribution these lands have to our customs,
culture, and socioeconomics. We have long worked with BLM to balance
productive uses of federal lands, including solid conservation efforts.
The current Draft RMP requires significant additional work and further
stakeholder input to balance managing multiple uses without
compromising the economic health of communities of Sweetwater County
and Wyoming. Cooperators are amenable to sitting at the table with the
BLM to engage in a collaborative process to develop a plan that
balances multiple uses.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Director Bingham. I now recognize
Dr. Jay Lillywhite, Assistant Dean for Economic and Rural
Development at the New Mexico State University.
Dr. Lillywhite, good to have you here. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAY M. LILLYWHITE, ASSISTANT DEAN FOR ECONOMIC AND
RURAL DEVELOPMENT, NEW MEXICO STATE UNIVERSITY, LAS CRUCES, NEW
MEXICO

Dr. Lillywhite. Chairman Tiffany and members of the
Subcommittee, good morning and thank you for inviting me here
today. My name is Jay Lillywhite. I am the Assistant Dean for
Economic and Rural Development, and the Interim Associate Dean
for the Agricultural Experiment Station in the College of
Agricultural, Consumer, and Environmental Sciences at New
Mexico State University.
The Agricultural Experiment Station has 12 science centers
located throughout the state, including the John T. Harrington
Forestry Research Center located in Mora, New Mexico, adjacent
to the Santa Fe and Carson National Forests.
Forests provide numerous environmental and economic
benefits. They are natural carbon sinks and offer critical
watershed benefits, especially important in the arid West. In
New Mexico, forest watersheds supply more than 50 percent of
all water used by municipalities and agriculture. The United
States produces more than $200 billion in forestry products
annually, and with additional economic benefits coming from a
wide variety of forest-related activities.
Forests throughout the United States, but especially in the
West, face significant wildfire risk and damage. Over the last
10 years, forest fires in the United States have burned more
than 7 million acres annually. New Mexico has faced significant
wildfire damage in recent years, recording the two largest
fires in its history in 2022: the Hermits Peak/Calf Canyon
Fire, burning more than 340,000 acres; and the Black Fire,
burning more than 325,000 acres.
Large fires, as we have heard today, reduce the forest's
natural ability to regenerate and necessitate reforestation.
Land grant universities have contributed to solutions to
agricultural and natural resource problems in the past, and are
prepared to assist with problems caused by wildfires today.
Faculty at the John T. Harrington Forestry Research Center,
along with their higher education, state and Federal partners,
conduct research to address the unique reforestation needs of
the western United States. Researchers at the Center,
collaborating with their partners, have refined methods for
drought conditioning nursery seedlings grown from locally
collected seeds, developed nucleation planting strategies that
mimic natural regeneration, have identified optimal planning
time frames, and have examined the microclimates on tree
establishment in post-wildfire areas.
The research conducted at the Forestry Research Center has
had impressive results. Current efforts to reforest often use
non-native seedlings grown outside the Southwest. These
seedlings, planted using traditional methods, have a survival
rate of 25 percent or less. The Center's research and
corresponding strategies described earlier have increased the
survival rates. It is estimated that seedling survival rates
using the combination of strategies can approach 80 percent.
These strategies are reducing the cost of reforestation.
Today, the John T. Harrington Forestry Research Center
grows 300,000 seedlings annually, but more is needed to meet
reforestation needs. The Forest Service estimates that there
are more than 4 million acres that need reforestation, but they
have only been able to address about 6 percent of that need. It
is estimated that more than 5 million seedlings will need to be
produced annually for the next 10 or more years to reforest
wildfire-lost land in New Mexico and Arizona alone.
Recognizing this unprecedented need, New Mexico State
University has joined universities within the state and the
State Forestry Division to build the New Mexico Reforestation
Center using proven research from the Agricultural Experiment
Station. When fully operational, the Center will be able to
produce 5 million hardy seedlings annually.
Universities and state agencies want to be a part of the
solution, but we need assistance. H.R. 5015, Seedlings for
Sustainable Habitat Restoration sponsored by Representative
Leger Fernandez, will help. The bill would amend the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to authorize the
Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the
Forest Service, to enter into contracts, grants, and agreements
with universities and other partners for the purpose of
producing seedlings for re-vegetation, and explicitly support
needed capacity development.
New Mexico State University and its partners understand the
importance of forest and reforestation, and are making
significant investments to ensure that they are prepared to
meet current and future challenges. H.R. 5015 would make
resources available that are desperately needed if we are to
succeed.
Thank you for your invitation and your attention.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Lillywhite follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Jay M. Lillywhite, Assistant Dean, Economic &
Rural Development, New Mexico State University,
College of Agricultural, Consumer, and Environmental Sciences
on H.R. 5015

Introduction

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present my views on H.R.
5015, ``Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration Act of 2023,''
and its potential impacts on New Mexico and New Mexico State
University.
I have been a professor in the College of Agricultural, Consumer,
and Environmental Sciences at New Mexico State University for more than
20 years. In my current position as Assistant Dean for Economic and
Rural Development, I work to fulfill the College's mission of serving
``as an engine for economic and community development in New Mexico.''
The State's forests and woodlands provide an important contribution to
the State's economy and provide economic and community development
opportunities for the State.
In my role as Interim Associate Dean and Director of the
Agricultural Experiment Station, I have responsibilities for
administering the College's agriculture and natural resources research.
New Mexico's Agricultural Experiment Station has 12 science centers
located throughout the State, including the John T. Harrington Forestry
Research Center in Mora, New Mexico. The Center is adjacent to the
Santa Fe and Carson National Forests. The Center's mission is to
advance the understanding and success of forest restoration activities
in New Mexico through multidisciplinary research, education, and
stakeholder collaborations. The Center is New Mexico's only research-
based tree nursery. It conducts innovative research to produce
seedlings that will survive in harsh, burned area environments today
and thrive in the climate of 2100.
The Hermits Peak and Calf Canyon Fire, created when two USDA Forest
Service fires escaped prescribed burn areas, burned more than 340,000
acres in 2022. The fire, the largest in New Mexico's history, came
within one-tenth of a mile of the John T. Harrington Forestry Research
Center. Agricultural Experiment Station faculty and staff evacuated
tree seedlings and the seed bank in advance of the firefront and were
able to salvage nearly all of the crop. In the same year, the Black
Fire burned more than 325,000 acres in the Gila wilderness. It is from
this backdrop that I present my testimony.
The Importance of Forests

There are 766 million acres of forests in the United States,
including New Mexico's nearly 17 million acres (Oswalt et al., 2019).
Forests provide numerous benefits, including recreation, wood
resources, and, especially important in the arid West, watershed
benefits. In New Mexico, forest watersheds supply more than 50% of all
water used by municipalities and agriculture. Additionally, forests
provide the largest terrestrial carbon sink on the earth, sequestering
more than 11% of carbon emissions each year (Oswalt et al., 2019). It
is estimated that the forest products industry accounts for
approximately four percent of the United States' total manufacturing
gross domestic product (Oswalt et al., 2019).
Forests at Risk

All forests in the United States, especially in the Western United
States, face forest damage and destruction caused by wildfires. Over
the last ten years, forest fires in the United States burned an average
of more than seven million acres annually, with three years recording
more than ten million acres burned (Figure 1). As I previously
indicated, New Mexico has faced significant wildfires in recent years
with substantial damage. Over the last 20 years, the state has had
nearly 300,000 acres burned annually. These fires are often large.
Large fires increase the need for reforestation as they reduce the
forests' ability to regenerate naturally.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 1. U.S. Wildfires and affected acreage, 1993-2023.
Source: National Interagency Fire Center, N.D.

Reforestation Needs

A number of factors contribute to the need for reforestation,
including wildfire, insect infestations, disease, and drought. The
Forest Service estimates that 80% of reforestation needs are associated
with wildfires. The Forest Service has estimated that more than four
million acres of forests need reforestation as a result of wildfire,
but it has only been able to address six percent of this need (USDA FS,
N.D.).
It is estimated that more than five million tree seedlings will
need to be produced each year over the next ten years or more to
reforest lands that have been lost to wildfire in New Mexico and
Arizona alone. Where will these seedlings come from? The case of tree
losses from the Hermits Peak and Calf Canyon Fire, where 341,735 acres
were burned, can be used to illustrate the significant need to increase
reforestation capacity. If only the severely burned acreage were
replanted, experts estimate that the reforestation would require more
than twelve million seedlings. The Forest Service does not have a
nursery in Arizona or New Mexico. The largest nursery in the region is
New Mexico State University's John T. Harrington Forestry Research
Center, which has the capacity to produce 300,000 seedlings annually.
If reforestation were left to the Forest Research Center alone, it
would take more than 40 years to have enough seedlings to reforest the
Hermits Peak and Calf Canyon Fire.
New Mexico State University's John T. Harrington Forestry Research
Center

The John T. Harrington Forestry Research Center not only grows
seedlings for reforestation but also conducts vital, related research.
It hosts one of the few research programs in the United States with a
reforestation focus. Along with other higher education, state, and
federal partners, the Center conducts research to address the unique
reforestation needs of Western states. For example, the Center's
research includes refining methods to ensure newly planted seedlings
survive. Researchers, collaborating with partners, have refined a
method for drought-conditioning seedlings during nursery growth that
improves their survival when planted in the harsh environment of a
wildfire burn scar. The Center and its partners have pioneered
``nucleation'' planting strategies in reforestation, which are designed
to mimic natural regeneration. These strategies nurture a core area of
planted trees to reproductive age, rather than the traditional method
of grid planting, where many seedlings will die. The Center and its
partners also conduct research to examine the impacts of microclimates
on tree establishment in post-wildfire areas and are modeling how
future climate change may impact reforestation. This research
translates to improved reforestation efficiency for public and private
lands.
The research conducted at the Forestry Research Center has had
impressive results. Current efforts to reforest often use non-native
seedlings grown outside the Southwest. These seedlings planted using
traditional methods have a survival rate of 25 percent or less. The
Center's use of local tree seeds, seedling drought-conditioning, and
nucleation planting strategies has significantly increased survival
rates. It is estimated that our seedling survival rates, using this
combination of strategies, can approach 80 percent. These strategies
can also reduce the cost of reforestation.
Faculty, staff, and students at the Agricultural Experiment
Station's John T. Harrington Forestry Research Center regularly
collaborate with the Forest Service, State Forestry Division, faculty
and staff at Highlands University, the University of New Mexico, and
other universities on reforestation efforts. Staff from these
institutions are leaders in reforestation science and have the
expertise and experience that positions New Mexico to be a model for
successful reforestation practices across the nation.
More Needs to be Done

In recognition that the scale of the need for reforestation is
accelerating, New Mexico State University, Highlands University, the
University of New Mexico, and New Mexico's Forestry Division recently
entered into agreements that created the New Mexico Reforestation
Center. With significant state and federal support that can be made
available through the USDA Forest Service as facilitated through this
bill, the Reforestation Center, when fully operational, will be able to
provide up to five million seedlings annually. These seedlings will be
acclimated to harsh Southwestern growing conditions and, with
appropriate planting strategies, can have much higher survival rates.
H.R. 5015 ``Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration Act of 2023''

H.R. 5015 ``Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration Act of
2023'' would amend the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) to
authorize the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the
Forest Service, to enter into contracts, grants, and agreements with
various institutions, including institutions of higher education, for
the purposes of collecting and maintaining native seeds and for
producing seedlings for the purposes of revegetation. The bill is
needed because funds currently made available in the IIJA for
reforestation and revegetation include funding for the Department of
the Interior and Department of Agriculture to purchase seedlings but
not for needed capacity development.
H.R. 5015 clarifies that the Forest Service can use the funding in
the IIJA that is intended for revegetation or reforestation after a
wildfire not only to purchase seedlings but also for the creation of
the capacity to make those seedlings available, namely, the collection
and maintenance of the native seeds needed to grow the seedlings and
the production of the seedlings themselves. The allowances made in the
bill would support the work of the Agricultural Experiment Station's
John T. Harrington Forestry Research Center and the New Mexico
Reforestation Center. Such support would enable the Centers to continue
to conduct research that would improve the country's ability to meet
its significant reforestation needs, particularly in the West and
Southwest.
Section 40804, subsection (9) of the IIJA currently provides
funding to the Forest Service that can be used for the development of
seedling production capacity. However, the funding available in this
subsection is not sufficient to provide the infrastructure necessary to
produce the five million seedlings per year needed to reforest the
Southwest. Additional proposals have been made to amend this bill that
would free other subsections pertaining to revegetation and
reforestation of federal lands to include the capacity building
necessary to produce the seedlings needed. I strongly recommend that
these proposals be considered.
Lastly, the workforce needed to do this vital work needs to be
educated and trained. The concluding section of this bill further
clarifies that institutions of higher education are eligible for
funding under the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program to
provide employment or training in the collection, maintenance, and
production of native seeds for the purpose of revegetation or
reforestation. This is in recognition that not only the facilities but
also a workforce is needed to conduct reforestation activities.
Conclusion

Forests play an important economic and ecosystem role for our
country, especially in the West and in New Mexico. Persistent droughts
and changing climates are increasing existing wildfire, disease, and
pest risks and exacerbating forest damage and loss. These losses have
significantly increased the need for reforestation. New Mexico State
University and its partners understand the importance of forests and
reforestation needs and are making significant investments to ensure
that they are prepared to meet current and future challenges. H.R. 5015
would make resources available that are desperately needed if we are to
succeed.

References

Gleason, Megan. ``Reforestation Center Aims to Replant Trees in
Northern NM Burn Scar.'' July 18, 2022. Source NM. https://
sourcenm.com/2022/07/18/reforestation-center-aims-to-replant-trees-in-
northern-nm-burn-scar/#::text=The%20goal%20for%
20the%20New,Peak%2DCalf%20Canyon%20footprint%2C%20Burney. Accessed 17
March 2024.

Oswalt, Sonja. ``The State of the Forest.'' USDA Forest Service. April
22, 2019. https://www.fs.usda.gov/features/state-forest. Accessed 14
March 2024.

Oswalt, Sonja N., W. Brad Smith, Patrick D. Miles, and Scot A. Pugh.
``Forest Resources of the United States, 2017.'' USDA Forest Service
General Technical Report. 2019. https://www.fs.usda.gov/research/
treesearch/57903#. Accessed 14 March 2024.

Southwest Coordination Center. N.D. ``SW Historical Fire and Resource
Data.'' No Date. https://gacc.nifc.gov/swcc/predictive/intelligence/
Historical/Fire_and_Resource _Data/Historical_Fires_Acres.htm. Accessed
15 March 2024.

United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service.
``Reforestation.'' No date. https://www.fs.usda.gov/managing-land/
forest-management/vegetation-management/
reforestation#::text=Uncharacteristic%20wildfire%2C%20insect%20infestat
ions% 2C%20diseases,on%20National%20Forest%20System%20lands. Accessed
16 March 2024.

______

Mr. Curtis [presiding]. Thank you, Dr. Lillywhite. I now
recognize Mr. Wade Garrett, Vice President for Advocacy and
Strategic Relationships at the Utah Farm Bureau.
Mr. Garrett, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WADE GARRETT, VICE PRESIDENT FOR ADVOCACY AND
STRATEGIC RELATIONS, UTAH FARM BUREAU FEDERATION, SANDY, UTAH

Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, and members of the Subcommittee, for allowing me the
opportunity to be here today. As a former congressional
staffer, I understand the work and effort that goes into these
hearings, so thank you for your time.
My family operates a cow-calf operation in Juab County, in
the central part of Utah, where seven generations of Garretts
have cultivated and showed stewardship over private and public
lands. I am also a volunteer with Future Farmers of America and
Vice President of Advocacy for Utah Farm Bureau, and work on
their strategic relations.
Healthy public lands and sound management are critical to
each of these organizations. Before the Farm Bureau, I was a
congressional staffer overseeing public lands and natural
resource policy. In this role, I learned that farmers and
ranchers deserve a seat at the table, but also the importance
of having all voices represented. I am proud of the Utah Farm
Bureau and the views and policies we have adopted to put the
farmers first, while also being open and receptive to different
points of view.
Our mission at the Utah Farm Bureau is to inspire all
families to connect, succeed, and grow through the miracle of
agriculture. We are the state's largest volunteer organization
of farmers and ranchers, with just over 34,000 member families.
Public lands are the backbone of our state ranching,
recreation, and tourism economies. Nearly 70 percent of Utah is
comprised of federally owned public lands, which means that
each for each sector to thrive, coordination, collaboration,
and compromise are paramount to our collective successes.
The continued multiple use of Federal lands in Utah is
critical for our economy, way of life. For example, our family
operates grazing permits on the Mount Nebo Forest located in
the Uinta-Wasatch National Forest on spring and fall days, when
moving cattle will come into contact with a variety of users
who embrace the multiple use and sustained yield ethic. Young
campers look at our cowboys in awe, with images of the Old West
in their eyes. Hikers will also stop for pictures and talk to
us about the conditions. Some bikers power by on their way to
the top of the mountain, while others race past us on their way
down. We drive our trucks on improved roads and never drive in
the section designated as wilderness. None of this happens by
accident. Collaboration, planning, coordination across Federal
agencies and different stakeholder groups are what enable
multiple use and sustained yield of our public lands.
I am here on behalf of Utah Farm Bureau to support
Representative Curtis' H.R. 7006, a bill to keep public lands
public. Public lands are a critical part of the ranching
community in Utah. I personally know our local forest
supervisors and BLM field managers where we graze cattle. If
Natural Asset Companies, private companies, were allowed to
manage public lands, myself and other farmers and ranchers
throughout Utah would lose those local relationships. Land
management regulations would be at the whim of these private
owners who closed off access, cherry-pick their preferred use,
and close land altogether. We truly value Representative Curtis
and his leadership on these important topics.
I am also here to support H.R. 5499, the Congressional
Oversight of the Antiquities Act. The Antiquities Act has given
the president unilateral power to make the use decisions in
large areas that impact local communities, ranchers, and all
other land use. As we have seen in southern Utah, decisions
made in Washington can create acrimony and discord, and lead to
reversals and re-reversals on these important pieces of land.
I will stop there because I am out of time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Garrett follows:]
Prepared Statement of Wade Garrett, Vice President for Advocacy &
Strategic Relations, Utah Farm Bureau Federation
on H.R. 5499 and H.R. 7006

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on H.R.
5499 and H.R. 7006. The Utah Farm Bureau Federation supports both
bills, and I hope that my testimony will add positively to the
committee's deliberations.
My name is Wade Garrett, and I am the Vice President for Advocacy
and Strategic Relations at the Utah Farm Bureau Federation. The Utah
Farm Bureau Federation is our state's largest voluntary organization of
farmers and ranchers. Our organization consists of over 35,000 members
committed to protecting Utah's farms and ranches and ensuring a safe,
fresh, and locally grown food supply. Our members live in all of Utah's
29 counties and belong to county Farm Bureaus, which, in turn, comprise
the Utah Farm Bureau Federation. Our mission is to inspire all Utah
families to connect, succeed, and grow through the miracle of
agriculture.
In addition to my work for the Utah Farm Bureau, I am a volunteer
with the Future Farmers of America, and my family runs a farm in Nephi,
Utah, where seven generations of Garretts have cultivated and stewarded
private and public land. I was born and raised in Juab County, a rural
county roughly three times the size of the state of Rhode Island with a
population of 12,155 people. Throughout my life I have been fortunate
to travel to all corners of Utah and to meet Utahns from all walks of
life. Prior to working for the Utah Farm Bureau, I worked as a staffer
for former Congressman Jason Chaffetz. During my time with
Representative Chaffetz' office, I spent considerable time visiting
Utah's public lands, including Utah's national monuments. I have a deep
love for rural Utah, its people, and its lands.
Utah is a public lands state, with roughly 66 percent of our land
owned by the federal government. Utah is second only to Nevada in the
overall percentage of land owned by the federal government. With such a
sizable portion of our state's land owned or managed by the federal
government, the economic viability of many industries including
ranching, logging, mining, recreation, and tourism, hinges on decisions
made by our federal land management agencies.
This hearing comes at a crucial time, as Utah is once again in the
national spotlight regarding national monuments and other restrictions
on federal public lands. Members of the Utah Farm Bureau are watching
debates surrounding federal lands closely and we are actively
participating in planning processes. Utah Farm Bureau is troubled by
the trajectory our federal lands are on in Utah and throughout the
West. We are concerned about changes that federal land management
agencies are proposing or recently made, including restrictive land
management plans for Grand Staircase-Escalante and Bears Ears National
Monuments, creation of a sprawling new monument in our neighboring
state of Arizona, significant expansions of wilderness areas and areas
of critical environmental concern, and the Bureau of Land Management's
(BLM) proposal to issue conservation leases and to elevate conservation
as a use on par with other multiple uses.
Utah is at the epicenter of debates surrounding the establishment
of national monuments using the Antiquities Act. The Antiquities Act
authorizes the President of the United States to ``declare by public
proclamation historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures,
and other objects of historic or scientific interest that are situated
on land owned or controlled by the Federal Government to be national
monuments.'' The Act further states that the monument ``shall be
confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and
management of the objects to be protected.'' For more than a century,
the president has had the power to unilaterally designate federal lands
as a national monument without the input or consent of Congress, state,
and local governments, or affected citizens. The designation of Grand
Staircase-Escalante and Bears Ears National Monuments in Utah were
clear abuses of the original intent of the Antiquities Act, as they set
aside far more land than was necessary to meet the law's purpose.
The Antiquities Act is itself a relic of the past as it pre-dates
the establishment of five states, the establishment of the Bureau of
Land Management and the National Park Service, and the enactment of
major environmental and archeological resource protection laws. Use of
the Antiquities Act is now a blunt tool of the executive that does not
provide for the robust public process that Americans expect and that
decisions of this magnitude merit in the modern era. If added
protections for specific objects of historic or scientific interest are
needed, these proposals should be thoroughly vetted by Congress and
receive signoff from local elected officials. The scale of Antiquities
Act designations in recent decades goes far beyond the executive
authority that Congress originally intended. Such abuses of the
Antiquities Act hinder economic opportunity and remove decision making
from the states and private citizens. These designations affect grazing
rights, water rights, and even access to state and private lands.
Utah Farm Bureau supports H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the
Antiquities Act, sponsored by Representative Miller-Meeks. This
commonsense bill provides a vital check on the president's ability to
designate monuments using the Antiquities Act by requiring
congressional approval of presidential declarations within six months
of a designation or before the last day of the sitting Congress during
which the monument was designated, whichever comes first. We believe
Congress, in coordination with the executive branch, and with the input
and approval of state and local governments, should be the body to
designate national monuments.
As mentioned above, Utah Farm Bureau is also concerned about
restrictive land use designations. We support the multiple-use concept
of federal lands, recognizing that definable land areas have dominant-
use capability, which should be recognized with the concept of multiple
uses without the total exclusion of other uses. For these reasons, Utah
Farm Bureau also supports H.R. 7006 sponsored by Representative Curtis
to prohibit natural asset companies (NACs) from entering into any
agreement with respect to land in Utah or natural assets on or in such
land.
On October 4, 2023, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) published in the Federal Register a public notice entitled
``Self-Regulatory Organizations; New York Stock Exchange LLC; Notice of
Filing of Proposed Rule Change to Amend the NYSE Listed Company Manual
to Adopt Listing Standards for Natural Asset Companies.'' Although the
NYSE later withdrew the Proposed Rule, we continue to have serious
concerns about NACs and their potential creation and growth in the
future.

The Proposed Rule defined a NAC as:

``. . . corporation whose primary purpose is to actively
manage, maintain, restore (as applicable), and grow the value
of natural assets and their production of ecosystem services.
In addition, where doing so is consistent with the company's
primary purpose, the company will seek to conduct sustainable
revenue-generating operations. Sustainable operations are those
activities that do not cause any material adverse impact on the
condition of the natural assets under a NAC's control and that
seeks to replenish the natural resources being used.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 88 FR 68811.

Under the Proposed Rule, if a proposed NAC met the definition
conceptualized above, then the new NACs would be expected to hold
ecological performance rights (EPRs), which are defined as ``the value
of natural assets and production of ecosystem services.'' The NACs
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
would:

``. . . acquire the ecological performance rights of a
designated area by entering into an agreement with the natural
asset owner (e.g., a governmental entity or private landowner)
to obtain a license with respect to such rights.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 88 FR 68814.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Utah Farm Bureau is extremely concerned about this concept,
especially considering the BLM's recent Conservation and Landscape
Health Proposed Rule. The BLM's Proposed Rule redefines multiple use to
include ``conservation'' as a use. To further ``conservation'' as a
use, the BLM would issue ``conservation leases'' to businesses,
individuals, and certain government bodies, who would hold the leases
to further the ``conservation'' purposes. We believe that BLM adding
``conservation'' as a use and issuing conservation leases violates the
law and clear congressional intent under the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act. We encourage Congress to act swiftly should BLM
finalize its Conservation and Landscape Health Proposed Rule. Utah Farm
Bureau also notes that BLM's Proposed Rule would allow businesses to
purchase a conservation lease (coincidentally which is for 10 years,
the same as the minimum licensing requirements under the SEC's Proposed
Rule \3\) and thereby become eligible for NAC listing as they would
hold EPRs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 88 FR 68815.

The Proposed Rule for NACs also included reporting requirements for
NACs on what types of activities may be engaged in by the NAC. The
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposed Rule states:

``The NAC will be prohibited from engaging directly or
indirectly in unsustainable activities. These are defined as
activities that cause any material adverse impact on the
condition of the natural assets under its control, and that
extract resources without replenishing them (including, but not
limited to, traditional fossil fuel development, mining,
unsustainable logging, or perpetuating industrial agriculture).
The NAC will be prohibited from using its funds to finance such
unsustainable activities'' (emphasis added).

Utah Farm Bureau is concerned about the ambiguous phrasing in this
part of the Proposed Rule, especially the phrase ``perpetuating
industrial agriculture.'' Not only are we unclear on what that even
means, we are frustrated by the hostility the Proposed Rule shows
toward agriculture. We take seriously the need to feed and clothe the
world. Agriculture, including livestock grazing on federal lands, is
vital to the economies of rural Utah. In addition to the important
economic role that livestock grazing plays, livestock grazing
contributes to carbon sequestration through managed landscapes. Utah
Farm Bureau opposes involuntary reductions in grazing and will oppose
any efforts by BLM or NACs to that end. Appropriate grazing provides
science-backed environmental benefits, and allowing environmental
organizations, corporations, or members of the public to lease public
lands for the exclusion of other uses runs counter to the principles of
multiple use and sustained yield. Livestock grazing is also an
effective management tool used to remove noxious and invasive weeds.
Using grazing as a management tool also reduces fire risk and is much
less expensive than other management options.
For the reasons stated above, Utah Farm Bureau wholeheartedly
supports a prohibition on NACs from entering into any agreement with
respect to land in Utah or natural assets on or in such land. We
appreciate Congressman Curtis' efforts to prevent federal overreach and
to protect the livelihoods of our farming and ranching communities in
the state of Utah.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before your
subcommittee.

______

Mr. Tiffany. OK. Yes, thank you very much.
I want to thank all the witnesses for their testimony. Now,
we are going to go to Member questions. And first of all, I
will go to Representative Curtis from Utah for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ms. Ranking Member. It
is great to be here. What a delight to have not just one, but
two witnesses from Utah today.
And Mr. Garrett, you not only represent Utah's Farm Bureau,
but, as you said, you are a rancher and you live this every
day. And you understand, as well as all the Utahns, how our
Federal lands are shared and shared responsibly between
conserving, between recreation, between energy, and ranching,
and grazing.
But recently, there was a proposal by the SEC that would
allow Natural Asset Companies to tie up large portions of these
lands in order to meet some of their ESG goals. That would
include the public land in Utah. So, those of you who are not
familiar with Utah, perhaps you hear me say this a lot, I don't
think I can say it enough, two-thirds of all the land in Utah
are public lands. Just stop and think about that number for a
minute: two-thirds.
In the rural part of my district, 90 percent of these
counties are owned by the Federal Government. So, think for a
minute about taking 90 percent of the property tax away from
local government. How do you pay for police, fire, roads,
parks, schools, and everything else that local government is
supposed to do?
Now imagine locking up those public lands so that they
can't be used for the shared uses that we have talked about
today, and you can see why this is a problem.
And I want to be really clear. And, Mr. Garrett, you can
probably help me on this. Sometimes I call our ranchers and
farmers the original environmentalists, and I think they
sometimes take that as a little bit of an insult. But could you
just tell us why, in the heart, farmers and ranchers care
deeply about the land and taking care of, preserving the land?
Mr. Garrett. Absolutely. As I mentioned, my son is seventh
generation on this land, and this land has been improved even
in my lifetime, dramatically, in ways that we use that, ways
that we protect riparian areas, ways that we let other folks,
as a multiple use, use that.
Mr. Curtis. Yes, and in the end, if this land is not
preserved and protected, then you don't have that ability to
ranch and use it. So, your livelihoods are deeply dependent on
conservation and protecting this land.
And I simply bring that up because as we push back on Wall
Street and their attempt to lock these lands up, it is not an
attempt to somehow destroy these lands or not to preserve them,
but it is actually to protect them and make sure we can keep
using them.
Mr. Garrett. Absolutely.
Mr. Curtis. So, Mr. Garrett, just in your mind, what
happens if large sections of these lands are able to be locked
up? What happens to you and those around you?
Mr. Garrett. It decimates our rural economies. Tourism is
an important piece, but the ranching and that piece of it
provides for tire stores, grocery stores, other services,
schools that are in those areas. And if those go away, the
tourism economy is not enough to sustain them, you have been in
several parts of those areas; that does not happen.
But through sustained use and proper use, it allows these
rural areas to thrive, have an economy, and provide for those
in those areas.
Mr. Curtis. Yes, and in some ways make up for that loss of
revenue that you don't collect by property tax.
Mr. Garrett. Absolutely.
Mr. Curtis. Ms. McConkie, you have an incredibly
interesting situation that also is difficult to understand if
you are not from the West, but you literally own thousands of
parcels that look like little checkerboard squares around the
state, and your mission is to maximize those, and that revenue
goes primarily to our schools.
What happens to one of your checkerboard squares if you are
locked around it by these NACs?
Ms. McConkie. Thank you, Congressman.
The use of surrounding Federal lands affects trust lands
significantly. Little, scattered 1-square-mile pieces of land
are difficult for industry to put money into. It is just not a
large-enough area.
And there are also access issues, as well. Having to get
access to these pieces across restrictively-managed Federal
lands is difficult, and it makes our land have significantly
less utility.
Mr. Curtis. Great. This is why I have introduced the bill.
I urge my colleagues to support it, and I yield my time.
Mr. Tiffany [presiding]. The gentleman yields, and now I
turn to Representative Leger Fernandez for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you
all for your testimonies. And while I am sorry I had to step
out for a minute, I have reviewed the written testimonies and
very much appreciate it.
And thank you, Dr. Lillywhite, for coming here to share the
experiences of what you have been doing at the Research Center
in northern New Mexico.
There are a couple of things I think are wonderful. People
pointed out how much public lands there might be in Utah. There
are huge public lands in New Mexico. Mora happens to be one of
our counties that has not as much public land, it has a lot of
private land because the land grants were actually recognized,
right? We are going back when we talk about how long we have
been on the land. I am a 17th, add another decade, add another
10 generations New Mexican on the European side. So, there is
this long tradition, and I think it is important to talk about
the fact that ranchers and farmers and people who live in the
forested areas are amazing conservationists, and your program
works with those people on the land.
Tell us a little bit about the work that you have been
doing at the Research Center with regards to the importance of
the research, and looking at what are the kind of seedlings
that have the higher survival rates, because that is key if we
want to get as many of those seedlings actually growing into
trees.
Dr. Lillywhite. Yes, thank you very much for the question,
and I certainly agree with the people who work in and around
the national forest and forests in general. They are
conservation minded.
The science center is focused on reforestation. It is one
of the few forestry programs in the country that focuses
primarily on reforestation. And I will say it from the outset,
I am not a forester. I am not a forest scientist.
So, in my conversations with them, I work with them on a
regular basis, it is really a combination of the entire system:
so collecting the seeds, the native seeds, you heard that today
from the Forest Service, how important that is; stressing,
drought-stressing the seedlings as they are growing, so they
are prepared as they are planted into the soil; and then also
they use a special planting technique, where they plant the
trees into clusters and let them grow and then regenerate
naturally after that. So, it is a combination of that entire
supply chain where they achieve those really impressive
survival rates.
I said they are approaching 80 percent. I talked to the
forester several days ago and he said they have had some
experiments where they have gone up to above 90 percent. So,
you can think about the cost savings associated with that, if
you can keep that many alive during the reforestation process.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And I really appreciated in your
witness testimony, as well, that you talked about the
importance of developing the workforce. It is not just, let's
grow the seedlings, but we need the skilled workforce to be
able to actually do the planting, to do the research, to follow
all of this. Can you share a little bit about whether you think
that changing the Seedlings for Sustainable Habitat Restoration
to open up more opportunities to support seedlings production
like what you are doing at the Harrington Research Center is
important not just for New Mexico, but for across the country?
And I know you have been part of the discussions of how do
we modify the bill to make it reflect what we need today.
Dr. Lillywhite. Absolutely. It is critical. We don't have
the resources available, as a land grant university, to be able
to do the research, to be able to do the workforce development
without support from funding such as the Act that we are
talking about.
It has been made available. As you talked about, we have
received some funding. There are other places in the Act that
we could adjust and make those funds available in some of the
subsections that are in the re-vegetation, re-forestation
section.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. That is the intent, is we want to
unlock sources of funding that already exist but that are not
available to you now. Is that kind of how you see it?
Dr. Lillywhite. Yes, absolutely. We want to help, and we
have the research to be able to help. Our partners, Highlands
University and their work with workforce development, we have
the resources, the human resources to be able to do it, but we
need the financial resources to be able to continue.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. OK, thank you so much.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields back. I now turn to the
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Bentz, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is extremely
interesting testimony.
I am so happy you are all here. I am from Oregon. My
district is three-quarters of the state. Three-quarters of a
100-square-mile state, almost, is in my district. The county I
live in is about 164 miles north-south, and it is about 60
miles wide, and there has been a constant battle against a
monument that was suggested 15 years ago. And, fortunately, we
avoided it, and it is now back on the table, and we hope not
very close to being acted upon.
But instead what has happened is the BLM has come in with
an RMP that, frankly, does almost everything the monument would
have done. It doesn't do it all at once, it simply comes in and
says this is the part of the land that is going to be subjected
to a new rulemaking.
One of the things I wanted to mention, though, I am going
to mention it to Commissioner Poschman, and I am going to
mention it just because it reflects so many things that are
incorrect when one thinks about a monument.
On the second page of your testimony, you say polling has
consistently demonstrated public support for national
monuments, the supermajority of Westerners love national
monuments and support the protections. In my county, which has
a very small population of about 30,000 people, we had a vote
some time ago, and the vote was 20-to-1 against the monument.
And it has to do with the nature of the activities. It is
not like Colorado, with big, sharp, pokey mountains and all
kinds of extremely wealthy movie stars moving in. We don't have
any of those. What we have is an immense space that is
incredibly flat and incredibly empty. I grew up in the middle
of it on a ranch. And we would drive 60 or 70 miles to go to
church on Sunday, and 20 of that was over a gravel road, so it
is empty. And to suggest that somehow that space is going to be
the better for robbing the people there of their opportunity to
make a living is ridiculous. And I know, I have lived it, and
many of my clients in my law practice are currently living it.
So, I am irked when I see that because, of course, it may
well be the supermajority of Westerners, of people in LA,
Seattle, Portland, yes, of San Francisco. They may want
monuments, but the people that actually try to live out on that
land, and do their very, very best to put out the fires when
they start that otherwise would destroy the sage grouse that we
are trying to protect, or make a living on the cutting edge of
marginal existence, no.
And to suggest that somehow there will be billions of
dollars of people coming in to hunt and fish, no, I don't think
so, because the areas that are being identified inside the
RMPs, the management plans put together by the BLM, they are
roadless. So, if you want to get to water, good luck finding
water to begin with, and second, you are going to walk 20 or 30
miles. That isn't going to happen. There are not going to be
huge sales of fishing gear up in the northern part of the
county for activities that are never going to occur 100 miles
to the south.
So, I am just irked. It is so removed from the reality of
people trying to make a living on the land. And, of course, Mr.
Garrett, I think my family is on the fifth or sixth generation
also in that part of the world, ekeing out a living after all
these years trying to make a cow pay for the mortgage. I get
it. So, my question to you is, what would you say or say again,
if you will, why it is so bad for absentee owners to try to
take care of the land that you have lived on all these years,
you know what I mean by absentee owners?
Mr. Garrett. Yes. If you are not an absentee owner, you are
there day to day, operations of what happens on that land. And
it becomes priority, how that land is managed, for my
generation to carry on.
As I mentioned, I would like my son to be the next
generation. And if I don't manage that in such a way that he
can be that next generation, it ends with me, and that weighs
heavily on me in so many ways. And an absentee owner doesn't
have that concern. It is the bottom line, or the dollar that
comes to them, not the whole overall picture of making that
land productive for generations to come.
Mr. Bentz. And more to the point, they are not there to
protect the land when the fires start.
Mr. Garrett. They are not.
Mr. Bentz. They are not there to try to make it better,
because it lends itself, your activities on the land, to do
that. And I know this. I mean, I have been raised on a ranch.
I am out of time. I am very, very happy for the panel. And
with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Garrett. I guess I will add one thing. My son also
loves to hunt wildlife. Part of making sure wildlife is there,
as well, is you have to manage the ranching piece of it
correctly, too, to have all the above there, and I think that
is so important.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. I ask unanimous consent the following letter
and attached comments from three different organizations
representing stakeholders involved in the power sports industry
and related recreational pursuits be added to the record for
today's hearing.
The letter expresses support for H.R. 6085, sponsored by
Representative Hageman. The letter states concern with the lack
of public support for the draft Resource Management Plan. They
also address how multiple uses can and does exist with
conservation in mind by stating the public does not support the
designation of more than 1.5 million acres as ACECs and that
lands in the field office can be sustainably managed for
multiple uses while providing for conservation of the lands.
Specifically, these groups include Motorcycle Industry
Council, Specialty Vehicle Institute of America, and
Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association.
And without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

January 17, 2024

Project Manager, RSFO RMP
BLM Rock Springs Field Office
280 Highway 191 North
Rock Springs, WY 82901

To Whom It May Concern:

On behalf of the Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC), Specialty
Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA), and Recreational Off-Highway
Vehicle Association (ROHVA)--together referenced as the Associations,
thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on The Rock Springs
RMP Revision Draft EIS.
The powersports industry (motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
and recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs or side-by-sides) are a
$47.7 billion/year industry in the United States with a significant
majority of the vehicles being utilized off-road. This includes dual
sport and adventure touring motorcycles which are the quickest growing
segment of motorcycle sales.
The Associations, off-highway vehicle enthusiasts, and other
recreationists strive to support collaborative processes to develop
consensus on management of shared public lands. This holds true in
Wyoming where public lands provide significant recreation
opportunities. We were pleased that following the release of the Draft
RMP, Wyoming Governor Mark Gordon ``. . . assembled a task force
representing diverse Wyoming interests--Wyoming House of
Representatives, Wyoming Senate, conservation, economic development and
tourism, livestock, local government, mining, motorized access, oil and
gas, renewable energy and utilities, and sportsmen and hunting--and
charged the task force with developing consensus recommendations for
revising the Draft RMP to meet the needs of Wyoming stakeholders.''

The Task Force noted that ``Because the task force needed to
finalize its recommendation before the end of the public comment period
on January 17, 2024, the collaborative process was greatly accelerated
and the task force did not address every issue that they deemed
important.'' Despite that rush we are encouraged by the progress the
Task Force made and strongly support many of its findings including
number 22 of its Agreements in principle:

22: The majority of the task force has grave concerns about the
adoption of new or expanded ACECs in Alternative B, because of
the potential negative impacts these ACECs could have on the
economy, customs, and culture in SW Wyoming. The task force did
not have time to develop nuanced approaches to the management
in these proposed ACECs or propose different management
designations.

A major concern with the Draft EIS is the nebulous nature of ACEC
designations--particularly sweeping and unprecedentedly large
designations of ACECs in an RMP for a single Field Office (FO).
Alternative B would designate more than 1.5 million acres of Rock
Springs FO as ACEC potentially impacting access and usage of the public
lands. Consider that ACEC areas currently comprise 286,000 acres of
Rock Springs. Alternative B would be a massive increase--quintupling
the ACEC area in Rock Springs and more than doubling the 688,491 acres
of ACECs currently designated in all of Wyoming's 10 Field Offices.

This even though nobody knows what the designation of over 1.5
million acres of FO lands as ACEC will mean in practice. Consider a
common complaint about ACEC as described by Senator Barasso and his
colleagues in a letter to Director Stone-Manning:

. . . this designation creates more ambiguity around the BLM's
use of ACECs. The BLM national office has no accurate database
of ACECs. There is no standard format for reporting information
about ACECs within the agency or to the public. The BLM in
recent years has used ACECs to restrict recreational demands,
obliterate grazing rights, and hinder economic development in
lower-income communities. The absence of a standardized format
of ACEC data, while the BLM pushes for more land to be
designated as ACECs, is already leading to a growing delta of
distrust of what this draft RMP could mean for future BLM land
decisions.

Further concerns are raised when it is understood that BLM is in
the process of implementing a rule that may dramatically redefine what
an ACEC is and does. From the Conservation Health Rule (emphasis
added):

As part of this rulemaking, the BLM proposes establishing
procedures that require consideration of ecosystem resilience,
landscape-level needs, and rapidly changing landscape
conditions in designating and managing ACECs. The BLM may also
revise the ACEC manual and develop an ACEC handbook to
integrate the existing rule as well as the changes proposed in
this rulemaking, if finalized, into policy. The BLM would thus
provide additional guidance for how to incorporate ACECs into
resource management decisions in a way that considers trade-
offs among environmental, social, and economic values during
land use planning.

Since the release of the Draft EIS BLM officials have maintained
that the designation of 1.5 million acres as ACEC would not impact any
existing recreational opportunities. A September 9, 2023, article in
the Cowboy State Daily includes a quote from Kimberlee Foster, field
manager for the BLM's Rock Springs office that captures this sentiment,
``The most frustrating thing for us is all of the misinformation out
there. We're not closing any areas to all hunters or people walking
their dogs or some of the other nonsense that has been out there.''
We submit that while it may be the intention (however unlikely)
that implementation of Alternative B will not limit recreational
opportunities at this time, nobody, including BLM officials, can know
what the designation of an area as an ACEC will mean in the coming
years given that BLM plans to ``. . . provide additional guidance for
how to incorporate ACECs into resource management decisions in a way
that considers trade-offs . . .'' We know that BLM intends to rework
which lands can be designated as ACEC and how those lands will be
managed. What we don't know is what the outcomes will mean for
recreation, or other multiple uses, as the proposed Conservation and
Landscape Health Rule has received heavy pushback from the public and
has yet to be finalized. We believe it would be an error to designate
more than 1.5 million acres in the FO as ACEC when it is unknown what
that designation will entail.

We also support the Task Force's agreement in principle number 20:

20: The task force supports responsible recreational use across
the field office. Motorized and non-motorized access should be
continued for both dispersed and developed recreation. We
request that the field office invest more staffing and funding
resources to support recreational use, wise management,
monitoring, and mitigation as needed to address appropriate
areas for expanded or concentrated use, necessary
infrastructure improvements, and areas that need special
protections. These efforts are necessary for both conservation
special areas and special recreational places. The agency
should work with local stakeholders, including state and local
governments, to develop place-based plans that can address
recreational needs while maintaining traditional uses within
the Field Office area.

We support this agreement in principle both because BLM has a
multiple use mission that includes providing for recreation and because
we believe it better captures the current sentiment of the local public
and the opinions of the people who live, work, and recreate in the area
than Alternative B.

The Draft EIS describes the scoping process for the development of
the RMP revision:

The initial public scoping meetings for the Rock Springs RMP
revision were held in Lander, Rock Springs, Lyman, and Farson,
Wyoming, on February 28, and March 1, 2, and 3, 2011
respectively. During the four scoping meetings, 85 people
registered their attendance. The public meetings for the CTTMP
were held in Rock Springs, Lyman, and Farson, Wyoming on
November 13, 14, and 15, 2012, respectively. During the three
public meetings, 44 people registered their attendance. The
public meetings for the consent decree for wild horses were
held in Rock Springs and Rawlins, Wyoming on September 11 and
12, 2013, respectively.

Since the vast majority of public input took place nearly 10 years
before the BLM issued its Conservation and Landscape Health proposed
rule which indicates that dramatic changes are forthcoming to the
management of ACECs, we ask--how could the Draft EIS adequately reflect
the current comments and sentiment of the public? Even in the extremely
unlikely event that comments urged the FO to designate more than 1.5
million acres as ACEC, they couldn't have known that the BLM would seek
to change how ACEC are managed a decade later. Designation of the land
as ACEC today may not come with an intent to close the lands to
recreational access, but future field managers or Presidential
Administrations may feel otherwise. Having the land in ACEC designation
would only expedite efforts to close lands in the future.
In conclusion, the Associations urge BLM to rescind the Draft EIS
and seek to develop consensus through the collaborative process that
has been established by the Task Force assembled by Governor Gordon. It
is clear that the effected public does not support the designation of
more than 1.5 million acres as ACEC, and that lands in the FO can be
sustainably managed for multiple uses, while providing for conservation
of the lands for posterity.
Thank you for your consideration.

Sincerely,

Duane Taylor,
Director of Safe and Responsible Use Programs

______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

March 18, 2024

The Honorable Harriet Hageman
U.S. House of Representatives
1531 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Representative Hageman:

On behalf of the Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC), Specialty
Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA), and Recreational Off-Highway
Vehicle Association (ROHVA)--together referenced as the Associations, I
write in support of H.R. 6085, To prohibit the implementation of the
Draft Resource Management Plan and Environmental Impact Statement for
the Rock Springs RMP Revision, Wyoming, and for other purposes. As you
know, H.R. 6085 would bar the Secretary of Interior from allowing BLM
to ``finalize, implement, administer, or enforce'' the draft plan.

This is consistent with the Associations' comments to the BLM on
the draft RMP, which concluded:

. . . the Associations urge BLM to rescind the Draft EIS and
seek to develop consensus through the collaborative process
that has been established by the Task Force assembled by
Governor Gordon. It is clear that the effected public does not
support the designation of more than 1.5 million acres as ACEC,
and that lands in the FO can be sustainably managed for
multiple uses, while providing for conservation of the lands
for posterity.

Please see the attached full comments from the Associations, which
outline our concerns regarding the proposal in more detail.

Thank you for your consideration.

Sincerely,

Duane Taylor,
Director of Safe and Responsible Use Programs

______

Mr. Tiffany. I am going to take a few minutes for
questioning, then.
Mr. Poschman, one of the goals of the Pitkin County Climate
Action Plan is to electrify Pitkin County's vehicle fleet.
Where should we get those minerals, the United States or
somewhere else in the world?
Mr. Poschman. Thank you. That is an excellent question. I
think we have a climate crisis here. A lot of people believe
that. Whatever it takes would be my personal response to that.
But I have to say, I am not against mineral extraction. It
has to be done properly, and it has to be done in the right
places. What we have seen is----
Mr. Tiffany. So, if doing whatever it takes, does that
include having minerals mined by children overseas?
Mr. Poschman. That is a controversial issue, and we all
think it is repugnant that it happens. I also know that the
battery industry is moving away from cobalt, so that may be a
non-issue in the near future.
It is unfortunate that people are exploited around the
world, but it is a reality. And as industries change, you will
find them doing whatever, as the free markets allow access.
Mr. Tiffany. What if they don't change?
Mr. Poschman. I think it is going to change.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Sgamma, same question.
Ms. Sgamma. I can strongly state that child labor, slave
labor in China for solar panels is wrong and that seems pretty
obvious.
The thing is that, if we do it responsibly, we do oil and
natural gas development responsibly, we could do mining in the
United States. But there are those who want absolutely nothing
mined absolutely anywhere. So, we continue to see people say
there is a climate crisis----
Mr. Tiffany. The banana----
Ms. Sgamma [continuing]. But then they don't want to mine
for those minerals.
Mr. Tiffany. Excuse me a minute.
Ms. Sgamma. Sorry.
Mr. Tiffany. The banana principle, right? Build absolutely
nothing anywhere near anyone.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. Sorry to interrupt, go ahead.
Ms. Sgamma. No, I was wrapping up.
Mr. Tiffany. Oh, sorry to interrupt.
Director Bingham, in this latest iteration that they are
putting forward to you guys, did the BLM fulfill their
coordination responsibilities?
Mr. Bingham. They did not. That has been the major issue
with this whole process. It dates back into 2011, when it all
started with Alternatives B and C just as placeholders and
bookends that I have stated.
And then there was a break for 2 years, and then in 2015 we
worked on Alternative D, all the way up until 2022. There was a
lack of meetings in between, even from 2019 on. So, there was
little coordination or no coordination on Alternatives B and C
since 2015.
Mr. Tiffany. Director Bingham, if they continue in this
direction, are you going to be forced to take legal action to
get them to the table to coordinate?
Mr. Bingham. I think that is where we are heading, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. Director McConkie, same question. Are they
coordinating with the state of Utah? Are the Federal agencies,
in this case, the Bureau of Land Management, are they
coordinating with the state of Utah?
Ms. McConkie. I think, with the monument designations, that
has been severely lacking, and we have also had some
difficulties politically between our state and the Federal
Government as far as management of the Bears Ears Monument.
Mr. Tiffany. Will Utah be forced to take legal action to
get them to the table to coordinate?
Ms. McConkie. Utah actually already is in litigation over
the Bears Ears National Monument designation. They have been
for about a year and a half now.
Mr. Tiffany. Is part of that litigation surrounding the
responsibility of coordination contained in FLPMA?
Ms. McConkie. I am not an expert on that. I assume it
probably does.
Mr. Tiffany. Sure. And from what I understand from Mr.
Curtis, Utah public schools are losing revenue as a result of
continuing to shut down lands in Utah. Is that correct?
Ms. McConkie. When Federal lands are shut down, it
certainly affects state trust lands and the money we can
generate from those lands, which does affect public education.
Mr. Tiffany. And Mr. Bingham, is the same thing going to
happen if the Federal Government gets their way at this point,
if the Bureau of Land Management gets their way, that it will
reduce revenues for schools in Sweetwater County?
Mr. Bingham. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. That is the
prediction, and that is based on the revenue predictions in the
RMP.
Mr. Tiffany. So, think about it. We have a Federal
Government, via the Bureau of Land Management, that wants to
starve schools in America, starve public schools in America. It
is astounding that that type of stuff is happening, where under
the guise of the green fantasy, they will do anything. They
will allow children to mine in the Congo. They will allow
schools to be starved of revenue, all in the name of this green
fantasy. It is incredible to watch it happen.
Ms. Sgamma, I am going to come back to you with just one
final question here. It almost seems like it is a goal of the
current Administration to shut down natural resource use in
America. Generally speaking, is that what we are witnessing?
I know my colleague, who just stepped in the room here, has
said that there is a war on people in America. I mean, is that
what we are seeing here?
Ms. Sgamma. Well, we certainly see President Biden has
pledged to get rid of Federal oil. He stated that. We have seen
mineral withdrawals, for example, in Minnesota that would shut
off mining to the very minerals necessary for batteries and
renewable energy. So, yes, there is absolutely a banana
mentality in the United States.
Mr. Tiffany. I will yield, and I will turn now to the
gentlelady from Wyoming for 5 minutes for questioning, if you
are ready.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I am ready, and thank you all for
being here. I am sorry I was not able to be here for the
remainder of the hearing. I was over in a hearing in the
Judiciary Committee, focusing on regulatory reform and what it
is that we need to do in terms of addressing the agency
overreach that we have seen, especially in the last 30 years.
And I don't think that there is a better example of that than
what has been happening in Wyoming recently with the Rock
Springs District Office Resource Management Plan.
It is very apparent to me that that particular document and
the Alternative B that was chosen recently by the BLM last fall
is a test case, and it is an effort by the BLM to determine
whether they can turn our BLM lands essentially into National
Park Service lands, and to exclude all of us not only in terms
of oil and gas development, but mining, grazing, and anything
that produces revenue or generates revenue.
Coming from Wyoming, 48 percent of our surface estate is
owned by the Federal Government, 65 percent of our mineral
estate is also owned by the Federal Government. And what is
very apparent when you live in the West is that there are only
certain uses that can generate revenue on vast swaths of land.
It may not be that you always have oil and gas in a particular
area, or coal in a particular area, or uranium or grazing. But
together, when you look at the way that our lands are situated,
and you look at the nature of our vegetation, this
precipitation that we receive and those sorts of things, if you
block grazing, if you block oil and gas development, if you
block mining, there is no other way to generate revenue off of
literally tens of millions of acres of land. And as a result,
it not only is going to affect Wyoming and the western United
States, it will affect the country as a whole.
Director Bingham, I appreciate you being here today. We
appreciate all that you do both for Sweetwater County and for
the state of Wyoming. And you highlighted in your testimony
many of the grievances regarding the process by which the
preferred alternative, Alternative B, came about from the BLM.
You are not the first one to bring this to my attention, and I
want to highlight some testimony that I listened to from a
former BLM staffer given to Wyoming's joint Federal Natural
Resources Management Committee.
James Evans, who is a Rock Springs Field Office employee
while the draft RMP was being developed, testified that the
BLM's preferred alternative received very little time and
effort in its development. In his own words, he said, ``The
science and the work was all done on D,'' Alternative D. ``We
sat down, and in 1 week we did Alternatives B and C together.
After that was done, and we sat down with the cooperative
agencies, we spent the next 5 or 6 years developing Alternative
D.'' So, the BLM spent 1 week on Alternatives B and C and 5 to
6 years on Alternative D.
Director Bingham, can you expound on what you know about
the length of time that the BLM took to create what is now the
preferred alternative in a 3.6-million-acre Resource Management
Plan?
Mr. Bingham. Thank you, Congressman Hageman. Yes.
Back in 2012, when the cooperative meeting started, there
were just a few meetings related to Alternatives B and C. And
also during that time, there were a little bit of discussions
on Alternative D. So, there was a small amount of time in that
there were a few co-operator meetings, and then there was a
meeting at the end of the year, just one comment period for
those Alternatives B and C.
I did hear Mr. Evans' testimony. I was there, actually, at
the meeting via Zoom, where he was testifying in front of the
legislature, where it doesn't surprise me that it was done in
that time period. Just when you look at all the implications of
it, and that it was described to co-operators as a bookend, or
a placeholder, and then Alternative D was the compromise to
come in between.
So, from 2015 on, there was a break because of the sage
grouse issue. It was all focused on Alternative D, and we were
actually directed to only focus on Alternative D for the
remainder of that 5 to 6 years that you mentioned.
Ms. Hageman. So, the entire process for FLPMA and the way
that we manage our Federal lands, the stakeholders that are in
the communities themselves, this entire process is to ensure
that the people who are actually affected by the decisions are
engaged and able to participate, and that we are able to manage
these lands in the best interest of everybody involved, and
that is why you talk about things such as balance.
We look at recreation, we look at access for oil and gas,
we look at grazing. And not every single acre is used for all
of those different types of activities. But you do a balance,
and you do a mosaic, and you do a quilt, and you figure out how
we are going to manage these resources, really, ultimately, in
the best interests of the people of the United States of
America. Because they belong to us. They don't belong to Joe
Biden. They don't belong to the BLM. They belong to us. We are
the ones who have the right to access them.
And what is very apparent to me by what happened with this
particular RMP is this is the sign of the future for this
Administration and the folks on the other side of the aisle.
They are going to do everything in their power to deny us
access management and use to over 600 million acres of Federal
lands if they have the ability to do that. And this is just the
first step.
I thank you for the work that you have done. I thank
everybody for being here and the work that you do making our
lives better.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields, and we are going to
close up shop here.
I want to thank all of you for your testimony and taking
the time to travel here. I would like to thank all the
witnesses for their testimony and Members for their questions.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for our witnesses, and we will ask that you respond
to those in writing, please.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Subcommittee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on Monday,
March 25, 2024. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:23 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Tiffany

Statement for the Record
Kristen Brengel
Senior Vice President, Government Affairs
National Parks Conservation Association

NPCA position on H.R. 5499: Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities
Act

Since 1919, National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) has been
the leading voice of the American people in protecting and enhancing
our National Park System. On behalf of our 1.6 million members and
supporters nationwide, I wanted to share our position on H.R. 5499--
Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act ahead of a hearing in
the House Natural Resources Federal Lands Subcommittee hearing
scheduled for March 20, 2024.

H.R. 5499--Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act

NPCA is opposed to this legislation, which would fundamentally
undermine the Antiquities Act of 1906. The Antiquities Act is one of
our nation's most important conservation laws; it allows the president
of the United States to proclaim lands or waters under federal
jurisdiction as national monuments to maintain the integrity of natural
and cultural resources. Used to safeguard and preserve federal lands
and historical sites for all Americans to enjoy, 18 presidents
representing both political parties, have used this authority to
designate 163 national monuments. This accounts for about one-quarter
of the current sites within the National Park System. Congress has the
power to designate a national park or historic site. Congress can also
re-designate a presidentially proclaimed monument to become a national
park, as it has done with parks like the Grand Canyon and Acadia.

The Antiquities Act was passed by Congress with the understanding
that some nationally significant sites need urgent protection and
should not be subject to the lengthy path a bill can take. What was
true for the 59th Congress in 1906 is still true today: Congress can be
too inactive to act expeditiously and protect cultural or natural
resources. For example, Congress had four terms where it could have
designated the Harriet Tubman National Historical Park. Bipartisan and
bicameral legislation sat for years in committee with no substantive
action. It took a designation through the Antiquities Act to ensure the
first site was designated which later prompted Congress to act.

H.R. 5499 would mandate that any site designated by the Antiquities
Act would require Congressional approval within six months, or the end
of the current congress, or else the designation would be nullified. In
effect, Congress would only have to be inactive to strip a newly
designated site of its protections. Congress simply should not be the
sole guarantor of protecting America's natural and cultural heritage.

H.R. 5499 further undermines the intent of the Antiquities Act by
mandating that any sites that do not get Congressional approval as
monuments may not be included in any future monument designation for 25
years. The very point of the Antiquities Act is allowing a branch of
the federal government to move quickly to protect resources that are
under direct threat. H.R. 5499 creates an arbitrary timeline that
stipulates irreplaceable resources or significant historical sites be
potentially unprotected for a quarter century.

Both Presidents Trump and Biden recently used the Antiquities Act
to preserve historically significant sites, designating Camp Nelson and
the Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monuments respectively.
These sites, which both could have been protected by Congress and were
not, allow Americans to learn about our diverse national history.
President Obama protected Harriet Tubman National Historical Park
(formerly national monument) while President George W. Bush designated
the Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument. For the last 118 years
presidents, regardless of political party, have chosen to protect
American cultural and natural resources for the betterment of all. From
the Statue of Liberty to Zion National Park, the Antiquities Act has
been used to guarantee our most treasured places can be enjoyed and
learned from for generations to come. The protection and interpretation
of these sites represents the very best of American values. H.R. 5499
critically endangers that shared interest and we urge Congress to
reconsider this damaging legislation.
Thank you for considering our views.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Neguse

BACKCOUNTRY HUNTERS & ANGLERS

March 19, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

On behalf of Backcountry Hunters & Anglers (BHA), the voice for our
wild public lands, waters and wildlife, I write to express our
opposition to the Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act (H.R.
5499). This legislation aims to undermine the Antiquities Act which has
been used for more than a century to conserve our nation's public lands
and waters with benefits for hunters and anglers.
The Antiquities Act is a critical tool to conserve large
landscapes, secure important fish and wildlife habitat and safeguard
traditional hunting and angling opportunities on our public lands and
waters. National monuments have a long history of being designated
through the Antiquities Act with bipartisan support. Together, nine
Democratic and nine Republican presidents have established 161 national
monuments through their authority under the Antiquities Act.
By exerting congressional review over the Antiquities Act, H.R.
5499 threatens the use of an important administrative authority that
has conserved wild public lands and waters at risk from development.
This legislation would erode the foundation for more than a century of
conservation success and is wholly unnecessary as Congress already has
the authority to establish, modify or abolish national monuments in
addition to their authority to manage federal public lands through
other designations.
Landscapes conserved through the Antiquities Act have sustained
cherished opportunities for hunters and anglers, from the Upper
Missouri River Breaks National Monument in Montana which provides
opportunities for hunters to pursue iconic species like bighorn sheep
and sharp tailed grouse, to the Rio Grande Del Norte National Monument
in New Mexico where anglers can throw a line to Rio Grande cutthroat
trout.

BHA has consistently advocated for America's national monuments
system and the judicious use of the Antiquities Act as a way to
permanently conserve important large landscapes. Key to achieving this
outcome is a process that adheres to the following specific tenets:

Important fish and wildlife habitat must be conserved.

The monument proclamation must clearly stipulate that
management authority over fish and wildlife populations
will be retained by state fish and wildlife agencies.

Bureau of Land Management and U.S. Forest Service lands
must remain under the authority and jurisdiction of these
multiple-use focused land management agencies.

The monument proclamation must direct reasonable access
for fishing, hunting, and wildlife management, including
allowances for terrestrial habitat improvement and water
developments.

The input and guidance of hunters and anglers must be
included in management plans for national monuments.

The monument proposal must be developed through a public
process--one that includes hunters and anglers, as well as
appropriate state, Tribal, and local governments.

The monument proposal must gain support from local hunters
and anglers.

Hunting and fishing opportunities must be upheld and the
historical and cultural significance of our outdoor
traditions explicitly acknowledged in the monument
proclamation.

Once again, BHA reiterates our opposition to H.R. 5499 as this
legislation would undermine a bedrock conservation law, inhibiting
future opportunities to thoughtfully protect public resources with
unique values for the benefit of hunters and anglers.

Sincerely,

Kaden McArthur,
Government Relations Manager

______

Statement for the Record
Jocelyn Torres
Chief Conservation Officer and Interim Co-Executive Director
Conservation Lands Foundation

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on
legislation being considered in today's hearing of the Subcommittee on
Federal Lands.
The Conservation Lands Foundation is a national non-profit
organization headquartered in Durango, Colorado with staff in New
Mexico, Nevada, California, Utah, Idaho, and Washington, DC. We were
established in 2007 on the belief that public lands are best protected
when there is a national network of local advocates working to advance
a common conservation vision. Our mission is to protect, restore, and
expand the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM) National Conservation
Lands through education, advocacy, and partnerships. We advance this
mission through our support for more than 80 grassroots organizations
who steward and protect the BLM National Conservation Lands in their
communities.
With that mission in mind, Conservation Lands Foundation expresses
strong support for H.R. 6209, Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral
Pipeline Act, introduced by Rep. Dina Titus of Nevada, which ensures a
water pipeline project by Southern Nevada Water Authority (SNWA) may be
constructed underground through Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area
and adds over 9,000 acres to the NCA as important mitigation.
As the Bureau of Land Management does not have the authority to
grant right-of-way access to SNWA in a permanently protected area, this
project must first seek Congressional authority. The Horizon Lateral
project is an example of how infrastructure projects on National
Conservation Lands can have minimal ground disturbance, mitigate
anticipated impacts, and address community needs while ensuring the
objects and values for which the area was protected remain protected.
Conservation Lands Foundation previously testified in support of
this effort to construct the water pipeline project to ensure a million
Nevadans have access to the water system, and expand the NCA as part of
the Southern Nevada Economic Development and Conservation Act
introduced last Congressional session. We look forward to working with
Congresswoman Titus to advance this legislation and with SNWA to find
other partnership opportunities that improve habitat and recreation
opportunities in the NCA.
While this legislation is a positive example of a bill that strikes
a balance between conservation and development with input from local
advocates, unfortunately, many of the bills being considered in today's
hearing seek to undermine the ability of local advocates to engage in
the management of public lands, as well as weaken bedrock laws and
regulations that ensure our most cherished landscapes are protected.
Conservation Lands Foundation expresses strong opposition to the
following bills being considered in today's hearing:
H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act

This legislation, introduced by Rep. Mariannette Miller-Meeks of
Iowa, represents a direct assault on the bedrock law that has been used
by 18 presidents, nine Democrats and nine Republicans, to protect our
nation's most critical public lands and waters. Since its enactment,
the Antiquities Act has been an essential tool for presidents to ensure
America's most iconic natural, cultural, and historic places are
protected for generations to come. Some of those iconic places include
the Grand Canyon, the Statue of Liberty, Fort Monroe, the Pacific
Remote Islands, and Acadia, Zion, and Olympic National Parks, among
many others.
Imposing restrictive measures that undermine the Act's fundamental
principles and jeopardize its effectiveness to ensure our most
cherished landscapes and cultural resources are protected serves the
interests of no one who cares about the public's access to and the
future of America's public lands. According to the U.S. Department of
Commerce, the outdoor recreation economy increased 4.8 percent in 2022,
compared with a 1.9 increase for the overall U.S. economy. Considering
that, such an effort to undermine the Antiquities Act only benefits
those who seek to exploit the land without any regard for its
recreational value in the marketplace, without any concern for its
importance to communities that have called it their home since time
immemorial, and without any interest in ensuring future generations can
continue to access and benefit from it.
Congress already has this power to make changes to how our nation's
public lands are managed. This bill is an attempt to restrict the tools
available to the American public, in particular Tribal governments and
underrepresented communities, to advocate for designations important to
the health and wellbeing of their communities, and the natural land
around them.
We strongly oppose this legislation and urge the Committee to vote
``no'' on this harmful legislation if and when it comes up for a vote.
H.R. 6085, To prohibit the implementation of the Draft Resource
Management Plan and Environmental Impact Statement for the Rock
Springs RMP Revision, Wyoming

This harmful bill introduced by Rep. Harriet Hageman of Wyoming
would undermine years of community-based work by her constituents to
produce a resource management plan revision for the public lands
managed by the Bureau of Land Management's Rock Springs Field Office.
Pursuant to Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act of 1976, this resource management plan represents a necessary
update to the 1997 Rock Springs Resource Management Plan. Section 202
of FLPMA mandates that the ``Secretary shall, with public involvement
and consistent with the terms and conditions of this Act, develop,
maintain, and, when appropriate, revise land use plans which provide by
tracts or areas for the use of the public lands.'' The draft proposes
balanced management across 3.6 million acres of public lands in
southwest Wyoming, conserving critical wildlife migration routes,
protecting sensitive cultural resources, and maintaining recreational
access for locals and visitors alike. It also leaves over half of the
planning area open to one or more types of industrial activities, such
as oil and gas drilling, mining, or renewable energy.
BLM's Rock Springs Field Office is in the middle of a robust public
process, which began in 2011, to revise the resource management plan.
Since the inception of the revision, BLM has hosted four scoping
meetings and three public meetings in response to the draft plan
release. In addition, the most recent public comment period was
extended to allow for comprehensive participation from local
stakeholders and the Wyoming Governor's office. Prohibiting the
implementation of the draft resource management plan revision runs
counter to FLPMA and the will of the tens of thousands of people who
submitted public comment in response to the draft plan. We strongly
oppose H.R. 6085.
H.R. 6547, Colorado Energy Prosperity Act

Like the previous bill, this legislation, introduced by Rep. Lauren
Boebert of Colorado, seeks to undermine years of community-based effort
to produce a Resource Management Plan for the public lands managed by
the Colorado River Valley Field Office and the Grand Junction Field
Office of the Bureau of Land Management. This supplemental
environmental impact statement is necessary in order to address the
issues identified in the lawsuits in the Colorado River Valley RMP,
described in settlement agreements, and in the Grand Junction RMP,
described in BLM's motion for voluntary remand. In response to the
court ruling and settlement agreements, the draft revisits oil and gas
leasing availability and proposes balanced management for the 2 million
acres in both field offices, which cover some of Colorado's most
important wildlife habitat, recreational areas, spectacular scenery,
cultural sites, and water resources. However, valid existing leases are
not impacted by this plan.
Like the Rock Springs Field Office above, the Colorado River Valley
and Grand Junction Field Offices have conducted rigorous public
outreach to inform this process. Over the past year and a half, BLM has
held two scoping meetings and three public meetings in response to the
release of the draft plan. Prohibiting the finalization,
implementation, administration, and enforcement of the forthcoming plan
would interrupt this robust public process and prevent BLM from
fulfilling its obligations under the terms of the settlement
agreements. We urgently request that the members of the Subcommittee
and full Committee vote against H.R. 6547.
H.R. 7006, To prohibit natural asset companies from entering into any
agreement with respect to land in the State of Utah or natural
assets on or in such land

This legislation, introduced by Rep. John Curtis of Utah, would
prevent a natural asset company, which do not currently exist, from
entering into any agreement with respect to land in the State of Utah
or natural assets on or in such land.
The proposal to create this new kind of corporation, which the
Securities and Exchange Commission is no longer considering, was
proposed as a way to invest money behind natural areas, working lands,
and ecosystem restoration in order to put a fair market value on the
land itself, not only the products and resources extracted from it.
We oppose this legislation because, beyond the fact that natural
asset companies do not exist and their creation is no longer being
considered, it provides false legitimacy for a conspiracy theory that
ties these non-existent companies with the Bureau of Land Management's
Conservation and Landscape Health Rule. For this reason, we urge the
Subcommittee and full Committee to vote no on H.R. 7006.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, for the
opportunity to share this testimony, and for your consideration of our
views on the legislation being heard today.

______

ENVIRONMENT AMERICA

March 19, 2024

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse and members of the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands:

We are writing in opposition to three of the bills on the agenda
for the March 20, 2024 hearing. We need more nature and each of these
bills undermines current efforts and future opportunities to protect
special places for future generations.
We oppose the Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act (H.R.
5499) which would limit the effectiveness of the Antiquities Act. Since
it was signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1906, the Antiquities
Act has been used by 18 Presidents to protect American treasures such
as Chaco Canyon, the Grand Canyon, Dinosaur National Monument, Joshua
Tree and Arches. We support the use of the Antiquities Act to protect
special natural areas and we want to see it continue to function as a
valuable tool for conservation as it has for the past 118 years.
Passing H.R. 5499 would limit the establishment of future national
monuments, potentially denying future generations the opportunity to
enjoy even more beautiful and special places in our country.
We oppose the Colorado Energy Prosperity Act (H.R. 6547), which
would prevent the Bureau of Land Management from finalizing their
supplemental EIS for the Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction Field
Offices. The supplemental EIS could protect nearly 2 million acres of
federal public land in western Colorado from future oil and gas leasing
including parts of the Dolores River Canyon, Book Cliffs and Grand
Hogback. These areas are critical for biodiversity and provide
unparalleled outdoor recreational opportunities.
Finally, we oppose the H.R. 6085, which would prohibit the
implementation of the Draft Resource Management Plan and Environmental
Impact Statement for the Rock Springs BLM Field Office. The BLM is
proposing a more conservation-focused approach for managing
approximately 3.6 million acres including prioritizing wildlife habitat
and habitat connectivity by protecting parts of the area from mining
and drilling. We support this approach and other efforts by the BLM to
connect more fragmented habitats.

Thank you,

Ellen Montgomery,             Lisa Frank,
Public Lands Campaign
Director                      Executive Director,
Washington Legislative Office

______

Statement for the Record
Shaaron Netherton
Executive Director
Friends of Nevada Wilderness

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Federal Lands Subcommittee:

On behalf of Friends of Nevada Wilderness and our 16,000
supporters, please accept these comments in support of H.R. 6209, the
Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act.

Friends of Nevada Wilderness is dedicated to preserving all
qualified Nevada public lands as wilderness, protecting all present and
potential wilderness from ongoing threats, educating the public about
the values of and need for wilderness, and improving the management and
restoration of wild lands. Friends of Nevada Wilderness is celebrating
our 40th anniversary this year.

I would like to express appreciation for the Nevada delegation's
continued support for local efforts to resolve issues on public lands.
Nevadans know how to come to the table in good faith and work together
to develop bills that enhance economic development, conserve public
lands and improve recreation opportunities.

The Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act would expand
the Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area by adding contiguous
federal lands and provide for a right-of-way under the Sloan Canyon
National Conservation Area and other public lands for the purpose
securing water resources for Las Vegas Valley residents. Friends of
Nevada Wilderness supports the 9,290-acre expansion of the national
conservation area. This will help protect habitat corridors for bighorn
sheep and other wildlife.

We understand that putting the pipeline under the national
conservation area is much less expensive than the alternative through
Henderson. There will however, be impacts to public lands surrounds the
national conservation area from waste rock storage, etc. We recommend
that a mitigation and/or restoration fund be created with the cost
savings of this alternative to be used to ensure all temporary impacts
to the national conservation area and other public lands are restored
and provide funding to manage the Sloan Canyon National Conservation
Area for its intended purposes of protecting natural and cultural
resources.

______

MULEY FANATIC FOUNDATION

March 19, 2024

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse:

On behalf of the Muley Fanatic Foundation, I write in strong
opposition to H.R. 6085, offered by Rep. Hageman. This bill would have
the effect of prematurely short-circuiting a land use planning process
that has been ongoing for more than a decade and has the potential to
provide critical, needed conservation measures for Wyoming's renowned
mule deer populations that have declined more than 40% over the last
three decades.
The Muley Fanatic Foundation and many other stakeholders have been
intimately involved in the Rock Springs Resource Management Plan (RMP)
process. The notion that Rep. Hageman would propose a bill that ignores
the efforts by so many that have been put forth in this very valued
public process is unfortunate to say the least.
This legislation undercuts more than a decade-long planning process
for millions of acres of public land in southwestern Wyoming.
Throughout this process, along with other stakeholders, I have
personally participated in dozens of meetings with federal, state, and
local officials, and have invested countless hours in drafting comments
and providing testimony. Striking the right balance in these land use
plans can be challenging at times, but I do not think that wasting all
of the time and taxpayer resources that have gone into preparing the
Rock Springs plan, which would be the end result of this bill, is the
right course of action. Please show your support of the process as the
BLM moves forward in their efforts to review more than 40,000 public
comments that are submitted on the draft Rock Springs RMP and allow the
BLM to share a revised plan incorporating many of these comments.
I oppose H.R. 6085, and I urge you to oppose this legislation
during committee consideration.

Sincerely,

Joshua W.D. Coursey,
President/CEO

______

THE WILDERNESS SOCIETY

March 20, 2024

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Federal Lands Subcommittee:

On behalf of our more than one million members and supporters, The
Wilderness Society (TWS) writes to express views on legislation being
heard before the Subcommittee on March 20, 2024. We respectfully
request that this letter be included in the hearing record.
H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act

TWS opposes H.R. 5499, sponsored by Representative Miller-Meeks (R-
IA). Since it was signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1906, the
Antiquities Act has been used on a bipartisan basis by 18 Presidents to
protect America's most significant natural, scientific, cultural, and
historic places, including the Baaj Nwaavjo I'tah Kukveni-Ancestral
Footprints of the Grand Canyon, Statue of Liberty, Fort Monroe, and
Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monuments. This legislation
represents a direct assault on this bedrock conservation law by seeking
to impose restrictive measures that undermine the Act's fundamental
principles and jeopardize its efficacy in preserving our nation's most
cherished places.
The legislation would forcibly sunset national monument
designations while limiting future designations, which blatantly
undercuts the original intent of the Antiquities Act to protect places
at urgent risk. It would also undermine the meaningful Tribal
engagement at the center of many modern designation efforts,
disregarding the sovereignty and expertise of Indigenous communities
whose cultural heritage and ancestral lands are often central to
monument designations. Finally, Congress already has the power to pass
legislation creating, revoking or modifying national monuments on a
case-by-case basis. TWS therefore sees this additional layer of
oversight completely unnecessary.
Furthermore, national monuments poll very well with voters across
party lines. Per the Colorado College's 2024 Conservation in the West
Poll, 85% of westerners support creating new national parks and
monuments to protect historic sites and areas for recreation.
For these reasons, TWS opposes this legislation and urges members
of the Subcommittee not to advance it.
H.R. 6085, To prohibit the implementation of the Draft Resource
Management Plan and Environmental Impact Statement for the Rock
Springs RMP Revision, Wyoming
The Wilderness Society opposes H.R. 6085 sponsored by
Representative Hageman. The bill would block implementation of the
Bureau of Land Management's Rock Springs Resource Management Plan.
Finalization of a new Rock Springs Resource Management Plan is long
overdue and there is an urgent need to update management for this
landscape according to new research and community values.
This bill would undermine the extensive public process convened in
Wyoming over the last decade to inform this plan. Among them have been
many opportunities to discuss and provide input on the future
management of these BLM lands for local stakeholders. Local
governments, state agencies, and representatives from the Governor's
Office regularly met with BLM to craft the plan components over the
last decade. In 2023, Wyoming Governor Mark Gordon convened a Rock
Springs-focused taskforce with a variety of interest groups and elected
officials, which successfully crafted multiple consensus-based
management recommendations for BLM to consider. BLM also received
comments from tens of thousands of individuals, elected officials,
organizations, and businesses, which will inform adjustments for the
final Rock Springs plan--unless this bill gets in the way.
Blocking implementation of this plan disregards years of public
input from Wyomingites and the collaborative task force convened by
Governor Gordon. Delaying the much-needed updates to land management
prescriptions will harm Wyoming communities and jeopardize areas of
critical wildlife habitat, cultural resources and unique recreational
opportunities--not to mention create uncertainty public lands users for
years to come. For these reasons, TWS opposes this legislation and
urges the Subcommittee not to advance it.
H.R. 6547, Colorado Energy Prosperity Act

TWS opposes H.R. 6547, sponsored by Representative Boebert, which
would circumvent a court-ordered public process to chart public land
management in western Colorado for decades to come. The Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) is conducting a public process to update its resource
management plans for the Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction field
offices as the result of a U.S. District Court of Colorado ruling and
subsequent settlement agreement. The court found that the BLM violated
the law with respect to its environmental analysis during the previous
planning process for the Colorado River Valley Field Office and ordered
the BLM to broaden the range of alternatives for oil and gas leasing
and conduct a more robust analysis of air quality impacts. The new plan
also considers areas of Tribal significance for increased protection.
The Grand Junction plan suffered from the same legal deficiencies, and
a challenge to that plan was settled between the parties and combined
with the Colorado River Valley plan for additional analysis.
H.R. 6547 would prevent the BLM from completing its work on this
public process and updating these two plans. If signed into law, this
bill would force the BLM to disregard robust comments from the general
public, including conservation stakeholders, municipalities, counties,
and the State of Colorado on the draft plan, as well as feedback
received through formal Tribal consultation. This landscape contains
wilderness-quality lands, important wildlife habitat, cultural
resources, recreation opportunities, and other natural resources. We
are grateful for the work by the planning team at the BLM to improve
management prescriptions throughout the field offices. We urge the
Subcommittee to reject this legislation, and to instead allow the BLM
to complete its public process, as required by the federal courts.
H.R. 7006, To prohibit natural asset companies from entering into any
agreement with respect to land in the State of Utah or natural
assets on or in such land

TWS opposes Representative Curtis's legislation to prevent a
natural asset company from entering into any agreement with respect to
land in the State of Utah or natural assets on or in such land.
The proposal for establishing natural asset companies was to
facilitate investment in preserving natural areas, working lands, and
ecosystem restoration. The objective was to assign monetary value to
the land itself, rather than solely valuing the resources extracted
from it.
This legislation propagates a baseless conspiracy theory linking
these non-existent companies (the proposal never advanced past the
conceptual stage) with the Bureau of Land Management's Conservation and
Landscape Health Rule. Claims suggesting that these companies would
have been part of a plot to harness the rule to privatize public lands
are unequivocally unfounded.
This legislation is a red herring and TWS urges members of the
Subcommittee not to advance it.
H.R. 6209, Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act

The Sloan Canyon Conservation and Lateral Pipeline Act would expand
the Sloan Canyon National Conservation Area by adding contiguous
federal lands and provide for a right-of-way across federal public
lands for the purpose securing water resources for Las Vegas valley
residents. While the Wilderness Society is supportive of the NCA
expansion, we have concerns with the current bill language and
recommend that the Subcommittee make adjustments before reporting the
bill.
Specifically, The Wilderness Society supports the bill's provisions
providing for the addition of 9,290 acres to the Sloan Canyon NCA.
Protecting these lands is important to securing bighorn sheep habitat
connectivity that allows movement to and from the NCA and the South
McCullough Wilderness and Avi Kwa Ame National Monument to the south.
We are concerned about the bill's provisions regarding the public
land resources outside of the NCA, which will see the most impact from
the Horizon Lateral project. While the bill explicitly states that the
Secretary of the Interior may include reasonable terms and conditions
under FLPMA to protect ``Conservation Area'' resources, it is critical
that the Secretary retain authority to protect public land resources
inside and outside of the NCA. We accordingly urge the Subcommittee to
amend section 3(h)(3)(A) to include other public land resources.
TWS generally believes the Secretary should retain discretion over
when and where rights-of-way across public lands are granted, that
industrial projects are not appropriate within units of the National
Landscape Conservation System, and that grantees of rights-of-way
should pay fair market value for the use of public lands. TWS also
understands the unique geographic and public interest circumstances at
issue here, and we appreciate the sponsor including provisions that
ensure that the natural and cultural resources within the NCA will not
be permanently adversely affected. We recommend that a mitigation and/
or restoration fund be created with the cost savings of this
alternative to be used to ensure all temporary impacts to the NCA and
other public lands are restored and provide BLM funding to manage the
NCA for its intended purposes of protecting natural and cultural
resources.

Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Lydia Weiss,
Senior Director, Government Relations

______

March 20, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: H.R. 5499, Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

On behalf of the undersigned organizations and our millions of
members across the country, we are writing to express our unwavering
support for the Antiquities Act of 1906 and our strong opposition to
H.R. 5499, the ``Congressional Oversight of the Antiquities Act,''
which poses a significant threat to this bedrock conservation law.
Since its enactment, the Antiquities Act has been one of our
nation's most critical conservation tools for preserving public lands,
waters and cultural sites. Our national parks and monuments and other
protected public lands and waters unite all people in this country by
protecting our shared heritage for future generations to enjoy. Since
it was signed by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1906, the Antiquities
Act has been used on a bipartisan basis by 18 Presidents (nine
Republicans and nine Democrats) to protect America's most iconic
natural, scientific, cultural, and historic places, including the Grand
Canyon, the Statue of Liberty, Fort Monroe, the Pacific Remote Islands,
and Acadia, Zion and Olympic National Parks.
Furthermore, national monuments poll very well with voters across
party lines. Per the Colorado College's 2024 Conservation in the West
Poll, 85% of westerners support creating new national parks and
monuments to protect historic sites and areas for recreation. The sheer
diversity of historic, cultural, and natural treasures that have been
protected by the Antiquities Act is the reason why hundreds of groups
representing sportsmen, cultural heritage organizations, evangelicals,
conservation, recreation businesses, historic preservation, and many
others all oppose efforts to undermine this vital law.
H.R. 5499 represents a direct assault on the Antiquities Act. The
legislation would forcibly sunset national monument designations while
limiting future designations, which blatantly undercuts the original
intent of the Antiquities Act to protect places at urgent risk. It
would also undermine the meaningful Tribal engagement at the center of
many modern designation efforts, disregarding the sovereignty and
expertise of Indigenous communities whose cultural heritage and
ancestral lands are often central to monument designations. Finally,
Congress already has the power to pass legislation creating, revoking
or modifying national monuments on a case-by-case basis.
As organizations committed to conservation, environmental
stewardship, and the preservation of our nation's heritage, we urge you
to oppose H.R. 5499 and to uphold the Antiquities Act as a critical
tool for protecting America's natural and cultural treasures.
Thank you for your attention to this urgent matter. We trust that
you will consider the long-term implications of H.R. 5499 and stand in
defense of the Antiquities Act.

Sincerely,

Accountable.US                Los Padres ForestWatch

Alaska Wilderness League      Marine Conservation Institute

Azul                          Mountain Mamas

Californians for Western
Wilderness                    Mystic Aquarium

CalWild                       National Marine Sanctuary
Foundation

Center for Biological
Diversity                     National Ocean Protection
Coalition
Coalition to Protect
America's National Parks      National Parks Conservation
Association

Colorado Wildlands Project    National Trust for Historic
Preservation

Conservation Colorado         National Wildlife Federation

Conservation Lands
Foundation                    Native Voters Alliance Nevada

Conservation Northwest        Natural Resources Defense Council

Conservatives for
Responsible Stewardship       Nevada Wildlife Federation

Continental Divide Trail
Coalition                     New Mexico Wild

Defenders of Wildlife         Northeastern Minnesotans for
Wilderness

Earthjustice                  Nuestra Tierra

EarthKeepers 360              Ocean Defense Initiative

Earthworks                    Oregon League of Conservation
Voters

Endangered Species
Coalition                     Oregon Natural Desert Association

Environment America           Plaquemines Rising Coastal
Restoration

Environmental Protection
Information Center-EPIC       Progressive Leadership Alliance
of Nevada

Friends of Organ Mountains-
Desert Peaks                  Protect Our Winters

Friends of the Earth US       Sierra Club

Grand Canyon Trust            Silvix Resources

Great Old Broads for
Wilderness                    Soda Mountain Wilderness Council

GreenLatinos                  Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance

Healthy Ocean Coalition       The Mountain Pact

Hispanic Access Foundation    The Wilderness Society

HECHO                         Trust for Public Land

Institute for a Progressive
Nevada                        Tuleyome

John Muir Project             Union of Concerned Scientists

Klamath Forest Alliance       Vet Voice Foundation

Las Cruces Green Chamber of
Commerce                      Western Watersheds Project

League of Conservation
Voters                        WildEarth Guardians

______

Support for Alternative F and Conservation Management in the
Colorado River Valley and Grand Junction Field Offices
Draft Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement (SEIS)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Castle Peak Wilderness Study Area in Eagle County, which is
proposed for expansion in Alternative F of the draft SEIS. Photo
credit: Jon Mullen/EcoStock

Please find the below letters that have been submitted to the
Bureau of Land Management in support of Alternative F and the
conservation-based management considered in the draft Supplemental
Environmental Impact Statement (SEIS) for the Colorado River Valley and
Grand Junction Field Offices.

This packet contains supportive letters from the following entities
and individuals:

Representative Diana DeGette, Colorado's Congressional
District 1

State of Colorado, Department of Natural Resources and
Department of Public Health and Environment

Eagle County

Pitkin County

Routt County

City of Glenwood Springs

Town of Palisade

The Mountain Pact and over 25 individual local elected
officials

Grand Valley Outdoor Recreation Coalition

The Colorado Food and Farm Alliance and over 30
agricultural producers and related businesses

Nearly 85 local business in Western Colorado

In addition to what's in contained in the packet, the conservation
community generated comments from nearly 6,000 community members and
submitted technical comments on behalf of the following organizations:
Audubon Rockies, Center for Biological Diversity, Citizens for a
Healthy Community, Colorado Wildlands Project, Conservation Colorado,
Conservation Lands Foundation, Defenders of Wildlife, Earthjustice,
Great Old Broads for Wilderness-Grand Junction Broadband, Living Rivers
& Colorado Riverkeeper, National Parks Conservation Association, Rocky
Mountain Wild, Sheep Mountain Alliance, Sierra Club, The Wilderness
Society, Waterkeeper Alliance, Western Colorado Alliance, Western
Watersheds Project, Wilderness Workshop, and WildEarth Guardians.

*****

Theese documents are part of the hearing record and are being
retained in the Committee's official files:

The documents are available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II10/20240320/116881/HHRG-
118-II10-20240320-SD008.pdf

[all]
