- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R., TO PROMOTE AND ENHANCE OUTDOOR RECREATION OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND VETERANS ON FEDERAL RECREATIONAL LANDS, "MILITARY AND VETERANS IN PARKS (MVP) ACT"; H.R. 1786, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS TO SUBMIT TO CONGRESS A REPORT ON THE WARRIOR TRAINING ADVANCEMENT COURSE, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO ADMINISTER A PILOT PROGRAM TO EMPLOY VETERANS IN POSITIONS THAT RELATE TO CONSERVATION AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "GET REWARDING OUTDOOR WORK FOR OUR VETERANS ACT, OR (GROW) ACT; H.R. 1829, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TO CONVEY THE PLEASANT VALLEY RANGER DISTRICT ADMINISTRATIVE SITE TO GILA COUNTY, ARIZONA; AND H.R. 2468, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO CONVEY TO THE STATE OF UTAH CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF CAMP WILLIAMS, UTAH, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "MOUNTAIN VIEW CORRIDOR COMPLETION ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. ____, MILITARY
AND VETERANS IN PARKS ACT; H.R. 1786;
H.R. 1829; AND H.R. 2468

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, July 20, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-50

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-989 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, July 20, 2023..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2
Levin, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..............................................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     4

Panel I:

Kiggans, Hon. Jen, a Representative in Congress from the
Commonwealth of Virginia...................................     6
Owens, Hon. Burgess, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Utah..............................................     7
Crane, Hon. Elijah, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     8
Levin, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..............................................     8

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Lands, Frank, Deputy Director for Operations, National Park
Service, Washington, DC....................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    14
Emanuel, Jacqueline, Associate Deputy Chief, National Forest
System, U.S. Forest Service, Washington, DC................    14
Prepared statement of....................................    15

Panel III:

Cline, Hon. Woody, Supervisor, Gila County, Arizona..........    24
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Wilson, Lisa, Deputy Director of Engineering and Operations,
Utah Department of Transportation, Salt Lake City, Utah....    28
Prepared statement of....................................    29
Villanueva, Jeremy, Government Affairs Associate Director,
Wounded Warrior Project, Washington, DC....................    36
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Berejka, Marc, Divisional Vice President, Community Advocacy
and Impact, REI, Kent, Washington..........................    39
Prepared statement of....................................    41

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Bureau of Land Management, Statement for the Record on H.R.
2468.......................................................    54

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Safe and Responsible Use Programs, Duane Taylor,
Director, Statement for the Record.....................    55

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

``Therapeutic landscapes, outdoor programs for veterans,
and public lands,'' Social Science & Medicine, November
19, 2020...............................................    21

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON DISCUSSION DRAFT OF H.R. ____, TO
PROMOTE AND ENHANCE OUTDOOR RECREATION OPPORTUNITIES FOR
MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND VETERANS ON FEDERAL
RECREATIONAL LANDS, ``MILITARY AND VETERANS IN PARKS (MVP)
ACT''; H.R. 1786, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
TO SUBMIT TO CONGRESS A REPORT ON THE WARRIOR TRAINING
ADVANCEMENT COURSE, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO
ADMINISTER A PILOT PROGRAM TO EMPLOY VETERANS IN POSITIONS THAT
RELATE TO CONSERVATION AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``GET
REWARDING OUTDOOR WORK FOR OUR VETERANS ACT, OR (GROW) ACT;
H.R. 1829, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TO CONVEY
THE PLEASANT VALLEY RANGER DISTRICT ADMINISTRATIVE SITE TO GILA
COUNTY, ARIZONA; AND H.R. 2468, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF THE
INTERIOR TO CONVEY TO THE STATE OF UTAH CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND
UNDER THE ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OF THE BUREAU OF LAND
MANAGEMENT WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF CAMP WILLIAMS, UTAH, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``MOUNTAIN VIEW CORRIDOR COMPLETION ACT''

----------

Thursday, July 20, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m. in Room
1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Tiffany, Fulcher, Stauber, Bentz,
Kiggans, Westerman; Porter, and Leger Fernandez.
Also present: Representatives Crane and Owens.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to consider four bills:
Representative Kiggans' Military and Veterans in Parks Act;
H.R. 1786, Representative Levin's Get Rewarding Outdoor Work
for our Veterans Act, the GROW Act; H.R. 1829, from
Representative Crane; and H.R. 2468 from Representative Owens,
Mountain View Corridor Completion Act.
I ask unanimous consent that the following Members be
allowed to participate in today's hearing from the dais: the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hunt; the gentleman from Utah, Mr.
Owens; and the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.
I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. Today, the Subcommittee on Federal Lands
continues our celebration of America by considering legislation
that recognizes the brave men and women whose heroism and
sacrificial service to this country protect our safety and the
liberties that we cherish. The legislation we will consider
today offers thoughtful solutions that will improve outdoor
recreation opportunities for our nation's heroes, provide
spaces for relaxation and healing for military families.
The perils of military service, unfortunately, leave many
members of our Armed Forces with long-lasting wounds: some
visible, some invisible. An estimated 50 percent of veterans
experience some combination of combat-related psychological or
physical injuries, and as many as 66 percent have diagnosable
mental health issues.
Research has consistently shown that time spent in nature
and recreating outdoors can be beneficial and therapeutic to
soldiers returning from the battlefield, particularly for those
dealing with PTSD. With the proper stewardship, our national
parks and public lands can play a critical role, offering
convenient, affordable, and accessible recreation opportunities
to our country's armed services and veterans. I would say all
of us can benefit from being outdoors, which I am looking
forward to this weekend.
The unfortunate reality is that veterans, and wounded
warriors in particular, often find much of our public lands to
be off limits. Trails can be inaccessible or not maintained.
Outdated regulations can limit the use of new, adaptive
recreation equipment. And even if adaptive recreation
opportunities are offered, finding information about those
opportunities from Federal land managers can be next to
impossible.
Our veterans deserve to access the very lands they fought
so hard to protect and defend. Every American owes our nation's
veterans an unpayable debt, and it is incumbent upon each one
of us sitting around the dais today to fight to ensure our
public lands are stewarded in a way that makes them accessible
for our nation's military veterans and Gold Star families. That
is why I am a strong supporter of Representative Kiggans'
legislation, Military and Veterans in Parks Act, or the MVP
Act.
I am thankful for Representative Kiggans' leadership on
this issue. As a freshman member of our Committee and a former
Navy helicopter pilot, there is nobody more well-suited to lead
this effort than her. She is a tireless advocate for our
nation's service members and veterans, especially for those in
her district in Virginia.
I would also like to take a moment to recognize the other
important legislative efforts on today's agenda.
H.R. 1829, offered by Congressman Crane, would create a
retreat facility in Gila County, Arizona for veterans and their
families to relax and enjoy the outdoors with their families.
H.R. 2468, the Mountain View Corridor Completion Act,
offered by Representative Owens of Utah, conveys land within
the boundary of Camp Williams, an important National Guard
training facility, to the state of Utah to complete the
Mountain View Corridor.
Finally, Representative Levin's GROW Act is a bipartisan
bill that helps veterans find employment at the Department of
the Interior through a new pilot project. Only one in four
veterans have jobs lined up after leaving the Armed Forces.
Representative Levin's legislation will enable veterans to find
stable, well-paying jobs that enable them to be outdoors.
In closing, I believe our agenda today honors our military
members and veterans, and will hopefully make tangible and
meaningful improvements in their lives. I want to thank all the
bill sponsors for their leadership on these important bills
before us.
I also want to recognize and thank the witnesses for being
here, and for your advocacy on behalf of our nation's brave
heroes.
With that, I will now recognize Ranking Member Levin,
sitting in in place of Representative Neguse today.
Welcome, and we would love to hear your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MIKE LEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.
Ranking Member Neguse had a scheduling conflict, so I am
filling in.
Today's hearing includes key bills designed to uplift and
support the veterans community, continuing important work to
promote access to public lands among service members and
veterans.
Last Congress, I was proud to support bipartisan
legislation to ensure free access to public lands for all
veterans and Gold Star families. Passing the Alexander Lofgren
Veterans and Parks Act was a valuable milestone. However, there
is always more we can do to deepen the connections between
veterans and their public lands. That is why I am particularly
excited to talk about my bill, H.R. 1786.
The GROW Act establishes a pilot program aimed at employing
veterans in conservation and resource management activities
directly on our public lands. By engaging our veterans in the
preservation of our public lands, we honor their dedication to
our nation and provide them with meaningful career development
opportunities. The participation of veterans and conservation
and resource management activities through the pilot program
established by the GROW Act not only offers them valuable
employment opportunities, but also enlists their expertise and
passion in safeguarding these lands for all Americans to enjoy.
We will also be reviewing the Military and Veterans in
Parks Act, a discussion draft from Representative Kiggans
geared toward increasing recreation opportunities for veterans.
The MVP Act is an excellent companion to the GROW Act, and two
great acronyms for these two bills, by the way.
Our public lands, which encompass breathtaking landscapes,
diverse ecosystems, and a rich cultural heritage are national
treasures. Enhancing opportunities for veterans to connect with
them, whether through work or recreation, should be a priority
for this Subcommittee. By combining efforts to support our
veterans and preserve our public lands, we foster a profound
sense of patriotism and stewardship, ensuring that the beauty
of our nation's natural heritage endures for years to come.
It is encouraging to see us come together in a bipartisan
manner to ensure that our heroes are rewarded for their
sacrifices, given every opportunity to succeed, and celebrated
for their continued service to our great nation.
I look forward to the conversation today and yield back the
balance of my time.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Levin. I would now like to
recognize the Chairman of the Natural Resources Full Committee
for an opening statement.
Mr. Westerman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and thank you
to everyone that is here today.
Ronald Reagan once said that veterans know better than
anyone else the price of freedom, for they have suffered the
scars of war. We can offer them no better tribute than to
protect what they have won for us. I think that is very fitting
as we begin this hearing today. What our veterans have won and
defended for us includes the full splendor and abundance of
national parks and public lands that we, as Americans, have
been blessed with. And there is no better tribute to them than
ensuring their full access to these lands so that they can
begin often the long process of healing the scars that remain
from war.
From the National Mall here in Washington, DC to the
backcountry wilderness areas in my district in Arkansas, our
national parks and public lands can and should be places of
healing and comfort for our veterans.
Last year, I was proud to co-lead the bipartisan Alexander
Lofgren Veterans in Parks Act, or the VIP Act, alongside
Representative Miller-Meeks, to provide free lifetime passes to
our public lands to our veterans and Gold Star families. The
Military and Veterans in Parks Act, or the MVP Act, is a
continuation of our bipartisan efforts to truly unleash the
full outdoor recreation potential of the public lands our
military service members and veterans fought so hard to defend.
When I became Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee
earlier this year, I laid out a vision for our public lands
with my Republican colleagues that was focused on increasing
access. And while I know that increasing access for our
veterans, military service members, and individuals with
disabilities are goals that have been talked about and
idealized for a long time, it is now time to turn that talk
into action, and that is exactly what Representative Kiggans is
doing here today by leading the MVP Act.
As a former Navy helicopter pilot, I know that she
understands how difficult it can be for our country's veterans
to return to civilian life, and the importance that time
outdoors can have towards easing that transition. The MVP Act
sets a new bar for what it means to truly have access to our
national parks and public lands, creating tangible and
meaningful improvements in the lives of veterans.
It would create new, adaptive trails and recreation
opportunities such as hiking, camping, skiing, and kayaking in
each region managed by the BLM, the Forest Service, and the
Park Service. With minor improvements to existing
infrastructure, we can turn inaccessible recreation into
accessible opportunities for wounded warriors and individuals
with disabilities broadly.
The bill would also streamline the permitting and fee
process for veterans groups to host activities and events on
Federal lands, and provide assistance to organize and host more
of these events.
As you can see in the pictures behind me, these events
reach thousands of veterans annually. This legislation would
help more groups organize events so that veterans can become
more connected to nature and to each other. This is critical,
as research has proven time and time again that nature can be
one of the most effective treatments for veterans suffering
from physical or psychological injuries from the battlefield.
The MVP Act, like the GROW Act, would also promote career
and volunteer opportunities for our veterans. I would like to
acknowledge Representative Levin and Representative Wittman's
work on the GROW Act, which is a win-win for both our veterans
and Federal land managers.
I would like to also recognize the efforts of my colleague
from Arizona, Representative Crane, to help veterans in his
community. A veteran himself, the legislation he has before us
today would help turn under-utilized Forest Service land and
buildings into a veterans' retreat in Young, Arizona.
Our nation's service members, veterans, and Gold Star
families, they really are our MVPs, and they should be entitled
to fully experience the public lands they or their fallen
family members put their lives on the line to defend. The brave
men and women in our nation's Armed Forces are the best that
our nation has to offer, and they deserve access to the best
recreation opportunities our nation's Federal lands have to
offer.
Again, I would like to thank the witnesses for joining us
today, particularly those who are veterans themselves. I look
forward to hearing your testimony, although I will have to
leave before I get to hear all your testimony. But we do have
written copies, and I thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We will now move on
to our first panel, which consists of Members who are
sponsoring bills today.
First of all, I would like to recognize Representative
Kiggans in regards to the MVP Act.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JEN KIGGANS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA

Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the
opportunity to speak in support of the Military and Veterans in
Parks Act, nicknamed the MVP Act after the invaluable role our
service members play in protecting our great nation.
As the wife of a veteran, the mother of future veterans,
and a Navy veteran myself, I have a unique understanding of the
issues plaguing this important population. As a geriatric nurse
practitioner who spent years caring for our greatest
generation, I have also seen the effects of not just physical
injuries sustained on the battlefield, but combat-related
emotional trauma, post-traumatic stress disorder, and countless
other psychological wounds. These lasting scars make the
already difficult transition back to civilian life that much
harder for our veterans.
Almost two-thirds of all post-9/11 veterans are
experiencing mental health issues, and 25 percent of all
veterans have a service-related disability. We should be going
above and beyond to give these heroes every opportunity to
reintegrate into civil society.
Between the beach and the bay, southeast Virginia is home
to some of the most beautiful natural resources in the country.
Residents and visitors alike enjoy hunting, fishing, hiking,
kayaking, camping, and countless other forms of outdoor
recreation, often on one of the many national wildlife refuges
we have. The MVP Act ensures that these recreation
opportunities are available to our military service members,
veterans, and Gold Star families.
As a primary care provider, I know the connection between
outdoor recreation, exercise, and positive mental health
outcomes cannot be denied. This important bill seeks to
capitalize on these proven benefits to help our most vulnerable
veterans. Research consistently demonstrates that spending time
in nature can reduce stress, alleviate symptoms of anxiety and
depression, and enhance overall psychological and well-being.
For our veterans who suffer from both physical and
invisible wounds of war, these benefits are particularly
critical. That is why it is incredibly frustrating to me that
accessibility remains a significant obstacle for disabled
veterans in our national parks and recreation sites. Steep
trails, inaccessible facilities, and inadequate accommodations
limit the ability of veterans with disabilities to fully enjoy
all the fantastic recreation opportunities our Federal lands
have to offer.
The MVP Act directs the Forest Service, BLM, and the
National Park Service to each develop adaptive trails and
campgrounds in the regions they manage, as well as accessible
hunting, fishing, and kayaking opportunities.
I cannot stress enough how important it is that we invest
in infrastructure and initiatives that make our parks more
accessible to those with disabilities, especially our veterans.
This includes the construction of wheelchair-accessible trails,
ramps, and facilities, as well as transportation options within
parks, ensuring that disabled individuals have convenient
access to all areas.
Though my time in Congress has been short, I have made it
my mission since Day 1 to advocate for the mental health of our
service members and veterans. This goal impacts everything I do
here in Washington, admittedly, most of all in the Armed
Services and Veterans Affairs Committees. But Virginia's 2nd
District is home to more veterans than almost any other in the
country, as well as some of the nation's most beautiful natural
resources. Therefore, it is a great honor to be advocating for
the MVP Act before this Committee today.
These brave men and women have dedicated their lives to the
service of our nation, defending our freedoms, and protecting
our way of life. They have displayed extraordinary courage,
resilience, and unwavering commitment to our country. It is our
duty to ensure they receive the support and opportunities they
deserve, even after their service has concluded. I hope my
colleagues recognize the great need for the MVP Act, and I urge
your support.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Kiggans. I now
recognize Representative Owens for 5 minutes on H.R. 2468.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BURGESS OWENS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Owens. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member
Levin, for the opportunity to testify on behalf of my bill,
H.R. 2468, the Mountain View Corridor Completion Act.
I was pleased to introduce this legislation earlier this
year with the support of Congressman John Curtis, a member of
this Committee. Both Congressman Curtis and I represent some of
the fastest-growing counties in the fastest-growing state in
the nation. The transportation infrastructure needed to support
this growing population is under immense stress. Fortunately,
Utah is up for the challenge.
To add to our challenging, tremendous growth is the added
factor of over two-thirds of the state of Utah being owned or
controlled by different Federal Government agencies. Connecting
communities over and across some of these federally owned
parcels creates a unique difficulty, which often requires
intervention and approval of the U.S. Congress. This bill
addresses one of those situations.
The Department of Transportation, UDOT, has been
anticipating our population growth for decades, and began work
over 15 years ago on a project called the Mountain View
Corridor. The corridor connects eastern Utah County and
southwestern Salt Lake County, transecting the military
training installation of Camp Williams. Camp Williams is a
24,000-acre training area managed by the U.S. Army National
Guard.
This existing road, the Mountain View Corridor, serves as
the only public access to the headquarters area of the Utah
National Guard complex, as well as access to the National
Security Agency, NSA, Data Center. Two-thirds of the Mountain
View Corridor project has already been completed, and the final
third would require an acquisition by UDOT of three separate
irregular parcels of land totaling 36 acres. This is Federal
land technically owned by the Bureau of Land Management.
Because these parcels are located inside the existing
boundaries of an active military reservation created in 1914 by
President Woodrow Wilson's executive order, the BLM does not
actively manage these parcels. They are instead managed by the
U.S. Army National Guard, which does not use this land, nor has
any plans to do so in the future. This bill is needed because
BLM lacks authority to transfer the land presently under the
control of the U.S. military.
The Utah National Guard is in full support of the Mountain
View Corridor project, and has worked extensively with UDOT, as
well as BLM, on the project's proper alignment.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, I urge this Committee to
move quickly to approve this legislation.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Representative Owens.
Next, I recognize Representative Crane for 5 minutes on H.R.
1829.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ELIJAH CRANE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Crane. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, for the opportunity
to be here today. Thank you for inviting me to participate in
today's hearing and speak in support of my bill.
I also want to thank Congressman Paul Gosar for his
leadership in this effort, and I also want to thank Senators
Kelly and Sinema from Arizona for co-sponsoring this
legislation.
This piece of legislation was the first bill I introduced,
and is a testament to veterans in Arizona. Specifically, my
bill would enable Gila County, Arizona to build a veterans
center on 232 acres in Young, Arizona. As a former Navy Seal, I
know the importance of providing this resource cannot be
understated.
This legislation will serve our state and its heroes well.
The Veterans Center would protect and maintain the rich history
of the property, while providing family housing, meeting and
activity spaces, resource rooms, veteran ceremonial grounds,
and outdoor recreation. It would be the first of its kind in
northern Arizona, providing resources and support to primarily
rural veterans and their families.
Veterans in northern Arizona deserve a space to heal and
reconnect with their families after putting their lives on the
line for the peace and freedom of all Americans. I am happy
that I can be a part of this hearing today, and will get a
chance later to hear from my friend, Woody Cline, who has been
very instrumental in raising awareness and support of this
project.
I encourage you all to support this legislation. Thank you.
I yield back.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Crane. I would like
to recognize our Ranking Member today, Representative Levin,
for 5 minutes on H.R. 1786.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MIKE LEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Levin. Thank you very much, Chairman Tiffany, for
holding this legislative hearing, and particularly for hearing
my legislation, the Get Rewarding Outdoor Work for our
Veterans, or GROW Act. I was proud to introduce this bipartisan
bill with my colleague, Rob Wittman of Virginia, to employ more
veterans in outdoor jobs at the Department of the Interior.
The Federal Government has a duty to ensure veterans
returning to civilian life can obtain jobs that advance their
skill sets and support their families. The Department of the
Interior, in particular, is well positioned to provide
rewarding career opportunities that allow veterans to get
outside and reap the benefits of being in nature for their
mental and physical health.
Under my bill, the Department of Labor Veterans Employment
and Training Service and Department of Veterans Affairs will
establish guidelines containing best practices for Federal
agencies to employ transitioning veterans. These guidelines
will incorporate lessons learned from VA's Warrior Training
Advancement Course, or WARTAC, an established program with a
proven track record in training and employing service members
transitioning from the military. DOI will use those best
practices to establish a 2-year pilot program to employ
veterans in positions relating to conservation and resource
management, and will report back to Congress.
I place a great importance on conserving our Federal lands
and waters, and I can think of no better group of individuals
to continue their service by protecting our natural treasures
than our veterans. Not only will the GROW Act employ veterans
at DOI and give them the tools to succeed, I believe it will
also create a veteran hiring model for all Federal agencies in
the future. It is a win for the Federal workforce, it is a win
for the environment, a win for veterans, and a win for our
country.
The bill has also been referred to my other committee, the
House Veterans Affairs Committee, where it has received a
hearing and a markup in the Economic Opportunity Subcommittee.
I look forward to receiving feedback from our witnesses today
on how we can strengthen the portions of this proposal under
the Natural Resources Committee's jurisdiction so that we can
move it forward.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Levin. We will now
move on to our second panel.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, press the ``on'' button on the
microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
I would now like to introduce Mr. Frank Lands, the Deputy
Director for Operations at the National Park Service, to
testify for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lands, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF FRANK LANDS, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR OPERATIONS,
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Lands. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Levin, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
present the Department of the Interior's views on two items on
today's agenda. I would like to submit our full statement for
the record and summarize the Department's views.
In addition, the Bureau of Land Management has submitted a
statement for the record on a third bill, H.R. 2468, the
Mountain View Corridor Completion Act. The Bureau would be
happy to respond in writing to any questions on that bill.
The National Park Service strongly supports the goals of
H.R. 1786, the Get Rewarding Outdoor Work for our Veterans Act,
or the GROW Act, facilitating greater opportunities for
employing veterans in conservation and resource management
work.
The Department recognizes the immense pool of talent
represented in our nation's veterans, and we have a strong
record of employing veterans and their spouses. Currently, more
than 12,000 of the Department's workforce is made up of
veterans. A wide range of opportunities in natural and cultural
resource conservation, law enforcement, maintenance,
information technology, and administration align particularly
well with the experiences and interests of many of our
military's veterans.
As a former veteran myself, with over 20 years of
experience working for the military prior to joining the
National Park Service in 2021, I can personally attest to the
excellent fit and opportunity the National Park Service offers
the military, and the military offers the National Park
Service.
We also participate in innovative programs such as the
Traditional Trades Advancement and the Skill Bridge programs,
which offer opportunities to gain experience working in the
resource management and conservation field.
The pilot program envisioned in H.R. 1786 has the potential
to add to the range of job opportunities that veterans have
currently within the Department. However, we are concerned
about the timelines contained in the bill. We would welcome the
opportunity to work with the sponsors and the Committee on
amendments to address our concerns.
On the discussion draft titled the Military and Veterans in
Parks Act, or MVP Act, the Department strongly supports the
goals of the discussion draft to promote and enhance outdoor
recreation opportunities for our active service members and
veterans, and our full statement provides preliminary views on
the draft.
Of note, the discussion draft addresses adaptive trails and
opportunities for military service members and veterans. The
Department is committed to meeting standards for accessible
trails. However, the discussion uses the term ``adaptive
trails,'' which is not defined in the current authorities.
It also identifies a number of requirements that would
entail significant time, effort, and resources to meet if not
brought into alignment with our other accessibility
authorities.
The Department works closely with the Departments of
Defense and Veterans Affairs as directed in the discussion
draft, and is committed to providing public information
regarding its remarkable variety of recreation programs and
resources.
We note that the Director of the National Park Service
currently co-chairs, with the VA, the Task Force on Outdoor
Recreation for Veterans.
The Department notes that exempting active duty members and
their dependent veterans and Gold Star families from Federal
recreation fees, as proposed, could impact our ability to
maintain and operate local recreation facilities.
Additionally, the allocated use exemption may have
significant impacts to the recreational experiences of other
public land users.
The discussion draft contains several other provisions that
appear to be similar to programs already in place. For example,
the National Park Service has numerous partnerships with
entities with experience in outdoor-related volunteer and
wellness programs for Armed Forces and veterans.
We also look forward to giving further consideration to how
the discussion draft's requirements would fit into our existing
programs.
The Department would like to have the opportunity to work
with the sponsor and Committee to better understand the intent
of some of the provisions, and to provide comments and
recommended amendments as the draft is introduced.
Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Levin, thank you again for
the opportunity to appear before you today. I would be happy to
answer any questions that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Lands follows:]
Prepared Statement of Frank Lands, Deputy Director for Operations,
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 1786 and Discussion Draft, H.R. ____, ``Military and Veterans
in Parks (MVP) Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee thank you for the opportunity to provide the views of the
Department of the Interior on H.R. 1786, the Get Rewarding Outdoor Work
for our Veterans Act (GROW Act), and a discussion draft of H.R. ____,
the Military and Veterans in Parks Act (MVP Act).
The Department strongly supports promoting and enhancing outdoor
recreation opportunities for active service members and veterans on
recreational lands under the Department's jurisdiction, and
facilitating opportunities for the hiring and promoting of veterans
within the Department's workforce, goals of both H.R. 1786 and the
discussion draft of the MVP Act.
The Department employs almost 12,000 veterans Department-wide.
Within the NPS, over fifteen percent of the National Park Service's
(NPS) workforce are veterans. These 3,300 veterans work in a wide range
of natural and cultural resource roles, including law enforcement,
maintenance, information technology, and administration, and,
importantly, include both the NPS Director and the NPS Deputy Director
for Operations.
H.R. 1786, Get Rewarding Outdoor Work for our Veterans Act (GROW Act)

The Department strongly supports the goal of H.R. 1786 of
facilitating greater opportunities for employing veterans in
conservation and resource management work. We recognize the immense
pool of talent represented in our nation's veterans and, along with
other Federal agencies, we take seriously our commitment to hiring and
promoting veterans. We would like to work with the sponsor and the
Committee on amendments to address the concerns described in this
statement.
Our comments are limited to section 3(b) of H.R. 1786. We defer to
the Department of Veterans Affairs for views on section 2, which
requires a report on the Warrior Training Advancement Course, and to
the Department of Labor on section 3(a), which requires the
establishment of guidelines containing best practices for Federal
agencies that carry out programs to employ veterans transitioning from
service in the Armed Forces.
Section 3(b) would require the Secretary of the Interior, in
consultation with the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans'
Employment and Training and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, to
establish a pilot program to hire veterans in conservation and resource
management positions within the Department of the Interior. It would
require an initial briefing to Congressional committees no later than
60 days after enactment on how the pilot program will be implemented
and legislative recommendations for improvement. It would further
require a second briefing to Congressional committees within one year
of the start of the pilot program on implementation progress, and the
issuance of a final written report providing data on the pilot program
to those same Congressional committees within 30 days of the pilot's
completion.
The NPS has had a strong record of employing veterans and their
spouses, including robust use of applicable special hiring authorities
such as the Veterans Recruitment Appointment authority, the 30% or More
Disabled Veteran authority, Spouse Preference, and the authorities
under the Veterans Employment Opportunities Act of 1998. As noted
above, more than 3,300 veterans are employed by the NPS, comprising
over fifteen percent of the NPS workforce.
In addition to directly hiring veterans into federal positions, the
NPS also participates in innovative programs, such as the Traditional
Trades Advancement Program (TTAP) and SkillBridge, which provide job
skills and experiences that prepare veterans for post-military careers
in the Federal government or elsewhere in the public or private
sectors. The TTAP is a national, pre-apprenticeship-style internship
program administered by the NPS Historic Preservation Training Center.
TTAP introduces youth and veterans to skills and careers in the
historic trades, such as carpentry and masonry, at NPS sites nationwide
through an earn-as-you-learn experience. With SkillBridge, the NPS
partners with the Department of Defense to allow active service members
to intern or apprentice in NPS sites as Volunteers-in-Parks, where they
can receive training and gain valuable civilian work experience in a
variety of career fields before they transition out of military
service.
Like the NPS, both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and the
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) have robust programs to employ veterans
and their spouses. The FWS employs over 1,500 veterans, comprising over
sixteen percent of the agency's workforce. Through a new entry-level
hiring initiative, the FWS is directly recruiting veterans and others
eligible for special hiring authorities into positions in human
resources, finance, information technology, law enforcement, biological
fields, and other administrative areas. The FWS has also hosted and
hired veterans participating in vocational training through the Veteran
Readiness and Employment program. By advancing these initiatives and
utilizing our existing special hiring authorities, the FWS is able to
offer a broad range of career opportunities to our nation's veterans.
The BLM offers a number of hiring programs that benefit veterans,
transitioning service members and their families. Veterans may be given
preference during the hiring process when applying for positions, and
depending on eligibility, may also qualify for special hiring
authorities utilized through the Department. Over the past several
years, for example, the BLM has developed Wildland Firefighting Crews
specifically designed to employ military Veterans matching our
veterans' skills with wildland firefighting. Many of the skills
veterans learned in the military translate to wildland firefighting,
such as teamwork; decisive leadership; risk mitigation and management;
logistics and emergency medicine. BLM veteran crews provide job and
career avenues for military veterans, allowing them to find post-
military careers that provide a sense of serving and working within a
team setting.
As noted above, the Department supports the bill's overall goal of
facilitating greater opportunities for veteran employment. The pilot
program envisioned by H.R. 1786 has the potential to add to the range
of job opportunities that veterans have currently within the
Department. However, we are concerned that the timelines contained in
the bill for briefing Congressional committees, implementing the pilot
program, and the issuing a written report would not be sufficient to
consult with our interagency partners at the Departments of Labor and
Veterans Affairs, design an effective and evidence-based pilot program,
and implement the pilot for a sufficient length of time from which to
gather data to inform our recommendations and reporting. We would
welcome the opportunity to work with the sponsor and the Committee on
amendments to address these concerns.
Discussion Draft oF H.R. ____, Military and Veterans in Parks Act (MVP
Act)

The Department strongly supports the goals of the discussion draft
titled the ``Military and Veterans in Parks Act'' or ``MVP Act'' to
promote and enhance outdoor recreation opportunities for active service
members and veterans on recreational lands under the Department's
jurisdiction, and we appreciate that the discussion draft is an effort
to expand those opportunities. The Department is providing preliminary
views on this discussion draft and looks forward to providing
additional comments on this discussion draft and working with the
Committee as this bill is introduced.
Section 2 of the discussion draft addresses adaptive trails and
opportunities for military service members and veterans. Efforts to
provide more accessible recreational and trail opportunities to the
public not only help military service members and veterans but all
people with accessibility issues. The Department is committed to
meeting standards for accessible trails when constructing new or
modifying existing trails. The discussion draft uses the term,
``adaptive trails'' which is not defined in current authorities, and
also identifies a number of requirements that would require significant
time, effort and resources to meet if not brought into alignment with
the other authorities already in use.
Section 3 of the discussion draft provides direction for the
Department to work with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the
Department of Defense to develop education and public awareness
materials to members of the Armed Forces and veterans. The Department
currently works closely with these agencies, and the Director of the
NPS currently co-chairs with the VA the Task Force on Outdoor
Recreation for Veterans. The Department agrees with the importance of
outdoor recreation and is committed to providing public information
regarding its remarkable variety of recreational programs and resources
across its bureaus.
Section 4 of the discussion draft would amend the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA) by exempting all current and former
military members from paying recreation fees. Currently, we offer no-
cost annual passes to active-duty military members and their
dependents, and no-cost lifetime passes to veterans and members of Gold
Star Families. The annual and lifetime passes, however, do not cover
the full cost of expanded amenity recreation fees or special recreation
permit fees. This section would direct that in addition to no-cost
entrance passes, active-duty members and their dependents, veterans,
and Gold Star Families would also be exempt from standard amenity
recreation fees, expanded amenity recreation fees, and special
recreation permit fees. It also provides for streamlining special
recreation permits to veterans organizations, and exempting these
organizations from allocations of visitor use days. The Department
notes that the exemption for fees has the potential to have a financial
impact to federal agency fee collections, in turn impacting our ability
to use those funds to maintain and operate local recreation facilities.
Additionally, other portions of Section 4, such as the allocated use
exemption, may have significant impacts to the recreational experiences
of other public land users.
Section 5 of the discussion draft requires the Department to seek
to enter into partnerships or agreements with State, Tribal, local or
private entities with expertise in outdoor-related volunteer and
wellness programs for members of the Armed Forces or veterans.
Currently, the NPS Submerged Resources Centers (SRC) Wounded Veterans
in Parks (WVIP) program engages wounded veterans in underwater
scientific and resource management mission-based opportunities that
provide therapeutic and rehabilitative benefits contributing to their
physical and emotional health. Since 2017 the NPS SRC WVIP program has
conducted 15 projects working with 5 different veteran service
organizations in 6 different NPS units. Section 6 directs the
Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture to develop and make public
a strategy to increase visits to Federal recreational lands by members
of the Armed Forces, veterans and Gold Star Families. We look forward
to giving further consideration to how these requirements would fit
with the existing programs we have for these groups.
Section 7 of the discussion draft revises FLREA to add veterans
organizations to the membership of Recreation Resource Advisory
Committees (RACs). The Department supports the concept of adding
representation from military service members and veterans to Recreation
RACs. The BLM notes, however, many RACs currently have difficulty
getting and keeping enough members for a quorum. This could make it
harder, especially if a location does not have a local or even regional
veterans organization.
Section 8 of the discussion draft addresses providing career and
volunteer opportunities for veterans in positions related to the
management of Federal Recreational lands. As noted above, the
Department appreciates that the experience and interests of many
military veterans align well with the wide range of opportunities in
natural and cultural resource lands management within the Department.
We look forward to working with Congress to ensure that this section is
not duplicative of current programs and authorities focused on the
recruitment, training and hiring of veterans.
Finally, Section 9 of the discussion draft provides definitions
that the Department is currently reviewing. and may have additional
comments to ensure clarity in these definitions. The Department would
like to have the opportunity to work with the sponsor and the Committee
to better understand the intent of some of the provisions and to
provide additional comments and recommended amendments.
Chairman Tiffany, this concludes my statement. I would be pleased
to answer any questions you or other members of the Subcommittee may
have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Frank Lands, Deputy Director
for Operations, National Park Service

Mr. Lands did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Owens
Question 1. As my staff worked with the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) to prepare the map for the conveyance in H.R. 2468, the Mountain
View Corridor Completion Act, we received feedback from the BLM to
expand the area conveyed to the State of Utah. Is the BLM interested in
conveying more land in the area? How would a conveyance of this land
ease the management burden on the agency?

______

Mr. Tiffany. Yes, thank you, Mr. Lands. I now recognize Ms.
Jacqueline Emanuel, the Associate Deputy Chief for the National
Forest Service.
Ms. Emanuel, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACQUELINE EMANUEL, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY CHIEF,
NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Emanuel. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany and Ranking
Member Levin. My name is Jacqueline Emanuel, and I am Associate
Deputy Chief of the National Forest System representing the
U.S. Forest Service.
In my portfolio, I oversee recreation, heritage, and
volunteer resources, engineering, the Great American Outdoors
Act, and the wilderness and wild and scenic rivers, business
services, and ecosystem management coordination. My background
includes leading the National Partnership Office and in an
earlier part of my career I stood up the fee demonstration
program, which predates the Federal Lands Recreation
Enhancement Act, which has evolved and grown since that time,
and is an important part of our discussion today.
I am pleased to be here before you today to discuss the
U.S. Department of Agriculture's view on two important pieces
of legislation, both of which focus on serving veterans, active
duty military, and Gold Star families.
The first piece of legislation is H.R. 1829, a bill to
convey lands and facilities from the Forest Service to Gila
County, Arizona so that the county can build a resort for
veterans. The Department supports H.R. 1829 as a
straightforward and common-sense solution to provide Gila
County, Arizona with a facility that they can use for veterans
to enjoy our public lands.
The Department would like to work with the Committee and
the sponsor on some technical changes that address issues
around implementing section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act and related to a reversionary clause in the
bill.
The second piece of legislation is titled the Military and
Veterans in Parks Act, and that draft bill provides tangible
benefits to recognize our veterans, active duty military, and
Gold Star families, building on the important work of the
Alexander Lofgren Veterans and Parks Act.
Additionally, the proposal would make our Federal
recreation lands more accessible to all. The Department
strongly supports the intent of the Military and Veterans in
Parks Act.
Our comments on this bill pertain only to the Forest
Service's ability to efficiently and effectively implement the
Act. The USDA defers to the U.S. Department of the Interior on
the effects of this bill on DOI bureaus and Federal lands under
its jurisdiction.
This draft bill dramatically reduces the fees that
veterans, Gold Star families, and members of the armed services
and their dependents would pay when visiting and enjoying
National Forest System land. This includes most types of
recreation and special recreation use fees.
Americans, and especially veterans, are finding connections
to national forests and grasslands in greater numbers than ever
before. This surge in visitation is helping us understand how
to better serve and provide a variety of outdoor experiences to
accommodate different abilities and needs across the recreation
opportunity spectrum. Our national forests and grasslands
belong to all Americans, and our mission is to provide for
sustainable, high-quality opportunities to all visitors from
any background or ability.
The goals of the Military and Veterans in Parks Act aligns
with the agency's reimagined recreation effort, which engages a
broad spectrum of stakeholders to advance the agency's outdoor
recreation agenda. We want to work with the Committee to manage
through the financial and programmatic impacts of the bill, and
to ensure any unintended consequences are examined as we strive
to apply our policies equally across the public.
We stand at the ready to work with the Committee on the
development of this legislation.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement, and I would be
happy to answer any questions you have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Emanuel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jacqueline Emanuel, Associate Deputy Chief,
National Forest System, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
on H.R. 1829 and Discussion Draft, H.R. ____, ``Military and Veterans
in Parks (MVP) Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the views of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service, regarding H.R.
1829, and H.R. ____, the ``Military and Veterans in Parks Act'' (``MVP
Act'').
H.R. 1829

H.R. 1829 would authorize a land conveyance between the USDA Forest
Service, Tonto National Forest and Gila County, Arizona. The conveyance
would be required if requested within 180 days after enactment of the
bill. The bill would establish the terms for the conveyance as well as
conditions for reversion of the conveyance.
The Tonto National Forest is currently using a portion of the
administrative site that consists of a fire warehouse, helipads, and a
fenced parking/storage area as depicted on the legislative map as
``USFS Area.'' The remainder of the administrative site depicted as
``Gila County Area'' is currently under a special use permit as a term
lease and the Tonto National Forest does not have existing plans to use
it in the future. Transferring the site should not impact the Forest's
administrative or firefighting capacity, and executing the transfer is
unlikely to impede the Forest and the Agency's ability to serve the
public.
This bill would include several provisions related to the transfer.
The action to initiate the transfer is clearly described, and the
parcel for transfer is identified through a legislative map. All of the
costs of conveyance are to be borne by the recipient of the transfer,
and the agency is not required to provide a covenant or warranty with
respect to environmental conditions under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
Finally, the interest of the public and government are protected though
the reversion clause; should the land cease to be used for the purpose
identified in the legislation, the ownership reverts back to the USDA
Forest Service.
The USDA supports H.R. 1829, as a straightforward and commonsense
solution to provide Gila County Arizona with a facility that they can
use to provide services to veterans, but would like to work with the
committee to ensure historic resources are protected as the agency
complies with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act and
to provide the Secretary with some oversight authority should the
reversionary clause be utilized and the parcel to return to federal
ownership.
H.R. ____, Military and Veterans in Parks (MVP) Act

USDA strongly supports the goals of the draft bill titled the
Military and Veterans in Parks (MVP) Act to promote and enhance outdoor
recreation opportunities for members of the Armed Forces and veterans
on Federal recreational lands. The concepts contained in this
discussion draft would provide tangible ways to recognize the service
and sacrifice that this discussion draft is designed to honor. USDA
would like to work with the discussion draft sponsor and Subcommittee
on the MVP Act in addressing technical concerns noted in this testimony
to ensure success in implementation of this discussion draft.
We are deeply committed to connecting all Americans to the
outdoors, and we welcome this opportunity to make Federal lands even
more accessible. The goals of this discussion draft are consistent with
the Forest Service's engagement with stakeholders this summer in an
endeavor called ``Reimagine Recreation,'' which addresses equity and
accessibility issues related to recreation opportunities on Forest
Service-managed lands. Our comments on this discussion draft pertain to
its effect on the Forest Service, including management of National
Forest System lands. USDA defers to the U.S. Department of the Interior
(DOI) on the effects of this discussion draft on DOI bureaus and the
Federal lands under their jurisdiction.
Section 2(a) of the discussion draft would require the Secretary of
Agriculture to select a location in each Forest Service region for at
least one adaptive trail, defined as a continuous, land-based route
with characteristics that allow access for individuals with physical
disabilities. The discussion draft would place similar requirements on
the Secretary of the Interior. Locations for adaptive trails would have
to be identified no later than one year from the date of enactment and
would have to be completed within five years of enactment, in
consultation and coordination with stakeholders. Section 2(b) would
require the Secretaries to identify and develop adaptive recreation
opportunities, which could include improving access to existing
recreational facilities such as campgrounds and target ranges or
activities such as hunting, skiing, rock climbing, boating, and biking.
Section 2(c) would authorize the Secretaries to enter into agreements,
contracts, or partnerships to make adaptive rental equipment available
on Federal recreational lands. Section 2 would also add inventory and
reporting requirements.
Pursuant to national guidelines adopted through public notice and
comment, the Forest Service provides accessible opportunities on some
trails that are designed for hiker/pedestrian use. Other types of
trails, such as equestrian or snowmobile trails, are designed for modes
of travel that involve non-human-powered locomotion. These types of
trails may accommodate people with disabilities. In addition, pursuant
to national guidelines adopted through public notice and comment, the
Forest Service integrates the concept of universal design into
developed recreation areas on NFS lands. This approach ensures that
developed recreation sites like campgrounds are accessible to all
people, including people with disabilities. Some outdoor recreation
opportunities, like outfitting and guiding and ski areas, are provided
by concessioners, not the Forest Service. For these recreation
opportunities, concessioners, rather than the Forest Service, are
responsible for addressing accessibility. Concessioners are required to
comply with applicable accessibility requirements. The Forest Service
works with holders of ski area permits to promote accessibility at ski
areas. The Forest Service would like to work with the discussion draft
sponsor and Subcommittee to ensure that requirements to promote rental
of adaptive recreation equipment do not conflict with concession
operations on National Forest System lands. We would also suggest
language regarding partnerships and other opportunities for making
adaptive equipment available for use at no cost, rather than for rent,
to address equity issues.
Section 3 of the discussion draft would require each Secretary
concerned to coordinate with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the
Secretary of Defense to develop educational and public awareness
materials to disseminate to members of the Armed Forces and veterans
regarding recreation opportunities on Federal lands that are free of
charge, volunteer opportunities, availability and location of trails
for users of all abilities, adaptive equipment assistance, health
benefits of outdoor recreation, and programs and jobs focused on
continuing national service such as the Public Land Corps, AmeriCorps,
and conservation corps programs.
The Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA), enacted in
2004, authorizes the Forest Service, National Park Service, U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land Management, and Bureau of
Reclamation to collect and retain recreation fees and requires most of
the recreation fee revenues to be spent at the sites where they are
collected to enhance the visitor experience and directly benefit
visitors that use those sites. Section 4 of the discussion draft would
exempt Veterans, Gold Star Families, and Members of the Armed Forces
and their dependents from any type of recreation fees, including
standard amenity recreation fees, expanded amenity recreation fees, and
special recreation permit fees. This provision would apply to all
noncommercial recreation fees at all Forest Service-operated sites, as
well as to commercial special recreation permit fees for recreation
events and outfitting and guiding. Fees at concessioner-operated
federally owned recreation sites would remain unchanged by this
discussion draft because FLREA does not apply to recreation use fees
charged by concessioners under other authorities. Aspects of this
section would further advance the Alexander Lofgren Veterans in Parks
Act, which President Biden signed into law in 2021 (Pub. L. No. 117-81,
Sec. 641), by giving members of the Armed Forces and veterans free
passes that are honored at thousands of Federal recreation sites
nation-wide.
Additionally, Section 4 of the discussion draft would require the
Secretaries to issue a special recreation permit to veterans
organizations in areas where there is no limited entry permit system
and capacity is available; would require the Secretaries to waive the
requirement for a special recreation permit for veterans organizations
based on a finding of nominal effects; and would preclude the
Secretaries from requiring a permit or reservation for a picnic area if
the public is not required to obtain a permit or reservation for the
area. Section 4 also would provide that service days allocated to
outfitters and guides would not be applied to recreation events
conducted by veterans' organizations in the area.
The goals of Section 4 generally align with USDA's Equity Action
Plan, which promotes access to recreation and outdoor experiences by
underserved communities. However, it is important to consider a
balanced approach and the impact of recreation fee waivers for all
recreation opportunities on Federal land management agencies' ability
to offer the high-quality recreation services the public has come to
expect. On the one hand, the Agency is proud to waive standard amenity
recreation fees to veterans and members of Gold Star families pursuant
to current law. On the other hand, commercial special recreation
permits authorize business opportunities on Federal lands and are
appropriately subject to a special recreation permit fee. The Forest
Service relies on recreation fee revenues derived from FLREA for basic
operations, to prevent its recreation sites from becoming part of its
deferred maintenance backlog, to better manage Federal lands under its
jurisdiction, and to respond quickly to changes in visitation levels.
There would be financial impacts from the waiver on concessioners'
business operations as well that should be considered. Special use
permit fee waivers could result in inability to provide appropriate
staffing to respond to visitor needs, particularly at units with large
active duty or veteran populations, potentially resulting in unintended
outcomes. USDA would like to work with the discussion draft sponsor and
Subcommittee on technical improvements and clarifications to Section 4
of the discussion draft as there could be significant financial impacts
on commercial recreation service providers. It would be important to
minimize any real or perceived differences in treatment from other
permitted user groups, including those aimed at supporting other
populations with vocational or rehabilitative needs.
Section 5 of the MVP Act would seek to promote military and veteran
outdoor recreation through partnerships, including authority to provide
financial and technical assistance. Section 6 of the discussion draft
would require the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior jointly
to develop a strategy within one year of enactment to increase visits
to Federal recreational lands by members of the Armed Forces, veterans,
and Gold Star Families.
Section 7 of the discussion draft would require representation for
veteran organizations on Recreation Resource Advisory Committees
(RRACs). USDA questions the need for Section 7 given that RRACs are
focused on making recommendations about proposed recreation fees and
Section 4 would exempt veterans from paying those fees.
Section 8 would encourage the hiring of veterans in all positions
related to management of Federal lands and would require the Secretary
concerned to establish a new program or expand an existing program to
recruit, train, and accept members of the Armed Forces and veterans as
volunteers on Federal recreational lands. USDA supports the intent of
these provisions as they would provide an opportunity to create a new
program, in collaboration with the Department of Defense, for targeting
outreach to service members and veterans as well as forging new paths
to hiring in Federal land management agencies. We would be interested
in discussing changes to the Public Land Corp Act with the sponsor and
Subcommittee to advance these pathways.
Conclusion

USDA strongly supports the goals of the discussion draft to benefit
active-duty military personnel and their families as well as veterans.
We do, however, have concerns about financial and programmatic impacts
of the discussion draft. This discussion draft would not be revenue-
neutral compared to existing statutory authority, and we would like to
work with the bill sponsor and Subcommittee to minimize revenue
impacts. Additionally, we would like to work with the discussion draft
sponsor, the Subcommittee, and our partner land management agencies
regarding improvements to the discussion draft that could aid the
agencies in administering affected programs more efficiently and
equitably. Finally, FLREA is not permanent, and if this discussion
draft were enacted, elements of its implementation could be affected if
FLREA expired. The Administration's FY 2024 budget proposes
appropriations language to extend the authorization of FLREA through
2025.
That concludes my testimony, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or the other members have for me.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ms. Emanuel. I am now going to
recognize Members for 5 minutes for questions.
Representative Stauber, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair, thank you for holding this meeting.
I want to thank you for convening this hearing today, as well
as for the bills' sponsors for putting forth these important
pieces of legislation.
We owe a debt of gratitude to the men and women who wear
the cloth of this country, along with the families that are
forced to sacrifice in their everyday lives to enable their
loved ones to serve. One very small step that we can take to
thank these heroes is ensuring that they have access to our
public and Federal lands, and are able to enjoy the wonderful
benefits these lands have to offer. That is why I am happy to
support a number of the bills before us today.
The district that I represent includes significant public
lands such as the Superior National Forest, the Chippewa
National Forest, Voyageurs National Park, and Grand Portage
National Park. The public lands in Minnesota play such an
important role in enabling us to live our way of life.
Unfortunately, the Federal Government and the bureaucracy
that exert control over public lands often do not make it easy
for my constituents to enjoy these resources. Often out-of-
touch bureaucrats living in Washington push administrative
policies that hinder our access.
Time and time again, I have urged our colleagues at the
Forest Service, the National Park Service, and other Federal
agencies to vigorously engage our local communities rather than
simply dictate to them from Washington. Our active duty service
members, veterans, and their families, particularly, should not
face hurdles or difficulties in accessing and enjoying our
public lands. We should be keeping these interests in our
minds.
It is important that our public lands actually serve the
public and the communities where they are located. That is why
I am happy to see several of these bills build collaboration
with our local communities, allowing the American people closer
control and access to our public lands.
I want to thank my colleague from Virginia, Representative
Kiggans, for putting forth the Military and Veterans in Parks
Act, which would better enable our military and veterans to
access our public lands. In particular, I appreciate this
legislation's focus on collaboration and partnerships with
service member and veterans organizations, as well as state,
local, tribal, and private-sector stakeholders.
It is through these partnerships that the National Park
Service, the Forest Service, and the Bureau of Land Management
can build off the incredible work already being conducted by
our constituents in the communities we represent. That includes
the work of organizations like Veterans on the Lake in Ely,
Minnesota. Veterans on the Lake provides the opportunity for
our veterans and their families to enjoy and recreate in the
Superior National Forest in northeast Minnesota. Thanks to the
work of this organization, hundreds of veterans and their
families are able to boat, fish, swim, ski, and snowmobile.
Veterans on the Lake ensures that all individuals, no matter
their physical abilities, are able to participate in these
activities.
I am hopeful that Representative Kiggans' legislation will
help enable and replicate programs and initiatives like
Veterans on the Lake on public lands across our great nation.
Frankly, I believe the role of our Federal agencies is to get
out of the way and, instead, partner with these local
communities, enable them to provide these services and
opportunities.
Our Federal agencies do not need to reinvent the wheel.
They can build on the progress that great organizations like
Veterans on the Lake in my district already are doing, and I
believe Representative Kiggans' proposed legislation is a great
opportunity to do just that.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields, and now I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Levin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lands, I will start with you. Thank you for your
feedback on the GROW Act. I appreciate DOI's commitment to
employing veterans and military spouses under current programs,
and support for scaling up these efforts through the pilot that
we are proposing in the GROW Act.
My office received technical assistance on this bill from
your staff in May regarding the timing challenges referenced in
your testimony. As we move this bill forward through the
legislative process, I would be glad to accept DOI's
recommendations to extend the initial briefing deadline to 180
days after enactment, and strike the requirement for
legislative recommendations as part of the initial briefing.
However, I believe it is important to keep the
implementation briefing at 12 months after the pilot commences
so that Congress receives an update at the pilot's midpoint.
Does this sound fair, and do you have any outstanding concerns
about that?
Mr. Lands. Thank you for the question. At this point, I do
not have the information to actually provide a yes or no answer
on that. But I certainly will take it back to the staff, and we
are committed to working with your staff to make sure that we
are looking at the appropriate timelines.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. I appreciate that, and we will
definitely follow up on that with you and continue the dialogue
with you.
Ms. Emanuel, I will turn to you. The GROW Act was
originally introduced last Congress by my friend, Conor Lamb,
to establish a pilot program to employ veterans at both DOI and
at USDA. Conor was kind enough to allow me to take up the
mantle on this bill following his retirement--it seems like he
is too young to have retired--but his retirement from Congress,
and I decided to break it up into two separate proposals,
starting with the Department of the Interior.
While the version of this bill that Conor had differs from
ours, and the portion dealing with the USDA workforce hasn't
been introduced yet, I would be remiss if I didn't take the
opportunity to seek feedback from you, since you are here. Do
you have any initial thoughts you can share on a potential USDA
analogue of the GROW Act?
Ms. Emanuel. Thank you for that question. While I was
invited here to speak on MVP and H.R. 1829, I do know that we
would welcome any opportunity we have to work with you on a
pilot that employs veterans, so we would be happy to engage
with staff and provide technical assistance or testimony on it
in the future.
Mr. Levin. Fantastic. We will follow up with both of you.
We really appreciate your expertise on this as we work to get
this right.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Mrs. Peltola, would you like to be recognized for 5 minutes
for questioning?
Mrs. Peltola. Could you come back to me in just a minute?
Mr. Tiffany. I certainly can, absolutely.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Emanuel, the Forest Service currently has
a maintenance backlog of about $7.7 billion. Will the
conveyance such as the one directed by Representative Crane's
legislation help the agency reduce its maintenance backlog?
Ms. Emanuel. I suppose it is possible that it would help.
We want to ensure that we convey that property in the best
condition possible, and take care of the archeological
resources that we know exist, and bring those to resolution
with it, and we are retaining some of that land for the use of
firefighting and other emergency operations. But transferring
that land in a good condition is in the best interest of the
United States.
Mr. Tiffany. Would it allow you to focus resources in other
areas by doing that?
Ms. Emanuel. It would.
Mr. Tiffany. The Forest Service published a research paper
that I would like to enter into the record.

Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

The full paper can be found on the Committee Repository at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II10/20230720/116216/HHRG-
118-II10-20230720-SD003.pdf

Mr. Tiffany. The paper found that public lands were ideal
venues to increase outdoor recreation opportunities for
veterans. Despite the importance of our public lands, this
research found that efforts to promote veterans recreation
among Federal land managers were ad hoc and lacked a cohesive
strategy.
Do you believe the MVP Act will help the Forest Service
elevate veterans' recreation as a priority nationwide, and
enhance the agency's overall strategy for increasing
recreational access?
Ms. Emanuel. I appreciate that question. Absolutely. This
promotion of partnerships that specifically can be in service
to veterans and their families and active military, and having
some structure, focus, and strategy around it will just help us
replicate those types of activities that we already know are
serving them well across the nation.
So, I really do believe that this is an important part of
us reimagining our recreation and joining stakeholders to
create those opportunities.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Lands, Quinn Brett, a former National Park
Service employee who specialized in outdoor recreation,
recently stated in an article that the National Park Service's
trails haven't been measured probably since the beginning of
time to determine whether they meet accessibility criteria.
What is the Park Service currently doing to measure trails to
determine whether they are suitable for adaptive recreation,
and how could the MVP Act help bolster those efforts?
Mr. Lands. Sir, right now, across the nation, we have
21,000 miles of trails and a portion of that, obviously, is
accessible to disabled and those that have difficulty.
I think, right now, although we do not have a national
understanding of what our accessible trails are, we do have
good numbers throughout the parks. And each park actually
describes on their website what accessible trails are
available, and what accessible utilities and facilities are
available. I think this Act would help us as an agency to pull
that information together, and I think there is benefit to
that.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, and I yield and recognize Mrs.
Peltola for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think you kind
of asked this and kind of answered this, but you do have
adaptive trails right now in all of our parks, is that correct?
Mr. Lands. Most of the parks.
Mrs. Peltola. Most of the parks.
Mr. Lands. Most of our parks have accessible trails. Many
of the park units that we described before are historic in
nature, and therefore would not have the acreage to potentially
provide accessible trails. But many of the parks that are more
of our natural resources and land base do have accessible
trails.
I was just recently at a park in Golden Gate and had the
ability to walk around and see how they are providing access
not only to veterans and disabled veterans, but also our
disabled population.
Mrs. Peltola. Just as a follow-up, Mr. Chairman, do you
have anything online that helps park-goers see in advance if
they have accessibility?
Mr. Lands. We do. First of all, every park generally has
information on accessible trails, and then we also have a
website that specifically identifies those parks, and
highlights which parks have accessibility trails and other
features.
Mrs. Peltola. OK, and I just think it is wonderful that
your last name is Lands and you are in this field.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Lands. Thank you, ma'am.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, that is a good note. Next, I would like
to recognize Ms. Porter for 5 minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lands, I had a hearing on public lands accessibility
about 2 years ago when I was Chair of the Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations within the Natural Resources
Committee. And one of the things that the witnesses said, and I
would love if you could comment on this, is that a lot of the
design choices and features that we might make to improve
accessibility are also things that are consistent with good
conservation choices and, generally, more flexible use of
parks.
For example, the grade that trails need to be to permit
people to use wheelchairs or assistive walking devices on is
also the same grade that they recommend to prevent soil
erosion, and that some of the things around picnic tables, for
example, and making them wheelchair accessible also help people
who have kids and bring high chairs to campgrounds.
Can you comment on the sometimes argument that we hear that
we have to make a choice between making things accessible and
delivering on the mission of conservation of the National Park
Service?
Mr. Lands. Yes, ma'am, I agree with you. Many of the
accessibility features that we provided within our trails also
meet some of our other requirements, and are designed
specifically to do that. And I leave that to the very capable
and smart engineers that we have working for the National Park
Service, to look at those things that cross-cut against not
only making sure that we have accessibility to disabled, but
reducing impacts to the environment and also reducing costs and
looking for sustainability options.
So, those opportunities do exist. They are out there, and
we are working hard to make sure we incorporate those into our
national parks.
Ms. Porter. Ms. Emanuel, would you have anything to add?
Ms. Emanuel. We also incorporate a universal design in our
approach to providing outdoor experiences, and build in
accessibility through our landscape architecture that we have
professionally nationwide, just as a standard practice.
Ms. Porter. Yes, because I think one of the things is that
there is sort of this understanding of, and I think the poster
here really illustrates kind of some of what people think of as
disability, which may be people who have severe or very limited
or need additional mobility capacity. But we are also talking
about parks that are seeing a wider range. People are staying
active later in life. We saw many more people with young
children begin to use the parks.
So, I think, when we think about making the parks more
accessible, we have to recognize that it is something that we
actually do for all of us, because all of us at different
stages and places in our lives will benefit from these
accessibility features. When you lower things for people, for
instance, who may use a wheelchair, you also make it possible
for the 5-year-old to use that drinking fountain. And as a mom,
I appreciated that. And when you have sensory things for people
who maybe are visually impaired, those are also things that
work well for kids and for learning.
So, I just want to emphasize that I think this bill and
this approach is a win for all Americans, and I hope we can
approach it from that matter. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. Mr. Crane, do you wish
to ask any questions?
OK. Well, thank you for your testimony and answering these
questions today. We appreciate it very much, and we will now
move on to our third panel. I would like to thank both of the
witnesses for their valuable testimony.
While the Clerk resets our witness table, I will remind the
witnesses that under Committee Rules, they must limit their
oral statements to 5 minutes, but their entire statement will
appear in the hearing record.
I would also like to remind our witnesses of the timing
lights, which will turn red at the end of your 5-minute
statement, and to please remember to turn on your microphone.
As with the second panel, I will allow all witnesses to
testify before Member questioning.
Just a note to those that are coming up. We are going to be
going to votes soon, but we will get started here, and we will
come back if those votes get called before all of you get a
chance to give your testimony.
First of all, I am going to introduce the Honorable Woody
Cline. He is the District 3 Supervisor for Gila County,
Arizona.
Mr. Cline, I hope you are able to get settled in there.
I apologize, Mr. Cline, you have a much more esteemed
person to introduce you than myself, and that would be your
Representative, Mr. Eli Crane.

Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Clearly, that is not
true, but I appreciate you allowing me to introduce my guest
today.
Thank you, Mr. Cline, for appearing today before this
Committee, and also for your leadership on this bill.
Mr. Cline was elected as Gila County Supervisor in 2016,
and is a fourth-generation Gila County resident who resides in
Young, Arizona. He was born in Globe, Arizona, and raised in
Young, Arizona, and is the first resident to be elected to the
Board of Supervisors.
As a member of the Board of Supervisors, Supervisor Cline
also serves on the National Association of Counties, Coalition
of Arizona and New Mexico Counties, San Carlos Apache Tribe
Partnership Steering Committee, Gila County Board of Health,
and the Correctional Officers Retirement Plan Local Board for
Gila County Sheriff Office Dispatchers.
Formerly, Woody was the 2016-2018 President of the Gila
County Cattle Growers Association, and serves on the Board of
Directors for the Arizona Cattle Growers Association. He has
spent 19-plus years with the U.S. Forest Service working in
fire and range management, and his understanding of public land
usage and management is a valuable addition to the Board of
Supervisors.
Woody, thank you for leaving your beautiful ranch, and wife
Letha, and three daughters to come chat with us today. We
really appreciate it, and admire your determination to get this
legislation passed.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Cline, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. WOODY CLINE, SUPERVISOR, GILA COUNTY,
ARIZONA

Mr. Cline. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Committee members, and
thank you, Representative Crane, for that. That was very nice.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify on H.R. 1829 to ask
the Secretary of Agriculture to convey the Pleasant Valley
Ranger District Administrative Site to Gila County.
I would like to commend the bill's sponsor, Representative
Eli Crane, for championing this bill, it is a very good bill,
and for introducing it to legislation, and recognizing the
uniqueness of the area and its many outstanding resources that
could benefit our veterans.
As Mr. Crane had said, I took office in 2017, at which time
I started this project for Gila County. It has been in the
works ever since then. We have come through many, many hurdles
and obstacles to get to this point, and it is a very well-worth
project.
The project consists of 232 acres on this administrative
site there in Young. It is surrounded by three sides of
private, and the back side by public lands. It is very pretty.
It has been an admin site since the early 1900s, and then in
most recent years it was combined with another ranger district,
in which case all the staff members and people from that site
were moved to Payson, Arizona, to the other district to work
out of that.
The location is in Young, which is a remote, small town in
Arizona in about the center of Gila County, a little more
towards the north. There are about 800 to 1,000 full-time
residents there. The closest towns to Young, Arizona are
Payson, which is 65 miles, and Globe, which is about 70 miles
from Young. Very quiet town. Not a lot of activities there, so
it really fits for a project like this.
Through the years we have held many meetings on this site,
not only with the delegation but also with local governments
and town hall meetings, as well. Never once through the 6\1/2\
years we have been involved with this site have we ever found
any anyone opposed to the site. Everyone has been more than
supportive of it. The only the only issues we ever had was just
the process of getting to this point.
The site has a 6,000-square-foot administrative building,
two brick residences, two sets of barracks, a historic ranger
office, a historic ranger house, a historic barn, helipads, and
a well and wastewater systems. The three historic sites are on
the National Historic Register and SHPO out of Arizona has been
consulted. All that has been gone through, and we are excited
to take on the responsibility of keeping those sites up and
pristine to what they were in the past.
As time went by, we went ahead and pursued a special use
permit with the Forest Service to take occupancy of this site.
And what that did was that allowed us to go in there and go
ahead and start maintaining the site and working on it.
Today, the county has invested a little over $2 million on
the site. We have a partnership with the Forest Service to
support and keep up all the infrastructure on it. Our first
stage is complete. Our next stage is getting ready to start,
and that is going to be about $3 million project on our next
stage for the site.
We had this go through the County Supervisors Association.
All 15 counties in Arizona supported it.
With that, I would yield back and entertain any questions,
and thank you, Mr. Chair, for having me.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Cline follows:]

Prepared Statement of Woody Cline, Gila County Arizona Supervisor
on H.R. 1829

Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify on H.R. 1829, to require the Secretary of
Agriculture to convey the Pleasant Valley Ranger District
Administrative Site to Gila County, Arizona. I would like to commend
the bill's sponsor, Rep. Eli Crane, R-AZ for introducing this
legislation and for recognizing the uniqueness of the area and its many
outstanding resources that could benefit our veterans.

Project Description

Gila County proposes to provide a peaceful respite for veterans and
their families in a beautiful retreat-like facility in Young, Arizona.
The subject property consists of 232 acres of pristine land along with
a number of buildings for meetings and overnight accommodations.

Project Location

The project location is in Young, Arizona. The nearest cities to
Young are Payson, 60 miles to the northwest, and Globe/Miami 65 miles
to the south. From the Phoenix area, Young is about 150 miles away and
typically takes 2.5 to 3 hours by vehicle. The site is a former Tonto
National Forest (TNF) Administrative Site for the Payson/Pleasant
Valley Ranger District. In 2016 the TNF began moving out of the
facility and re-located to Payson where a new administrative site was
built.
In 2017, Gila County began talks with TNF staff for the ownership
of the property to be transferred to Gila County. During the many
discussions with TNF staff, they admitted that eventually the buildings
on the property would be ``bull-dozed'' due to a lack of maintenance
funds. County staff along with myself determined that the best way to
protect the site and buildings was to seek ownership. One of the
buildings that would have been bulldozed included a 6,000 square foot
administrative office building built in 2001 and occupied in 2002.

Public Participation

Many discussions were held with county staff, community members and
leaders regarding the re-use of the site. Early on, it was determined
that it would be the ideal place to provide a retreat-like facility for
veterans and their families that need a peaceful respite for healing
and re-connection.

Background

Meetings were held with the Tonto National Forest Supervisor, Neil
Bosworth as well as United States Forest Service Chief Vicki
Christensen and Deputy Chris French in Washington, DC. I also held
discussions and sought advice from Congressional staff to determine the
best path for the county to obtain ownership and have the site along
with buildings, transferred to Gila County. It was determined that a
bill needed to be written and presented to both the House and the
Senate in order to start the transfer of ownership. In 2020 Tonto
National Forest Service Supervisor Neil Bosworth suggested a 20-year
Special Use Permit in order for Gila County to begin the development of
the site into a Veterans Camp/Retreat and provide the much-needed
maintenance of buildings and land. The property contains a number of
structures and an RV park that will are a part of the project:

6,000 square foot administrative building

2 brick residences

2 sets of barracks (can sleep 10 each with kitchens)

Historic Ranger Office

Historic Ranger House

Historic barn

Heli pads

Well and wastewater system

The three historic structures are listed on the National Historic
Register of Historic Places. That fact prompted a consultation with the
State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) and that consultation was
held in April 2020. The consultation included an assessment of the
current condition of the buildings and advice from SHPO regarding the
maintenance and restoration of the buildings. A plan was developed by
County staff and submitted to the SHPO in May 2020 and approved in June
2020. The Special Use Permit could not be approved without the SHPO
consultation.
Once SHPO approved the county's plan regarding the historic
structures, the next step was to develop an Operating Plan that was
submitted to the TNF for consultation and approval. The Operating Plan
was approved in May 2021. Gila County wholeheartedly accepts the
responsibility of the preservation of these historic structures.
The Special Use Permit was developed by TNF staff and presented to
Gila County. The Special Use Permit and supporting documents was
approved by the Gila County Board of Supervisors on July 27, 2021 and
signed by the Tonto National Forest Supervisor on July 28, 2021.
On March 28, 2023, Rep. Eli Crane (R-AZ) introduced Bill H.R. 1829
and on March 28,2023 Senator Mark Kelly (D-AZ) and Senator Kyrsten
Sinema (D-AZ) to convey the Pleasant Valley Ranger District
Administrative Site to Gila County, Arizona.
On February 6, 2023, Arizona State Legislator, Rep. David Marshall
(R) introduced HB 2725 (appropriation; Department of Veteran Services
to appropriate $1M of state general fund money to Gila County for the
Pleasant Valley Veterans Retreat. During the course of the State budget
process, the amount increased from $1M to $3M. The bill was included in
Arizona Governor Katie Hobbs (D) final state budget.
Gila County Commitment to Project

The Gila County Board of Supervisors and county staff fully support
this project. The County is committed to being good stewards of the
beautiful land and buildings included on the site. Prior to the lease
being in place, the historic buildings were cleaned and ``rodent
proofed'' (with Tonto National Forest (TNF) approval) in order to
protect them from further damage. Without the County's involvement the
historic structures and other buildings would have fallen into
disrepair and eventually would have been removed by the Forest Service
due to a lack of maintenance funds.
Included in the Special Use Permit is the condition that the TNF
may offset all or part of the permit fee by the amount paid by the
holder for renovation, reconditioning, improvement, and maintenance
deemed to be the government's responsibility, pursuant to Granger-Thye
Fee Offset, 16 U.S.C. 580d. Gila County has accepted that
responsibility.
The Gila County Board of Supervisors approved an allocation of $2.5
million to the project and to date $1.6 million has been contracted and
$200,000 has been invested in the water and wastewater treatment
system. The water and wastewater system also supports the Tonto
National Forest's outlying Fire Station (still located on the site but
not included in the 232 acres) for fire suppression.
The transfer of ownership to the County will ensure that this
beautiful property will be protected and maintained preserving its rich
history in the community of Young and Gila County.
Gila County Vision:
We believe in the Family Unit and its ability to heal. We support
military service members by reconnecting the family unit through a
holistic approach within nature, while connecting the family unit with
resources and programs.
Framework for Veterans Retreat:
As listed above, there are several buildings on the site that will
be remodeled to provide the ultimate experience for veterans and their
families.
The current administration building will become the ``Main Lodge''
that will provide a check in area, meeting space, game and resource
rooms. A Veteran Ceremonial Grounds will be included at the Main Lodge
as well. Also included, will be family housing, playground areas,
walking trails sand volleyball court, horseshoe pits, gym & activity
center.
Improvements Completed
The administration building has been completed and is ready to
accept veteran events and to facilitate services.
The two existing barracks have been remodeled to include new
kitchens and bathrooms and will house 10 veterans per night. A large
common area in each of the barracks will provide a gathering place for
group meetings or relaxing.
The two brick residences have been remodeled and will be available
for families or individuals to occupy on a limited basis.
The RV Park has been upgraded and will provide 7 campsites for
groups, families or individuals.
Future Planned Improvements
The Historic Ranger residence and the Historic District Office will
be remodeled and will expand on the overnight options for families. Our
vision includes a ``Family Reconnect'' program for families in crisis
or families needing to reconnect after a parent has returned from a
deployment.
Also in the planning stages is the construction of an event center
that will provide a commercial kitchen and dining area as well as areas
for recreational activities and meeting space. And in addition, a
handicapped accessible house will be built to accommodate disabled
individuals.
Statewide Support
As I previously mentioned, we have had bi-partisan support for this
project. Rep. David Marshal (R) introduced H.R. 2725 and Governor Katie
Hobbs (D) included the bill in the State's budget.
On January 19, 2023, the County Supervisors Association, an
association that includes all 15 Arizona counties passed Resolution
Number 1-23 in support of the Pleasant Valley Veterans Retreat.
The bills introduced in Congress include a bill co-sponsored by our
Arizona Senators Kelly and Sinema, both Democrats and Rep. Eli Crane
our Republican. Crane and Kelly are both veterans and recognize the
importance of a retreat for veterans and the re-purposing of this
federal land.
This concludes my testimony. Thank you for the opportunity to
discuss this important issue and I would be willing to answer any
questions you may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Mr. Cline. Now, I would
like to recognize Ms. Lisa Wilson, Deputy Director of
Engineering and Operations, Utah Department of Transportation.
Ms. Wilson, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LISA WILSON, DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING AND
OPERATIONS, UTAH DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, SALT LAKE CITY,
UTAH

Ms. Wilson. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Levin, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of H.R. 2468, the Mountain
View Corridor Completion Act.
Speaking on behalf of the Utah Department of
Transportation, we are very grateful to Representative Owens
for sponsoring this bill.
The purpose of Representative Owens' bill is to authorize
the Bureau of Land Management to transfer or sell three small
parcels of Federal land to Utah. These parcels are within the
boundaries of Camp Williams, Utah.
[Slide.]
Ms. Wilson. If I could draw your attention to Slide 1, this
map shows the perimeter of Camp Williams. It is a large, active
military training installation created by an Executive Order of
President Woodrow Wilson in 1914, which withdrew over 18,000
acres of Federal public land for use by the military.
Today, the camp is used primarily by the Utah National
Guard, and is also the location of a large National Security
Agency data center. Camp Williams is located about 25 miles
south of Salt Lake City, which straddles the border between
Salt Lake County and Utah County, two of Utah's most populous
counties. From time to time over the last 100 years, Congress
has authorized transfers of land between the Federal Government
and Utah related to Camp Williams. Camp Williams has grown to
encompass approximately 20,000 acres of Federal land and 4,000
acres of land owned by the state of Utah.
This bill would authorize Utah to purchase 36 unused acres
of the Federal 20,000 acres of Camp Williams. These small
parcels are needed to complete a critical Utah highway project
called the Mountain View Corridor.
To briefly give you a sense of importance, according to the
2020 U.S. Census Bureau report, Utah's population is growing at
the fastest rate of any state in the nation. That growth
continues, particularly along the heavily populated Wasatch
Front in Salt Lake and Utah Counties, where well over half of
Utah citizens reside.
One impact of that growth is Redwood Road, the only road
that connects Western Salt Lake and Utah Counties, and which
operates over a right-of-way through Camp Williams, has
experienced dramatic increases in traffic volume from both the
general public and the military. This road has historically
provided the only public access to the Utah National Guard
Headquarters, as well as the data center.
To address this growth, about 15 years ago the Utah
Department of Transportation (UDOT) began the construction of
what Utahns call the Mountain View Corridor, an important 35-
mile highway between Salt Lake and Utah Counties.
[Slide.]
Ms. Wilson. Slide 2 shows the location of Mountain View
Corridor.
From the beginning of this project, UDOT has worked closely
with the Utah National Guard, as well as the Bureau of Land
Management, on securing the necessary land rights to
accommodate the project's alignment. Both entities have been
very cooperative. However, we need congressional help to
complete the last few miles of the Mountain View Corridor.
[Slide.]
Ms. Wilson. Slide 3 shows the completed portions of the
Mountain View Corridor in blue and the uncompleted portion in
orange.
While most of the yet-to-be-completed roadway will traverse
state land, including some of the state-owned portion of Camp
Williams, three triangular-shaped pieces of property that the
highway would impact are irregular parcels of Federal land
administered by the Bureau of Land Management.
[Slide.]
Ms. Wilson. While these parcels, as shown in Slide 4, are
located entirely within the boundary of Camp Williams, neither
the BLM nor the Utah National Guard actively use or manage
these parcels.
Because of President Woodrow Wilson's Executive Order, the
Bureau of Land Management considers these parcels to be under
the indefinite active control and management of the military
and will not transfer the parcels to Utah without congressional
authorization. As I previously mentioned, the National Guard
has been cooperative throughout the process and supports
completing the Mountain View Corridor. We have included in the
materials provided to this Committee, a copy of a letter of
support from the Adjutant General of the Utah National Guard,
Major General Taylor Michael Turley.
In closing, UDOT is confident that completion of the final
phase of the Mountain View Corridor is in the best interest of
the public safety in this fast-growing part of Utah, and urges
the passage of H.R. 2468, the Mountain View Corridor Completion
Act.
Thank you for your time today.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lisa J. Wilson, Deputy Director of Engineering
and Operations, Utah Department of Transportation
on H.R. 2468

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, Vice Chair Curtis,
and distinguished members of the Federal Lands Subcommittee: On behalf
of the Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT), thank you for
providing the opportunity to testify in support of H.R. 2468, Mountain
View Corridor Completion Act. We also express gratitude to
Representative Burgess Owens for sponsoring this important legislation.
The purpose of the bill is to authorize the Bureau of Land
Management to transfer or sell three small parcels of federal land to
Utah. These parcels are located within the boundaries of Camp Williams,
Utah. The land will be used by UDOT to complete an important highway
project that will benefit not just Utah citizens, but also members of
the military who utilize Camp Williams.
Camp Williams is a large active military training installation
created by an Executive Order of President Woodrow Wilson in 1914. That
order withdrew over 18,000 acres of federal public land for use by the
military. Today, the camp is used primarily by the Utah National Guard
and is also the location of a large National Security Agency data
center.
Camp Williams is located about 25 miles south of Salt Lake City,
Utah and straddles the border between Salt Lake County and Utah County,
which are Utah's two most populous counties.
From time to time over the last one-hundred years, Congress has
authorized transfers of land between the federal government and Utah
related to Camp Williams, and Camp Williams has grown to encompass
approximately 20,000 acres of federal land and 4,000 acres of land
owned by the State of Utah. [See Ex. 1.]
Representative Owens' bill would authorize Utah to purchase 36
acres of the federal 20,000 acres of Camp Williams land. These small
parcels are needed to complete a critical Utah highway project, called
the Mountain View Corridor.
According to the 2020 United States Census Bureau report, Utah's
population is growing at the fastest rate of any state in the nation.
That growth continues, particularly along the heavily populated Wasatch
Front in Salt Lake County and Utah County where well over half of Utah
citizens reside.
One impact of that growth is that Redwood Road, the only road that
connects western Salt Lake County and western Utah County, and which
operates over a right-of-way through Camp Williams, has experienced
dramatic increases in traffic volume from both the general public and
the military. This road has historically provided the only public
access to the Utah National Guard Headquarters area as well as the NSA
data center.
To address this growth, beginning fifteen years ago, UDOT began the
planning and construction of what Utahns call the Mountain View
Corridor--an important 35-mile highway between Salt Lake County and
Utah County. [See Ex. 2.]
From the beginning of this project, UDOT has worked closely with
the Utah National Guard as well as the Bureau of Land Management on
securing the necessary land rights to accommodate the project's
expansion alignment. Both entities have been very cooperative with
UDOT, and the first two phases of the project have been completed. This
needed project is already significantly increasing capacity and
improving public safety for both the general public and the military.
However, Utah needs Congressional help to complete the last few
southern miles of the Mountain View Corridor. [See Ex. 3] While most of
the yet-to-be completed roadway will traverse state land, including
some of the state-owned portion of Camp Williams, three triangular-
shaped pieces of property that the highway would impact are irregular
parcels of federal land administered by the Bureau of Land Management.
While these parcels are located entirely within the boundaries of Camp
Williams, neither the BLM nor the Utah National Guard actively use or
manage these parcels. [See Ex. 4.]
Because of President Woodrow Wilson's Executive Order, the Bureau
of Land Management considers these parcels to be under the indefinite
active control and management of the military and will not transfer the
parcels to Utah without Congressional authorization.
As mentioned, the Utah National Guard has been cooperative
throughout this process and supports completing the Mountain View
Corridor. We have included in the materials provided to this committee
a copy of a letter of support from the Adjutant General of the Utah
National Guard, Major General Taylor Michael Turley. We also understand
that Major General Turley is sending the letter to all committee
members. [See Ex. 5.]
UDOT is confident that completion of the final phase of the
Mountain View Corridor is in the best interest of the public safety of
both the military and the traveling public in this fast-growing part of
Utah, and we respectfully urge timely passage of HR. 2468, the Mountain
View Corridor Completion Act.
Thank you for your consideration. At any Member's request, UDOT is
pleased to answer any questions or to provide any additional
information to the subcommittee.

*****

EXHIBITS

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Deputy Director Wilson. I would now
like to recognize Mr. Jeremy Villanueva, the Government Affairs
Associate Director for the Wounded Warrior Project.
Sir, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEREMY VILLANUEVA, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS ASSOCIATE
DIRECTOR, WOUNDED WARRIOR PROJECT, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Villanueva. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Levin, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Federal
Lands for this opportunity to speak before you.
Since our founding 20 years ago, Wounded Warrior Project
has been helping post-9/11 wounded, ill, and injured veterans
address their biggest challenges and reach their highest
potential through impactful, no-cost programing and advocacy.
Throughout our history we have explored new ways to tailor
these programs to improve the mental, physical, and financial
well-being of those we serve as effectively as possible.
Today, I am pleased to show our support for two bills
before you based on our service to more than 190,000 veterans
across the country.
First, I want to share our support for the Get Rewarding
Outdoor Work for our Veterans Act, or the GROW for our Veterans
Act. From our perspective, veteran employment is key to not
just financial well-being, but also mental health. According to
results from our 2022 Annual Warrior Survey, Wounded Warrior
Project alumni are succeeding in finding work, but the
unemployment rate is still higher than the U.S. veteran and
general populations.
For the 6.8 percent of warriors who responded that they are
unemployed, the top reported barriers to employment were mental
health or physical distress, difficulty translating military
skills to the civilian workforce, and lack of education. We
believe that the GROW for our Veterans Act can address all
three of these factors.
Several military occupations involve large amounts of time
working outdoors in relatively harsh environments. These types
of jobs leave veterans with wilderness survival skills, an
understanding of various ecosystems, and other skills that are
related to outdoor recreation. Despite this, GAO recently
observed that veterans comprise a smaller proportion of
employees in outdoor recreation positions than in the larger
Federal workforce. Across all agencies in 2021, veterans and
outdoor recreation positions accounted for 11 percent of the
workforce, compared to 18 percent of all other Federal
occupations.
In addition to the financial benefits that would accrue
from increasing veteran employment, outdoor work can have
important mental health benefits, and research has shown that
direct sunlight exposure and being in nature can lead to
reduced depression, improve physical and psychological well-
being, social connection, resilience, and other benefits.
The GROW for our Veterans Act requires the Department of
the Interior and the Department of Veterans Affairs to
collaborate for a new, 2-year pilot program to connect veterans
with Federal jobs in conservation, resource management, and
environmental protection.
It would also direct VA to report to Congress, each Federal
agency, about the best practices of its warrior training
advancement course to help veterans find jobs during this
pilot.
Wounded Warrior Project proudly supports the GROW for our
Veterans Act, and shares its vision to help veterans find
quality Federal occupations that allow them to use their skills
to conserve and protect our public lands. Helping veterans
acquire the tools necessary to find meaningful employment and
lead financially resilient lives are among our highest goals,
and we appreciate Representative Levin for introducing this
legislation, and urge its passage.
In that same vein, we are pleased to share our support for
the Military and Veterans in Parks, or the MVP Act. This bill
would help disabled veterans, members of our Armed Forces, and
surviving families access our nation's public lands for
activities to improve their mental and physical health and
well-being. The MVP Act contains several important provisions,
but today I would like to highlight three.
First, it would allow the creation of adaptive trails and
adaptive recreation opportunities at each area managed by the
Forest Service, each national park, and each area managed by
the Bureau of Land Management.
Second, it would create partnerships between Federal
agencies and state, tribal, local, and private entities to
promote outdoor recreational programs among members of the
Armed Forces and veterans.
And third, it would encourage these Federal agencies to
hire veterans in all positions related to management of Federal
recreational land.
Among many of the warriors we serve, we have witnessed the
benefits that being outdoors, increased movement, time in
nature, and the opportunity for reflection has on an
individual's health and their relationships, particularly among
those who require adaptive equipment or services. We have heard
from warriors seeking to relocate to areas with more
accessibility to adaptive sports, and from caregivers sharing
stories about how adaptive recreational activities have made
the veterans in their lives happier, more outgoing, and more
eager to push their perceived limits.
We appreciate Representative Kiggans' work on this draft
bill, and strongly encourage its introduction and passage in
the House of Representatives.
Wounded Warrior Project once again extends our thanks to
the Subcommittee on Federal Lands for its dedication to our
nation's veterans, and this concludes my testimony, and I am
happy to answer any questions you or the members of the
Subcommittee may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Villanueva follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeremy Villanueva, Government Affairs Associate
Director, Wounded Warrior Project
on H.R. 1786 and Discussion Draft, H.R. ____, ``Military and Veterans
in Parks (MVP) Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and distinguished members
of the House Committee on Natural Resources--thank you for the
opportunity to submit Wounded Warrior Project's views on legislation
pending before the Subcommittee on Federal Lands.
Wounded Warrior Project (WWP) was founded to connect, serve, and
empower our nation's wounded, ill, and injured veterans, Service
members, and their families and caregivers. We are fulfilling this
mission by providing more than a dozen life-changing programs and
services to over 191,000 registered post-9/11 warriors and 48,000 of
their family support members, continually engaging with those we serve,
and capturing an informed assessment of the challenges this community
faces. We are pleased to share that perspective for this hearing on
pending legislation that would likely have a direct impact on many we
serve.
Discussion Draft, the Military and Veterans in Parks Act

Throughout our organizational history, WWP has explored new and
innovative ways to offer care and support to those we serve. Across
more than a dozen programs and services offered at no charge to
warriors or their families, five often promote outdoor recreation in
programming due to the multitude of health benefits from exposure to
direct sunlight and nature: Physical Health and Wellness; Project
Odyssey; Soldier Ride; Adaptive Sports; and the Alumni Connection
Program. These nation-wide adaptive-capable offerings may include
activities like biking, hiking, fishing, hunting, archery, camping, and
snow and water sports in pursuit of improvement in social, physical,
and mental well-being. Depending on the activity, staff experience, and
local availability, we offer these opportunities to warriors
independently or through a contracted vendor/organization. We have a
comprehensive process dedicated to ensuring the quality of the event,
accessibility for all warriors, and measurement of desired outcomes.
These measurable outcomes include physical and mental well-being;
improvements in physical activity, sleep, nutrition; and reductions in
symptoms of depression and chronic pain.

In this context, we believe that the Military and Veterans in Parks
Act, or the MVP Act, would help disabled veterans, members of our Armed
Forces, and surviving families access our nation's public lands for
activities to improve their mental and physical health and well-being.
The MVP Act includes several provisions aimed at improving access and
accessibility for veterans including six that we would like to
highlight:

Allowing the creation of at least one adaptive trail and
at least one adaptive recreation opportunity at each area
managed by the Forest Service, each National Park, and each
area managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM).
[Section 2]

Developing and disseminating materials for members of the
Armed Forces and veterans to educate on the availability
and location of resources to access outdoor activities in
the areas maintained by the Forest Service, National Parks,
and the BLM. [Section 3]

Reducing amenity recreation fees and streamlining the
recreation permit process for members of the Armed Forces,
veterans, and Gold Star Families. [Section 4]

Creating partnerships between federal agencies and state,
tribal, local, and private entities to promote outdoor
recreational programs among members of the Armed Forces and
veterans. [Section 5]

Creating a joint national strategy between the Departments
of the Interior and of Agriculture to increase visits to
federal recreational lands by members of the Armed Forces,
veterans, and Gold Star Families. [Section 6]

Encouraging these federal agencies to hire veterans in all
positions related to management of federal recreational
land. [Section 8]

In March 2022, WWP offered our perspectives on outdoor recreation
to the Task Force on Outdoor Recreation for Veterans established by the
COMPACT Act (P.L. 116-214 Sec. 203).\1\ Points raised then are still
relevant today, including our desire to increase public awareness
campaigns about free and discounted opportunities for veterans, expand
the availability of adaptive trails and water entry points, explore the
potential of veterans-preference weeks or events at National Parks, and
improve public awareness on the mental and physical health merits of
the outdoors, specifically for veterans. WWP believes that the MVP Act
addresses each of these issues and would create meaningful impact for
those we serve.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, Notice of Request for Information Regarding Veterans
Outdoor Recreation, 87 FR 10,281 (Feb. 23, 2022) (WWP comment available
at https://www.regulations.gov/comment/VA-2022-VACO-0001-0147).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wounded Warrior Project believes in the healing and connection
outdoor recreation can bring to veterans. We have witnessed the
benefits that being outdoors, increased movement, time in nature,
adoption of a new hobby, and the opportunity for reflection has on an
individual's health and their relationships. And as more and more
warriors experience these benefits, we have heard firsthand from
warriors seeking to relocate to areas with more accessibility to
adaptive sports and from caregivers sharing stories about how adaptive
recreational activities have made the veteran in their lives happier,
more talkative, and more eager to push their perceived limits. We
appreciate Representative Jen Kiggans' work on this draft bill and
strongly encourage its introduction and passage in the House of
Representatives.
H.R. 1786, the Get Rewarding Outdoor Work for our Veterans Act

A variety of military occupations involve large amounts of time
working outdoors in relatively harsh environments. These types of jobs
leave many veterans with wilderness survival skills, a keen knowledge
of various ecosystems, and other skills that are related to outdoor
recreation. Despite this experience, the Government Accountability
Office (GAO) recently observed that ``[v]eterans comprised a smaller
proportion of employees in outdoor recreation positions than in the
larger federal workforce. For instance, veterans accounted for 11
percent of federal outdoor recreation employees. By contrast, veterans
made up about 18 percent of employees across all occupations at the
corresponding agencies.'' \2\ In addition to the financial benefits
that would accrue from increasing veteran employment, outdoor work can
have important mental health benefits. Research has shown that direct
sunlight exposure and being in nature can lead to reduced depression,
improved physical and psychological well-being, social connection,
resilience, and other benefits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Gov't Accountability Off., GAO-23-106149, Veterans
Employment: GI Bill Benefits Can Help Lead to Outdoor Recreation
Careers (2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The GROW for our Veterans Act would establish a two-year pilot
program to employ veterans in federal positions that relate to
conservation, environmental protection, and resource management. The
program would be administered by the Secretary of the Interior--in
consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Assistant
Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment and Training--and would
utilize best practices from the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA)
Warrior Training Advancement Course (WARTAC) program to help veterans
secure employment at the Department of the Interior. WARTAC connects
veterans with real-world job opportunities to help them gain the skills
and experience that are helpful for finding future careers. The GROW
for our Veterans Act would also direct VA to submit a report to
Congress and the head of each federal agency that details the best
practices and hiring elements of WARTAC, and Department of Labor to
report on how best to implement these recommendations at federal
agencies.
Wounded Warrior Project proudly supports the GROW for our Veterans
Act and shares its vision to help veterans find quality federal
occupations that allow them to use their outdoors skills and passions
to conserve and protect our public lands. We appreciate Representative
Mike Levin for introducing this legislation and urge its passage.
Concluding Remarks

Wounded Warrior Project once again extends our thanks to the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands for its dedication to our nation's
veterans. We are honored to contribute our voice to your discussion
about pending legislation, and we are proud to support these
initiatives under consideration that would enhance veterans' access to
our nation's great outdoors. As your partner in advocating for these
and other critical issues, we stand ready to assist and look forward to
our continued collaboration.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Villanueva. Next, I will
recognize Mr. Marc Berejka, the Divisional Vice President of
Community Advocacy and Impact for REI.
Mr. Berejka, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARC BEREJKA, DIVISIONAL VICE PRESIDENT, COMMUNITY
ADVOCACY AND IMPACT, REI, KENT, WASHINGTON

Mr. Berejka. Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Levin, my
name is Marc Berejka, and I serve as DVP for Community Advocacy
and Impact at REI Co-op.
I am also joined today by my colleague, Naz Ahmed. Naz is
an Army vet who was deployed in the Middle East, and served the
United States honorably. At REI, she co-leads our employee
resource group for veterans. On behalf of the entire co-op,
thank you for starting this important conversation on the MVP
Act, how to make our Federal lands more accessible to members
of the Armed Forces and our veterans, especially those with
disabilities.
As you may know, REI is an 85-year-old co-op. It was
founded in the Pacific Northwest by 23 climbers who were
pioneering routes throughout the area's mountains. The climbers
formed a co-op in order to get easier access to high-quality
gear that they could afford. Fast forward to today, and we have
stores in almost every state, a robust online presence, and
over 16,000 employees. Somewhat incredibly, the co-op now has
over 23 million members. We are approaching 9 percent of the
country's adult population.
What drives our success is our long-standing, authentic
commitment to connecting people to time outside, to
demystifying what might seem challenging, and to make nature
approachable. We pursue this with a passion because we know
that time outside is fundamental to our well-being.
As a co-op, we are also deeply committed to giving back. We
are committed to stewardship, sustainability, and diversity.
Each year, my team collectively provides about $10 million in
support to hundreds of not-for-profits across the country,
including those like Blue Star Families, Minority Veterans of
America, Adaptive Adventures, and more. Despite our work, we
know that many, many people still face barriers to enjoying
time outside. Our sector calls this the ``nature gap.'' In
fact, per trust for public land, more than 100 million people
lack easy nearby access to safe, welcoming natural spaces.
We see this reality with eyes wide open. REI is regularly
sharpening our impact agenda, and closing this nature gap is
now a top priority. In fact, just last week in Anacostia Park,
we announced a new, long-term initiative we call ``Outside in
5''. Its aim is to be more forthright in identifying access
issues, and more determined than ever in addressing them.
Especially relevant to the MVP Act, we have been steadily
investing in research around the intersection between nature
and healing. Personally, I have had the honor to meet suffering
vets who have described how their lives were literally saved by
the mountains. To demonstrate that time in nature heals, REI
has funded research at top universities with vets as
enthusiastic participants, as well as trauma-suffering youth.
We know that demonstrating the benefits of time outside is
one key to closing the nature gap. Another lays in feasibility,
especially for people with disability. Here, REI has been
supporting not-for-profits that are designing assistive gear,
as well as adaptive programing.
The intent of the bill we discuss today is fully aligned
with REI's belief that the outdoors should be available and
accessible for everyone. We applaud the Committee for
identifying specific ways to make Federal lands more accessible
for both active duty military and disabled vets. Understanding
that the draft is subject to change, I have a few comments for
the Committee's consideration in addition to those in my
written testimony.
Foremost, while it focuses on vets and military, we see the
bill's benefits flowing to the broader disability community, as
well. So, we suggest that edits be made to explicitly call that
out, fostering accessibility of Federal infrastructure for the
entire disability community.
Second, I would underscore the importance of the bill's
awareness-raising goals. The bill should include guidance on
how to work with vets' organizations and the disability
community to update and amplify information on where accessible
infrastructure exists. It is not enough to build it and just
assume that they will come.
And then, as to the bill's mandate to build accessible
trails and recreation facilities, one trail and one facility
per region, per agency is a good start and can generate great
learning. But we see value in more ambition, both to break
ground on more initial projects and to complete them faster so
that the bill's pivot in trail building modus operandi takes
root more quickly.
To close, I want to emphasize how honored we are to be part
of this important work. We look forward to contributing to the
next version of the bill, and to seeing a bipartisan end
product advance to the next stage. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berejka follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marc Berejka, Divisional Vice President,
Community Advocacy and Impact, REI Co-op
on Discussion Draft, H.R. ____, ``Military and Veterans in Parks (MVP)
Act''

Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse, on behalf of REI Co-op,
I would like to thank the committee for starting this important
conversation on how to make our federal lands more accessible to
members of the Armed Forces and this nation's veterans. I welcome the
opportunity to provide the co-op's support for, and some comments on,
the draft version of the Military and Veterans in Parks (MVP) Act.
At REI, we know that the outdoors brings people together--
Republicans and Democrats, different generations, families, friends,
and many others. Despite our many differences, we all love the outdoors
and find common purpose in enjoying it together. As this legislation
highlights, time outside, in nature, provides meaningful opportunities
and solutions for many of us, not the least of which is our health and
wellbeing. My team and I look forward to an ongoing dialogue with you
and your staff on this important topic.
Statement of Interest

My name is Marc Berejka and I serve as the Divisional Vice
President for Community Advocacy and Impact at the co-op. I am also
President of the REI Cooperative Action Fund (``REI Fund''), a
relatively new public charity created by the co-op to foster more
equitable access to time outside.
REI is 85 years old this year. We were founded in the Pacific
Northwest in 1938 by 23 climbers who were pioneering routes in and
among the area's mountains. They had each other, as they mapped their
way into the region's inspiring nature and its adventures. They found
they needed quality gear at affordable prices. And since the region
didn't have a provider, they created an entrepreneurial solution--a co-
op for importing the best-available, European tools, selling them at a
modest mark-up, and enabling them to be all they could be.
Fast forward to today and REI is in almost every state. We have
over 180 stores, a robust online presence, and over 15,000 employees.
We buy product from about 1,000 different small and medium-sized
outdoor companies from around the country. And all told, the co-op now
has over 23 million members, approaching nine percent (9%) of the
country's adult population.
We are proud of our steady growth, our long-standing stewardship of
our lands and waters, our commitments to sustainability and diversity,
and our support for hundreds of nonprofits annually. To date, we have
invested over $125 million in our nonprofit partners across the
country. But we also know the mission suffers a gap. We and others call
it the nature gap. For all the work we've done over the decades to
introduce people to the outdoors--and its many benefits--we are fully
aware that large swaths of the American public lack welcoming,
accessible opportunities to connect with nature. In fact, based on
available data, we believe that a full 100 million people in America
face this nature gap.
To address it, just last week in Anacostia Park, we launched a new,
long-term commitment and initiative we call ``Outside in 5.'' Its aim
is to be more forthright in identifying access issues and more
determined than ever in addressing them. The nature gap emerges in
different ways among different communities, but at the core we see
systems and policies that have led to exclusion and displacement from
nature. Last week, we put down a marker that we will invest our
treasure and time against this problem, and also use our advocacy
voice, like we do here today.
We know that time outside is fundamental to human wellbeing. This
is not a notion but an increasingly demonstrable fact. All of us know
from our own experiences that time outside, in nature, is good for our
wellbeing. But because of research we've sponsored, there's also an
increasing body of evidence that shows how, physiologically, time
outside benefits us.
REI's Commitment to the Purpose of this Bill

At REI, we have been steadily investing in research around the
intersection of nature and healing and the importance of outdoor
recreation to overall health and wellness for almost a decade.
We are especially grateful to have pursued some of this work in
partnership with veterans and the veteran's community. In Congress, you
know well how important it is for us to demonstrate the nation's
respect and gratitude for our vets' service. One focus of ours has been
to highlight the unique role time outside in nature--facilitated via
cohort or alone--can play in the rehabilitation and wellbeing of our
vets. We commit ourselves to this work because America's veterans have
literally dedicated their lives to safeguarding this country and its
lands and waters.
It should go without saying, but all of us--government, industry,
nonprofits, and others--should do what we can to make it ever-easier
for our military and former military to enjoy the places they've been
protecting and to get the important benefits of being in nature.
Personally, I have had the honor--on more than one occasion--to hear a
suffering vet describe how his life ``was saved by the mountains'' or
``by a fishing trip with guides and buddies'' or ``by a through-hike
along the Appalachian Trail.'' The fact that well-crafted time outside
can heal should not be up for debate, but it still does seem to be a
fact we have to prove.
So as one company, with our partners, we endeavor. We have
supported research at some of the country's top universities with vets
as enthusiastic participants, as well as trauma-suffering youth.
Several years ago, we helped stand-up a Nature and Health initiative at
the University of Washington; and, recently, the REI Fund has provided
seed investments for a national Nature and Health Alliance, as well as
similar efforts at the Universities of Utah and of Maryland. For all
these institutions, time outside is seen as a vehicle for rejuvenation
and healing trauma.
We know that demonstrating efficacy is one key step. Another lays
in feasibility, especially for people with disabilities. Here, the REI
Fund is supporting both a national and several regional nonprofits that
are designing assistive gear and facilitated, adaptive programs. These
organizations--like Adaptive Adventures, Vermont Adaptive, Catalyst
Sports, All Out Adventures and the Outdoors for All Foundation--are
heroic in their own right. We are pleased to support them, their vets-
focused programs, and their broader mission.
We are also proud to have worked closely with Congress, including
this committee and the Committee on Veterans Affairs, on the 2020
passage of the ``Task Force on Outdoor Recreation for Veterans,'' which
was included in the COMPACT Act. The Task Force is now up and running
and working across federal agencies and alongside nonprofit
stakeholders to help remove barriers to leveraging public lands for the
treatment of veterans--effectively starting the conversation around the
concept of ``prescribing the outdoors'' at scale. We are looking
forward to seeing what recommendations this Task Force provides
Congress.
Initial Comments on the Draft

The draft version of the Military Veterans in Parks Act
appropriately prioritizes making some trails accessible to disabled
veterans and active duty military and providing needed information
about the location of accessible infrastructure across our federal
lands. At REI, we strongly believe that the outdoors should be
available and accessible for everyone, and we applaud the authors of
this draft for taking an important step in finding ways to make public
lands more accessible for both active duty military and disabled
veterans.
We should--at every level of government--be identifying
opportunities and areas to increase access to outdoor recreation for
those with disabilities. This legislation would certainly take a
significant step in formalizing that at the federal level.
With the understanding that this legislation is currently a draft
and subject to changes, I would like to provide some comments about
potential changes and additions for the Committee's consideration as
you finalize the text.
First and foremost, this legislation has a focus on our nation's
veterans and military, but this bill really benefits the broader
disability community. We would strongly suggest that the direction and
focus of the bill be inclusive--fostering accessible infrastructure on
public lands for the broader community of people with disabilities.
Through conversations with several federal agencies, we know there is
good work being done for this community. This legislation would elevate
that work and bring additional focus, which we support. The broader
disability community deserves that focus and we are hopeful that the
final text will ensure those who desperately need this access--our
nation's active duty military, veterans and others across the
disability community alike--are able to benefit from it.
In addition, we would like to underscore the awareness-raising
aspect of the bill. Accessible trails and other accessible
infrastructure are not useful if people who need them do not know they
exist. I would encourage the Committee to include guidance on working
with veteran's organizations and the disability community to
appropriately distribute updated information on where accessible
infrastructure exists and, if possible, what might be in the pipeline
down the road. If something similar exists today, it is difficult to
locate and the current and future work of these agencies deserves a
broader audience.
As to the trails and recreation facilities themselves, I would
encourage the Committee to aim higher and raise the bill's initial
ambitions. One trail and facility per region per agency is a good start
and can provide some key learnings, but ideally there would be more
initial projects so that people would be able to access them, which
will also provide needed information in growing this effort over time.
These initial trails could be considered a pilot program for discovery
around how to scale this across the country, including providing key
learnings to non-federal land management partners in states. The same
can be said about the bill's timelines. We would appreciate considering
a shorter implementation schedule, if possible.
Lastly, I want to raise a flag around the permitting provisions.
REI fully supports permitting reform and, in separate venues, have been
trying to advance permitting reform. The SOAR Act, which has been
introduced by members of this Committee and is the product of more than
a decade's work, will streamline the permitting process on public
lands. The permitting process is equally complex and frustrating at
times. As the Committee looks to cut red tape around access for
veterans and active duty military, I would ask the Committee to take
care to avoid undermining permitting reforms and opportunities that
will improve access for all lovers of the outdoors. We are happy to
discuss specific language changes with the Committee at the appropriate
time.
Conclusion

In closing, I want to reiterate how greatly the co-op and I
appreciate the chance to testify on this important legislation. My team
and I look forward to working with the Committee to ensure our nation's
active duty military, its veterans and our disability community have
greater access to our public lands. We also look forward to working
with you and all stakeholders--federal agencies, groups that support
the military community (like Blue Star Families), veterans
organizations, and the disability community--on innovative ways to make
our public lands more accessible. This is important work, which we are
honored to be a part of. We look forward to contributing to the next
version of this legislation and the bipartisan product that ultimately
advances.
I would also applaud the Committee for its parallel work on an
outdoor recreation legislative package, America's Outdoor Recreation
Act. That legislative package will be historic and will help to both
modernize and simplify access to the outdoors. Like the MVP Act, we
look forward to the historic passage of that broader piece of
legislation.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Berejka. Trust me, the Tiffany
family has fully supported, with three daughters, REI over the
years.
Mr. Berejka. We appreciate your membership.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. So, we are voting right now. We are going to
take a break. I am hoping all of you will stay, and you don't
have to stay in your seats, but if you would stay until we come
back, I would expect about a half hour. Yes, we look forward to
coming back at 10:45, and we will take questions from Members,
and we hope you will stay around to accept those questions.
Thank you very much for your testimony, and we will break
until 10:45.
The Committee stands in recess, subject to the call of the
Chair.
[Recess.]
Mr. Tiffany. The Committee will come back to order. We are
now going to take questions from Members. Thank you so much for
your patience as we cast a couple of votes there. I suspect you
all flew, so what we were doing was rather important in regards
to the FAA.
I am going to start with questions. Ms. Wilson, the process
for the Mountain View Corridor has been underway for the better
part of 15 years. Will you share with us the delays the
Mountain View Corridor project has experienced as a result of
the process of transferring the land?
Ms. Wilson. Yes. Actually, we started the environmental
process for Mountain View Corridor in 2003. Construction has
been going on for the last----
Mr. Tiffany. Sorry about that. Did you say 2003?
Ms. Wilson. Yes, that is correct. That is when we started
environmental. Construction of this highway has been going on
for the last 15 years.
And this project hasn't been delayed, it has been built in
phases, most of them in Salt Lake County to begin with. This is
the final phase that will connect the projects. We would like
to be able to start construction next year, so this transfer is
of utmost importance at this point for us.
Mr. Tiffany. But it is contingent upon us completing this
legislation?
Ms. Wilson. Correct.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Berejka, I want to go back to my notes
from previously. During your testimony, I am just trying to
come back to it, is there a definition for disability that is
used? You talked about providing more opportunities, right? Is
there a definition in Federal law that you guys reference in
regards to disability?
Mr. Berejka. I would defer to people who are more expert
than me for a definitive answer, but I would say that the
starting point is the ADA, and that different agencies, whether
they are Federal, state, or local would likewise refer to ADA
regulations.
Mr. Tiffany. You said there are some projects, that more
projects could be done, I think, toward the end of your
testimony, and perhaps get them done faster. Expand on that a
little bit, what you were talking about.
Mr. Berejka. So, I read the legislation and was very
enthused by it, and then I got to the last section and it said
we, Congress, require one project per region per agency, and
complete it within 5 years and report back on it after 6,
something to that effect. And I thought to myself, well, this
must be a notion of a test-and-learn, or pilot projects, or
something to advance this Congress' awareness and the agency's
awareness of how to build accessible facilities.
And I thought to myself, if we are going to legislate,
maybe we could be a little bit more ambitious. So, is
construction in 5 years really too much time, frankly? Could it
be done in less? Could there be more projects?
Mr. Tiffany. Welcome to the Federal Government, sir.
Mr. Berejka. Just encouraging my friends in Congress.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, yes, for sure. Sometimes it is the case,
though getting something started, and getting the process
started leads to results in the future. I cast some
encouragement that way. But yes, we get really frustrated with
the pace of the Federal Government, especially in regards to
permitting. It has been talked about ad nauseam in this
Committee.
I am going to yield back, and next I will recognize
Representative Stauber from Minnesota for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Before I get
into my questions I want to talk about the GROW Act, and I want
to thank my colleague from California, Representative Levin,
and my colleague from Virginia, Representative Wittman, for
introducing the GROW Act.
It is an important piece of legislation that will help
connect our veterans and retiring service members, put their
skills to good use after their military careers. It will help
these individuals continue their service to our country through
important roles focused on conservation and management of our
great public lands. Again, I want to thank both my colleagues
for introducing that.
I want to also thank the panel for their testimony this
morning, as well as their commitment to supporting our active
duty military members, veterans, and their families. It is so
incredibly important that we honor those who are willing to
make the ultimate sacrifice for all of us.
Mr. Villanueva, I want to thank you for the work that you
and others have done with the Wounded Warrior Project on behalf
of our veterans. Can you please share with the Committee the
impact that allowing disabled service members and veterans to
access, recreate in, and otherwise enjoy our public lands has
on these individuals?
Mr. Villanueva. Thank you, Congressman. That is a great
question. I mean, there are a couple of things that we can look
at.
Just right on its face, the physical well-being, the health
benefits from going outdoors, just being exposed to sunlight.
Vitamin D deficiency is something that is rampant right now in
our country, right? And when you have vitamin D deficiency we
are looking at things like depression, physical and muscle
pain, extenuations, and even hair loss.
But getting them back out, and not just out getting what we
would call windshield time, because a lot of windshields, they
will filter out the vitamin D, we are talking about getting
out, getting active, and being exposed to nature. That is right
there, those are the health benefits. That is right on its
face.
But in a more profound way, I think we need to look at, I
know some of the panels earlier, there were multiple references
saying that giving the best to veterans, and they are rewarding
them for their service. I don't look at it like that. Where I
come from and growing up surrounded by BLM properties, Federal
properties, national parks, going out there hiking, fishing,
that was my life before I joined the U.S. military. And for a
lot of veterans, that is the same. But because of their
service, many of them came back missing limbs, having diseases
that confine them to a wheelchair. Unfortunately, some of them
are dying of ALS. And the fact that they can't access these
same hiking trails, go to these same fishing spots, all we are
trying to get them back is a sense of normalcy. That is what we
want, something that they lost because of their time in
service.
Mr. Stauber. I have one more question, just because of the
time commitment. You are exactly right. I can't imagine a
veteran in a wheelchair that goes to a boat ramp, and it is not
wheelchair accessible. I can't imagine that.
Mr. Villanueva. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stauber. And in 2023, that should never happen.
Mr. Villanueva. No.
Mr. Stauber. So, I think that is why the advocacy on this
Committee, and led by the Chairman is extremely important, that
we allow access. And I appreciate your comments.
One more question. Among the programs that you have
partnered with, which kinds of programs do you think have been
most successful, and are these locally run and organized
programs, or programs run by the Federal Government?
Mr. Villanueva. That is a really good question, and I know
that there are a lot of programs that we have, but I will take
that back for the record, and I would love to work with you,
and get us in contact with our physical health and wellness
teammates so that they can share with you some of those
programs, the Federal programs and the local programs, that we
have used because we utilize both with Wounded Warrior Project.
Mr. Stauber. Yes, and just in my experience, it is the
local programs in the local communities that will come up with
the best options for the wounded warriors in our communities.
And having been a city councilor and a county commissioner, now
represent Minnesota's 8th Congressional District, it is
important that we listen to you all with the boots on the
ground, and listen to what those veterans need and want and
their desires to make sure they are not left behind. We owe it
to them.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Idaho, Mr. Fulcher, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the panel for
being here and for your testimony.
And you are probably aware of this, but a number of us
bouncing in and out aren't doing it because it is rude, it is
because there is more than one Committee going on, but please
know that we recognize your contributions here, and are
thankful for that, and had a chance to go through some of your
written testimony.
But my first question is going to go to Ms. Wilson, so I
will give you that forewarning, but a comment or two here
first.
I come from a state right next door in Idaho. And like you,
we are around two-thirds of the land mass, which is federally
controlled in our state. So, moves like this--in this case, to
the benefit of our veterans and a very worthy cause--I am
particularly pleased to see efforts to insert more local
control, in this case a federal transfer to states. And I have
just learned since being in office, this is my fifth year in
office, that most Members, and I think most people, don't
understand why there are a few particular states in the West
that have such a huge amount of Western land.
Can I just ask you first, are you a native Utahn? Have you
been in Utah a long time?
Ms. Wilson. Yes, sir. I have lived in Utah my whole life.
Mr. Fulcher. OK, so you understand the ramifications of
that. And there is a particular reason in history, post-Civil
War, all that, how states that came into the Union were treated
differently with the land and whatnot. Most people don't
understand that, and most people don't understand what it is
like to be at the state level and govern when you are subject
to all those Federal rules.
And one of the major things that is important to me is
local stakeholder control. Not necessarily a transfer. It can
take many forms. And I know in Utah, in the not too distant
past, there has been a number of attempts to do transfers, to
have more local control.
And if you have been there your whole life, I know, like in
Idaho, there have been state legislative attempts, there have
been transfer attempts, there has been nibbling around the
edges and some very good partnership programs like GNA, Good
Neighbor Authority, roadless rule, those types of things. This
is going to be a win, and I am very supportive of these bills,
and I know you are, as well.
But from your vantage point, what is the best approach for
those of us in the West and these dominated Federal lands to
try to engage with more local stakeholder control with the
Federal Government?
Ms. Wilson. I can't speak to the larger issues. I can speak
from a DOT perspective. And in this particular case, we have
worked very closely with our Federal partners. We have worked
closely with Camp Williams on a regular basis. We have for my
whole career, and they have been really great partners.
The BLM, too, in the area, they are very willing to work
with us and help us. So, I think those local relationships are
really important----
Mr. Fulcher. Is it a legislative approach? Is it statute
through these channels? What is most effective?
Ms. Wilson. Well, in this case, we wouldn't be here except
for the fact that this land was set aside by presidential
executive order and the BLM doesn't have a mechanism to
transfer it to us. If that weren't the case, this bill wouldn't
be in front of you.
Mr. Fulcher. OK. And not to cut you short, but I want to
give Mr. Cline an opportunity to address the same thing.
What is the best approach? You are coming from a similar
type environment.
Mr. Cline. Yes, sir, Congressman, thank you for that. In
our county, we are 97 percent owned by public lands, so
everything we do deals with public lands. Having the
partnership and everything with our local governments is a big
help.
It still has issues, as well. One of the biggest issues we
deal with on anything on the public lands is the NEPA process
and the ability to really work through that in order to manage
those lands.
Mr. Fulcher. And not to segue too much, I only have 30
seconds, but what would happen to your county without PILT and
without SRS?
Mr. Cline. We would dry up and blow away.
Mr. Fulcher. And that encapsulates the challenge, I think,
for myself and the Members of the West trying to communicate
some of the issues we face. Most people have no idea. So, thank
you for that.
Sorry on the time, I didn't get to the rest of the panel,
but I appreciate your insight.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee, Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chair Tiffany, and thank you
again to the witnesses for being here.
Mr. Villanueva, I especially thank you for your service and
also for your testimony today in which you noted that the
Wounded Warrior Project has received feedback from your
members, and that there is strong need for more adaptive trails
and recreation opportunities. Can you please expand on the
feedback that you have received, and how the MVP Act would help
wounded warriors broadly?
Mr. Villanueva. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We actually had discussions with what we call our physical
health and wellness teammates. We call them PH&W. But they were
adamant with a lot of their programs, that they have warriors
going out and they said that we need more adaptive trails.
But not only that. Specifically, what types of trails. What
is going to be the usage for it? Because what is a good trail
for hiking for someone with prosthetics is not going to be the
same, or not rated the same, for someone who is using either a
motorized or a tracked wheelchair, or if they are using a
recumbent bike. These trails need to be specified, and probably
signage put up letting them know this trail is good for these
certain adaptations.
But I think that the MVP, we were extremely pleased to see
this drafted legislation come to us because it answered a lot
of the issues that we have seen. And one of the most important
that I don't think we have even really talked about that much
was the outreach.
I have testified in a lot of different hearings in front of
House Veterans Affairs committees, Subcommittees, Senate
Veterans Affairs committees, and it seems like it always comes
down to the knowledge of the programs that are already out
there for veterans. The veterans want to go out and be active.
They want to go out and do these things, but they just are not
aware what is already there and available to them, so that
portion I am extremely, extremely hopeful to have that out.
Mr. Westerman. OK. Thank you for that, and I hope you will
continue. I know you will stay engaged with us as we move
through this process. Your feedback is very valuable.
Mr. Berejka, your testimony mentioned the extensive
research REI has conducted into analyzing the effects nature
and outdoor recreation have for our veterans. Can you please
talk about what this research has found, particularly as it
relates to veterans suffering from PTSD?
Mr. Berejka. Yes. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
For about a decade now, REI has been putting dollars into
different research projects at different universities, and I
have the privilege of overseeing a lot of those investments in
research and, as a result, have been very committed to focusing
where we can on the veterans community through personal
interactions. And I am sure this may be true for others on the
panel and yourselves. Veterans speak very directly about their
suffering and their troubles with TBI or PTSD, and then also
very directly about how time outside soothes their symptoms.
So, there are some Doubting Thomases, and we put research
dollars at Cal Berkeley into a program that showed how what I
will call a curated experience, a facilitated experience,
whitewater rafting among vets and with a bit of counseling--
this is one example--led to sustained weeks of reduced stress
hormone. So, if you can reduce the stress hormones coursing
through a vet's system through that type of activity, you have,
I think, some magic in your hands.
We did follow-on research with hiking in the Cascade
Mountains through the University of Washington, and these are
just examples of the types of projects that we have tried to
foster.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you for that. I am not a veteran, but
I am an outdoorsman, and I can relate to everything you said.
After being here in DC and getting back to the natural state of
Arkansas, spending time outdoors, fishing, hiking, or just
being at my farm, it is rejuvenating and refreshing, and I can
see how it would be very beneficial to veterans and our whole
country, and that is why we are trying to promote access to
outdoor recreation and access to our public lands for all of
America.
I think it could be very beneficial to our children, as
they grow up, to have those outdoor experiences, as well.
Mr. Berejka. For sure. On fishing in particular, I would
recommend to you Rivers of Recovery. They have done some
research on the benefits of fishing for mental health.
Mr. Westerman. It is good for mine.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Not always good for mine
because I do a lot more casting than catching.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Westerman. That is why it is called fishing and not
catching.
Mr. Tiffany. I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Oregon for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank all of you for
attending today.
Mr. Berejka, I am happy to say that we, my wife and I, shop
at your stores a lot, way more than I would like. But
wonderful, wonderful materials that you sell.
I am extremely interested in your efforts to make sure that
access to these public lands is preserved. And to that point,
there is a movement, and it has been around for a long time, to
lock up these lands and to turn them into spaces where no one
can really go. Has your committee addressed this issue?
I bring it up because I am from Oregon. I actually
represent about three quarters of the state, and there is a
huge amount of public land within my district. The challenge
has always been to maintain the ability to access those lands.
And as time has passed, many, many acres of those lands, many,
many square miles, have been locked up, preventing anybody from
really going into them. And there has been a movement in the
national forests to do away with roads, to make it even more
difficult for anyone to access, much less those who have
disabilities.
So, my question is, I think you mentioned 22 million people
that are customers of your co-op. That is a lot of political
power. Is your committee addressing these access issues? And if
so, how?
Mr. Berejka. We are still trying to assemble the political
wherewithal, if you will, the advocacy wherewithal of our
member base. We appreciate it when Members of Congress are also
members of REI.
On land closures or loss of access, our lived experience is
that individual cases often bring individual circumstances and
battles, if you will. So, at a national level, if you will, it
is really, really hard for REI Co-op to make a general
statement about the types of problems that you are referring
to. When there is an access issue in the vicinity of our stores
or where our members are concentrated, we are a co-op, we do
engage, but we do try to find those win-win outcomes.
Mr. Bentz. It would be hugely helpful, given the scope of
your customer base, if you could take more of an aggressive
position in maintaining this access because you have a huge
footprint. So, I am just saying there is a great danger in
people not standing up and saying we can't access these lands
any longer because of whatever type of approach has been used
to lock them up. And I guarantee you there are approaches to
lock them up that cover, literally, millions of acres. So, I
would just encourage that.
On page 11 of the Veterans in Parks Act, there is a mention
of permit streamlining. And, of course, we have been working
here in this Committee to try to streamline the use of NEPA and
other things. And it is no surprise that this paragraph is in
this bill because many folks, I am guessing veterans, don't
really have 4 or 5 years to wait for permitting to actually
happen. So, another thing that your group could help us with is
encouraging the streamlining approach that we have been trying
to use with NEPA, and for reasons far greater than those, or in
addition to those that are in this bill.
And, again, you have this Committee, you have this 22
million people. I am just encouraging you to use that power to
accomplish the purposes that I think that are set forth in
these bills. Can you give us any hope that you might be able to
do that in your committee, or is it just too difficult,
politically?
Mr. Berejka. It is not too difficult politically,
especially relative to permitting. In fact, Congressman, at the
break my colleague, Naz, and I were talking about the
challenges that she faces as an REI employee in securing
permits from the Federal Government for the programs that the
co-op facilitates on Federal public lands, and the wait time.
It is a drag on our business.
As a result, we have actually been working on permitting
reform up here on the Hill for almost close to a decade. But I
am told that we should be cautiously optimistic that this
Committee and on the Senate side there will be passage of the
SOAR Act, and inclusion in a bill that may see the President's
signature by the end of the year. So, on permitting
specifically, cautious optimism after a decade of work.
On the engagement of our member base, my colleague back at
headquarters, Alicia, will be overjoyed to hear that Congress
is asking that we step up our use of our member base to use
their voice, and I will bring that to the company leadership
and say Congress is asking us to do a little bit more with our
member base in terms of advocacy. Thank you.
Mr. Bentz. As long as that is our kind of advocacy.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Berejka. We are all here because we love the outdoors.
Mr. Bentz. Yes. I yield back, thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I want to echo what he
just said. I think about my three daughters, all young adults
who have shopped at REI. You can have a great influence on them
with this message, because they hear the message in regards to,
generally, environmentalism and things like that, and they hear
it from you folks, amongst many other sources. It would be
really good for them to hear a little bit of that flip side
that, if we have such stringent regulations in place, that
projects are not going to get done, and projects that I think
they would view as being very important and good for people
generally. So, you guys have a powerful voice in that and I
sure hope, just as Mr. Bentz said, that you will use that
platform that you have, because it is influential.
Mr. Berejka. Thank you, and I really appreciate the fact
that there is a camera here and that we are recording this,
because I am going to take this back and we are going to share
it around the leadership team, no doubt.
Mr. Tiffany. I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Arizona for 5 minutes, Mr. Crane.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it, and I
did want to say something to Chairman Westerman real quick,
sir.
Though you may not be a veteran of our Armed Forces, you
most certainly are a veteran of this place. And as somebody who
has been deployed three times into combat, I can tell you that
this might be one of the most dangerous environments I have
ever worked in. So, I am glad, sir, that you are getting out
into the wild and fishing or casting, or whatever you are
doing.
On that note, Mr. Cline, thank you again for being here,
sir. I want to ask really quickly, sir, this land that we are
trying to convey from the Federal Government to Gila County,
what is it currently being used for?
Mr. Cline. Well, thank you, Congressman. Can you restate
that? What it is currently used for?
Mr. Crane. Yes, sir. What is this land and the buildings
and structures on this land currently being used for?
Mr. Cline. As I mentioned earlier, it was a combined
district with another one, so it was totally vacated. Part of
it, there are 10 acres of this property that is currently being
used for fire suppression activities. They have an engine crew
station there. The rest of it, the 232 acres is what Gila
County has under permit. And currently, we have just been going
through the remodels and setting the site up for the veterans
retreat.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. So, the part that we are looking at
conveying right now isn't being used actively for anything, is
that correct?
Mr. Cline. That is correct.
Mr. Crane. OK. Thank you, sir. What about the buildings
that are on the site? Were they scheduled to be torn down?
Mr. Cline. Yes. According to the conversations I had in
2017 with the district ranger at the time, there was going to
be an effort taking place to auction off what they could, and
then dismantle and remove what they couldn't on the buildings.
Mr. Crane. And that is one of the things that I love so
much about this project, is that you are not coming here, Mr.
Cline, and asking the Federal Government for any money. You are
actually trying to take something that is a beautiful piece of
land that is not being used anymore, and revitalize it into
something amazing for some of our nation's finest individuals.
Is that correct?
Mr. Cline. That is correct. We want to totally repurpose
all the buildings that are there, and also looking to adding
one or two more in the next stage.
Mr. Crane. Yes, thank you so much. Gila County, Arizona is
home to over 500,000 veterans. Mr. Cline, can you briefly
explain to the Committee how much passing this legislation
would mean for the veteran community in your county?
Mr. Cline. This site will only be one of two sites in
Arizona. There is one in the southern part of Arizona and one
in the northern part. We have numerous veterans across the rim
country right there, in the northern part. It is not only for
Arizona, but it will be opened up for the nation, for whatever
group or individual has a use for it.
It is huge for our local community, as well. We have a
local veteran group there of about 100 people, right there in
that small town. And then right there between us and Payson
there are roughly another 5,000 to 7,000 more right there.
So, having this accessible not only to the local members,
the state members, the national members, but also we are
adjacent to the White Mountain Apache Tribe that is not very
far away, that has a number of veterans in that reservation, as
well, that have been a big supporter of this project. So, it
means everything to these folks.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir.
A little bit about myself really quickly. I deployed in the
SEAL teams in 2006, 2008, 2010, all three times to Iraq. I lost
a lot of friends while I was overseas, and even when I left.
When I came back, I struggled with a lot of different issues
that I don't typically talk about a lot, and I can tell you one
of the best things for me in my healing process was to get out
into the wild.
And I appreciate that you have spearheaded this effort,
sir, that you have worked on it for so many years, and I think
it is going to be a real blessing to the district and to the
county. So, thank you so much for doing it.
Mr. Cline. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields.
We want to thank you for your service to our country and
all the work you did, and we thank you for your continued
service out here in Washington, DC.
I think we went through everyone here. I would like to
thank all the witnesses for their testimony and Members for
your questions.
Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and we will ask that you respond to those in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Subcommittee
must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Tuesday, July 25, 2023. The hearing record will be held open
for 10 business days for those responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:23 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
Bureau of Land Management
U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 2468, Mountain View Corridor Completion Act

Introduction

Thank you for the opportunity to provide this Statement for the
Record on H.R. 2468, the Mountain View Corridor Completion Act. The
bill directs the conveyance of approximately 36 acres of Federal lands
within the administrative jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) to the state of Utah to be used for public or transportation
purposes.
The parcels proposed for conveyance under H.R. 2468 have been
withdrawn for military purposes since 1914 and are not actively managed
by the BLM. The BLM has no objection to the bill and would welcome the
opportunity to work with the sponsor on certain technical
modifications.
Background

According to the Record of Decision issued by the Federal Highway
Administration, Utah Division, the construction of the Mountain View
Corridor freeway is intended to address the need for a continuous
north-south transportation facility from western Salt Lake County to
northern Utah County, which has been identified in long-range
transportation plans since the 1960s. The corridor is in the vicinity
of the approximately 24,000-acre Utah National Guard training site at
Camp Williams, which is comprised of both Federal and State lands.
H.R. 2468

H.R. 2468 directs the Secretary to convey approximately 36 acres
under the administrative jurisdiction of the BLM to the State of Utah
within 60 days of enactment and without consideration. Under the bill,
the proposed conveyance would revert to the Department if the Secretary
and the Governor determine that any portion of the land is sold or not
used for public or transportation purposes. The bill also requires the
BLM to create a map and legal description of the lands proposed for
conveyance.
Analysis
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) of 1976
stipulates that the conveyance or sale of public lands may occur when
it is determined to be in the public interest and is consistent with
approved land use plans that have been developed with public
involvement and environmental analysis. FLPMA also requires that such
lands be conveyed for no less than their appraised fair market value.
However, Congress has provided mechanisms to transfer public lands to
local governments and nonprofits at little or no cost to be used for
public purposes in certain circumstances. The BLM is not aware of any
natural resource management concerns on the 36 acres proposed for
conveyance and has no objection to the bill given its assurance that
the lands to be conveyed will be for public purposes or to meet
transportation needs benefiting the public and the Utah National Guard
at Camp Williams.
Additionally, the BLM notes that finalizing the boundaries of the
conveyance and completing necessary environmental reviews may not be
possible within the 60-day time frame provided to complete the
conveyance. The BLM recommends allowing additional time to define and
adjust the boundaries as necessary to ensure the final proposal is
sufficient to meet any requirements for use as a public road operated
by Utah Department of Transportation. We would welcome the opportunity
to work with the sponsor on technical modifications to address these
issues.
Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to provide this statement for the
record.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Westerman

Statement for the Record

Duane Taylor, Director

Safe and Responsible Use Programs

On behalf of the Motorcycle Industry Council \1\ (MIC),
Specialty Vehicle Institute of America \2\ (SVIA), and
Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association \3\ (ROHVA)--
together referenced as the Associations, I appreciate the
opportunity to submit testimony in support of, and asking for
additions to, the discussion draft titled Military and Veterans
in Parks (MVP) Act which seeks to improve access and
opportunities for military service members, veterans, and Gold
Star Families to enjoy outdoor recreation on federal lands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC) is a not-for-profit,
national trade association representing several hundred manufacturers,
distributors, dealers and retailers of motorcycles, scooters,
motorcycle parts, accessories and related goods, and allied trades.
\2\ The Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA) is the
national not-for-profit trade association representing manufacturers,
dealers, and distributors of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) in the United
States. SVIA's primary goal is to promote safe and responsible use of
ATVs.
\3\ The Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) is a
national, not-for-profit trade association formed to promote the safe
and responsible use of recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs--
sometimes referred to as side-by-sides or UTVs) manufactured or
distributed in North America. ROHVA is also accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) to serve as the Standards
Developing Organization for ROVs. More information on the standard can
be found at https://rohva.org/ansi-standard/.

At the outset the Associations thank you for this draft
legislation. The powersports industry and its broader community
of activists, enthusiasts, riders and drivers have long
supported our veterans and others with physical disabilities by
hosting rides and other events. As a result, we recognize this
legislation would create new opportunities for returning
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
service members and others with challenges.

The industry itself has stepped up to make sure our
veterans and others with disabilities can get outdoors and
recreate. Just last month Indian Motorcycle and Veterans
Charity Ride partnered to celebrate June as Veteran Motorcycle
Therapy Month which included several motorcycle rides
throughout the month and an off-road excursion to Gateway,
Colorado. Late last year ``Can-Am and the Road Warrior
Foundation (RWF) hosted an epic ``Adventure Therapy'' ride for
a group of military Veterans that covered more than 1,000 miles
aboard the Can-Am Spyder.''

One of many examples of industry sponsored organizations
that get veterans outdoors on off-highway vehicles is the
Warfighter Made Mission. This organization, sponsored by
Polaris, and Fox among others provides, ``. . . Recreational
Therapy to service members, veterans, and their families with a
fleet of Polaris RZR's for enjoyment on a private off-road
course. Several vehicles are adapted for those with
catastrophic injuries. These events improve quality of life,
mental health, and bring families together in a fun and
positive environment.''

State and local off-highway vehicle clubs and associations
also host veterans' rides across the country. One such example
is the annual Thank You for Your Service ride hosted by the
Iowa OHV Association. The first such event, held in 2018, ``. .
. consisted of thirty members from Iowa's off-highway vehicle
(OHV) clubs (who) trailered their multi-passenger recreational
off-highway vehicles (commonly referred to as ``side-by-
sides'') to the Iowa Veterans Home to give 100 veterans and
staff members a ride on the grounds of the 150-acre facility.''
Veteran's Home staff were thrilled with the ride. ``I was very
excited to be part of this event. I've never seen so many happy
residents,'' said Matt McAllister, Recreational Therapist.''
And ``I have had many staff and residents express how great the
opportunity was for the residents and how smoothly it went.
There were a few residents who just were not sure of riding,
but once they went, they wanted to go again,'' said Emily Hall,
Recreation Bureau Chief.

OHVs offer an opportunity for those with disabilities to
engage in outdoor recreation that may not be available through
other means. Dan Kleen, who was the catalyst for the Thank You
for Your Service rides in Iowa, is an incomplete C-6
quadriplegic. Dan shared that he doesn't take rides for
granted, instead he views them as a gift he has been given as
there was a time that he didn't believe he would be able to get
outdoors ever again. He recounted a story that means a lot to
him. ``I was at a Jamboree and participants were offered the
chance to ride a new model ATV that was being premiered at the
event. I left my wheelchair in my truck and set out on the ride
with a group of riders and industry representatives that I
didn't know. When we stopped for lunch, I rode my ATV up to the
picnic table and ate alongside the other riders. After 8 hours
of riding, we returned to the trailhead and a friend brought my
chair over so I could dismount. The other riders were stunned
as they hadn't realized that I had any limitations. That was a
pretty fun day for me as I was able to keep up with all the
riders and I felt 100% engaged in the sport.''

OHV recreation can provide important opportunities for many
with disabilities to access the outdoors, and industry and
enthusiasts are ready to step up to the plate and help. As a
result, we support the Military and Veterans in Parks (MVP) Act
and recognize that nothing in the legislation as drafted would
disallow federal land management agencies from developing
adaptive trails and opportunities that feature OHV recreation.
But we suggest that OHV recreation should be specifically
mentioned in two sections of the draft legislation.

First, we suggest adding ``off-highway vehicle recreation''
on page 4, line 7 of the draft, so section (a)(5) reads:

(5) CONFLICT AVOIDANCE WITH OTHER USES.--In developing
each adaptive trail under paragraph (1), the Secretary
concerned shall ensure that the adaptive trail----

(A) does not conflict with----

(i) the uses in effect before the date of the enactment
of this Act with respect to any trail or road that is
part of that adaptive trail;

(ii) multiple-use areas where biking, hiking, horseback
riding, off-highway vehicle recreation, or use by pack
and saddle stock are existing uses on the date of the
enactment of this Act.
Secondly, please again add ``off-highway vehicle
recreation'' on page 6, line 4 of the draft so section (b)(3)
reads:

(3) ADAPTIVE RECREATION OPPORTUNITIES.--The adaptive
recreation opportunities developed under paragraph (1)
may include improving accessibility or access to----

(A) campgrounds and camping areas;

(B) hunting, fishing, shooting, or archery ranges or
locations;

(C) snow activities, including skiing and snowboarding;

(D) water activities, including kayaking, paddling,
canoeing, and boat launches;

(E) rock climbing;

(F) off-highway vehicle recreation

(G) biking; and

(H) any other recreation opportunities identified in
consultation with stakeholders under paragraph (2).

As we have indicated above, off-highway vehicle recreation
can be a vitally important way to get those with disabilities
outdoors. So, again, we support the draft legislation, but urge
the two minor suggestions above be implemented before
introduction.

Thank you for your consideration.

[all]
