- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1657, TO PROVIDE FOR A LAND EXCHANGE IN THE CHIPPEWA NATIONAL FOREST, MINNESOTA, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "LAKE WINNIBIGOSHISH LAND EXCHANGE ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 3107, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO ESTABLISH THE FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COUNCIL ON OUTDOOR RECREATION, "IMPROVING OUTDOOR RECREATION COORDINATION ACT"; H.R. 3200, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE AND THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN ACTIVITIES TO ENHANCE RECREATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR GATEWAY COMMUNITIES, TO AMEND THE FEDERAL LANDS RECREATION ENHANCEMENT ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A DIGITAL NATIONAL PARKS AND FEDERAL RECREATIONAL LANDS PASS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "GATEWAY COMMUNITY AND RECREATION ENHANCEMENT ACT; AND H.R. 4984,TO AMEND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STADIUM ACT OF 1957 TO PROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OVER THE ROBERT F. KENNEDY MEMORIAL STADIUM CAMPUS TO THE ADMINISTRATOR OF GENERAL SERVICES AND THE LEASING OF THE CAMPUS TO THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FOR PURPOSES WHICH INCLUDE COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "D.C. ROBERT F. KENNEDY MEMORIAL STADIUM CAMPUS REVITALIZATION ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 1657, H.R. 3107, H.R. 3200,
AND H.R. 4984

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, September 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-61

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-498 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, September 19, 2023......................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2
Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................    27
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................    28
Neguse, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado................................................    35

Statement of Witnesses:

Reynolds, Mike, Deputy Director, Congressional and External
Relations, National Park Service, Washington, DC...........     3
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Questions submitted for the record.......................     8
Emanuel, Jacqueline, Associate Deputy Chief, National Forest
System, U.S. Forest Service, Washington, DC................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13

Smith, Cory, Commissioner, District 1, Itasca County,
Minnesota..................................................    14
Prepared statement of....................................    15

Brodehl, Randy, Commissioner, Flathead County, Kalispell,
Montana....................................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Tariq, Ambreen, Senior Program Director, Outdoor Recreation
Roundtable, Washington, DC.................................    19
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Hunter, Delano, Acting Director, D.C. Department of General
Services, Washington, DC...................................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Trust for Public Land, Statement for the Record..........    37

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

National Parks Conservation Association, Letter to
Committee dated September 19, 2023.....................    38
Outdoor Alliance, Letter to Committee dated September 29,
2023...................................................    39
The Wilderness Society, Letter to Committee dated
September 19, 2023.....................................    41

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1657, TO PROVIDE FOR A LAND
EXCHANGE IN THE CHIPPEWA NATIONAL FOREST, MINNESOTA, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES, ``LAKE WINNIBIGOSHISH LAND EXCHANGE ACT OF
2023''; H.R. 3107, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO
ESTABLISH THE FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COUNCIL ON OUTDOOR
RECREATION, ``IMPROVING OUTDOOR RECREATION COORDINATION ACT'';
H.R. 3200, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE AND THE
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN ACTIVITIES TO
ENHANCE RECREATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR GATEWAY COMMUNITIES, TO
AMEND THE FEDERAL LANDS RECREATION ENHANCEMENT ACT TO PROVIDE
FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A DIGITAL NATIONAL PARKS AND FEDERAL
RECREATIONAL LANDS PASS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``GATEWAY
COMMUNITY AND RECREATION ENHANCEMENT ACT; AND H.R. 4984,TO
AMEND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STADIUM ACT OF 1957 TO PROVIDE
FOR THE TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION OVER THE ROBERT
F. KENNEDY MEMORIAL STADIUM CAMPUS TO THE ADMINISTRATOR OF
GENERAL SERVICES AND THE LEASING OF THE CAMPUS TO THE DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA FOR PURPOSES WHICH INCLUDE COMMERCIAL AND
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``D.C. ROBERT
F. KENNEDY MEMORIAL STADIUM CAMPUS REVITALIZATION ACT''

----------

Tuesday, September 19, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:17 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Tiffany, Fulcher, Stauber; Neguse, Leger
Fernandez, and Grijalva.
Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to consider four bills:
H.R. 1657, Representative Stauber's Lake Winnibigoshish Land
Exchange Act; H.R. 3107, Ranking Member Neguse's Improving
Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act; H.R. 3200, Representative
Zinke's Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act; and
H.R. 4984, Representative Comer's D.C. Robert F. Kennedy
Memorial Stadium Campus Revitalization Act.
I ask unanimous consent that Representative Zinke of
Montana be allowed to participate in today's hearing from the
dais.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. Today, the Subcommittee on Federal Lands
continues our work developing a comprehensive recreation
package.
While the House was away from DC during the August recess,
we were busy at work. We had boots on the ground all across the
country meeting with people, and hearing about the issues
everyday Americans are facing. This Committee held a hearing in
Yosemite. While the hearing focused on the need for forest
management and combating the wildfire crisis, I was reminded
how valuable these iconic places are to Americans who recreate
there. Having had my first opportunity to go there is
spectacular.
Engaging in outdoor activities, whether it is hiking,
camping, hunting, fishing, or simply spending time in nature is
not just important to us as individuals. It is part of our
nation's heritage. Despite the important role public lands play
in outdoor recreation, there are often conflicting levels of
access to the land and facilities provided by Federal land
managers, and convoluted policies among the various agencies.
That is exactly what the bills on today's agenda seek to
address.
The bills we are considering today would increase access to
public land, enhance coordination among the Federal land
management agencies, reduce bureaucracy, and provide for the
long-term planning of two important recreation sites.
Representative Zinke's bill, the Gateway Community and
Recreation Enhancement Act, will support gateway communities,
create better data on visitation to develop a digital pass so
Americans can access the park with their mobile device.
Importantly, the bill requires the National Park Service to
engage with local stakeholders before closing or reducing
access to a park, except for health and safety risks.
Last year, visitors to national parks generated a record
high of over $50 billion in economic benefits and supported
over 378,000 jobs. Legislation like Representative Zinke's bill
will help gateway communities build on this success and
continue to grow their rural economies by creating reliable,
dependable access to Federal lands.
I would also like to highlight legislation from my
neighbor, Representative Stauber, that would provide certainty
and predictability to a favorite hunting and fishing lodge in
his district on Lake Winnibigoshish. H.R. 1657, the Lake
Winnibigoshish Land Exchange Act of 2023, would facilitate a
land exchange between the owners of the lodge and the Forest
Service. I would like to commend Representative Stauber for
years of hard work he has put into crafting this locally-driven
solution that will benefit his constituents.
Like Representative Stauber's legislation, Representative
Comer's D.C. Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus
Revitalization Act is a locally-driven solution that would
provide for increased recreation here, in Washington, DC. The
legislation before us represents years of negotiations to
ensure a long-term solution for the future development and use
of the 142 acres of land known as the RFK Memorial Stadium
campus. To promote and enhance outdoor recreation, the bill
ensures any development of the site will maintain at least 30
percent parks and open space, and ensure access to the
Anacostia River and Anacostia River Trail.
Finally, Ranking Member Neguse and Representative Lawler's
bipartisan bill, H.R. 3107, the Improving Outdoor Recreation
Coordination Act, would establish the Federal Interagency
Council on Outdoor Recreation to coordinate policies among the
various land management agencies. I am interested in learning
more about this proposal, and whether it could potentially
decrease bureaucracy and redundancies among the Federal land
management agencies.
Each of these bills addresses a unique aspect of outdoor
recreation, from rural to urban communities, local to national
issues, and from immediate issues to long-term planning. I
thank each of the sponsors of today's bills for their
commitment and work.
I would also like to thank our panel of witnesses for being
here today to offer your unique expertise in the field of
outdoor recreation.
With that, I will now recognize Ranking Member Neguse.
And Ranking Member Neguse is not here at this point, so
let's go into our first panel.
I would just highlight for our panel we do have votes that
are coming up at 2:30, and we are going to get as far as we
can, and then we will go vote.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statement to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
I would like to introduce Mr. Mike Reynolds, the Deputy
Director of Congressional and External Relations at the
National Park Service.
Deputy Director Reynolds, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MIKE REYNOLDS, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, CONGRESSIONAL AND
EXTERNAL RELATIONS, NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Reynolds. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany,
Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the Subcommittee for this
opportunity to present the Department of the Interior's views
on three of the bills on today's agenda. I would like to submit
our full statement for the record and summarize the
Department's views.
H.R. 3107 would require the Secretary of the Interior to
establish the Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor
Recreation, or FICOR, composed of most of the agencies that
manage Federal lands and waters for recreation purposes.
The bill would require FICOR to meet as frequently as
appropriate to coordinate recreation policies across Federal
agencies, including implementation of the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act and many other matters. The
legislation would provide a statutory basis for FICOR, which is
currently administratively established, through a July 2022
Memorandum of Understanding among the agencies.
Since the MOU was signed, FICOR has developed an
operational charter and a 2-year work plan, focusing
coordination on priority topics such as permitting and fees,
partnerships, visitor use planning, youth engagement, and more.
The Department supports H.R. 3107, with amendments to make
the bill consistent, to the extent possible, with the July MOU.
We would also recommend language that assures long-term
sustainability for funding and capacity, and that all land and
water management agencies currently participating in FICOR be
included.
H.R. 3200 would require the Department of the Interior and
the U.S. Forest Service to carry out certain activities related
to recreational opportunities. These activities include
collaborating with other entities to better understand and
address gateway community needs, providing public involvement
in decisions that reduce access to national park units,
establishing a single visitation data reporting system for
recreation visits to Federal and tribal lands, and establishing
a digital National Parks and Federal Recreational Lands Pass.
The Department supports the intent of H.R. 3200, but would
like to work with the sponsor and the Committee on certain
provisions of the bill. We are broadly supportive of
congressional efforts to provide Federal land management
agencies with greater authorities and flexibilities to respond
to changing needs and evolving challenges in a time of
increased visitation to our public lands. We would welcome the
opportunity to continue collaborating with you to advance these
goals.
H.R. 4984 would direct the transfer of administrative
jurisdiction of the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium campus
from the National Park Service to the General Services
Administration, and direct the development of a new 99-year
lease between the GSA and the District of Columbia. The lease
would permit a number of uses, including a stadium and
commercial and residential development, subject to the approval
of the National Capital Planning Commission and the Commission
of Fine Arts.
The Department supports the goals of H.R. 4984. Our
principal interest is ensuring that the legislation provides
sufficient protection for park and recreational areas that the
National Park Service has long been responsible for
administering in this part of the District, where the former
stadium and adjacent park lands are located.
Importantly, from our perspective, the lease would require
that the District ensure that any commercial or residential
development not adversely impact lands under the National Park
Service's jurisdiction; that 30 percent of the leased land be
designated as parks and open space; and that development
provides for access to the Anacostia River and does not
interrupt the Anacostia River Trail.
The Department would like to recommend some amendments to
the bill as drafted. Furthermore, we would ask for your support
as the bill advances through the legislative process to ensure
that it continues to provide for the protection of a sufficient
amount of land for open space and park and recreation purposes,
consistent with the Federal Government's historic commitment to
that goal. We look forward to working with you toward that end.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony and I am happy to
answer any questions that you or other members of the
Subcommittee may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Reynolds follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael T. Reynolds, Deputy Director for
Congressional and External Relations,
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 3107, H.R. 3200, and H.R. 4984

H.R. 3107, ``Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the Department
of the Interior's views on H.R. 3107, to direct the Secretary of the
Interior to establish the Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor
Recreation.
The Department supports H.R. 3107 with amendments. The Department
defers to the Department of Agriculture, the Department of the Army,
and the Department of Commerce regarding their views on this bill's
provisions, particularly as they affect the U.S. Forest Service, the
Corps of Engineers, and the National Marine Fisheries Service,
respectively.
H.R. 3107 would require the Secretary of the Interior to establish
the Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR), composed
of the National Park Service, the Bureau of Land Management, the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the Bureau of
Reclamation, the U.S. Forest Service, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and the National Marine Fisheries Service. The bill would require FICOR
to meet as frequently as appropriate to coordinate recreation policies
across Federal agencies, including implementation of the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act and many other matters that are common to
agencies that manage Federal lands and waters for recreational
purposes. The legislation would provide a statutory basis for FICOR,
which is currently administratively established.
Our Nation's public lands, waters, and the fish and wildlife they
support are an important resource for the American public. These places
provide a diversity of outdoor recreation experiences for tens of
millions of Americans each day and improve the social well-being of
urban and rural communities across the United States. These
recreational opportunities are supported by agency work both on and off
federal lands. Outdoor recreation also contributes significantly to the
national economy and the economies of local communities.
Federal land and water management agencies have long-standing
responsibilities for the conservation and sustainable use of the
resources within the places they manage. The need for interagency
coordination of Federal departments and agencies with the
responsibility to manage lands and waterways for outdoor recreation has
a history dating back to at least 1946 with the development of the
Federal Recreation Committee, which was soon after redesignated as the
Federal Inter-Agency Committee on Recreation. Since then, there have
been several iterations of this organized coordination, including the
most recent Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation
reestablishment in July 2022 through a Memorandum of Agreement (MOU)
signed by the Secretaries or Assistant Secretaries of the Department of
Agriculture, the Department of the Army (Civil Works), the Department
of Commerce (the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), and
the Department of the Interior. Collectively, these agencies manage an
area of more than 730 million non-overlapping acres that consist of
parks, lakes, monuments, wild and scenic rivers, Reclamation water
projects, wildlife refuges and fish hatcheries, forests, and marine
sanctuaries and wilderness areas.
The overall goal of the FICOR, as defined in the recent MOU, is to
institutionalize and facilitate better coordination and collaboration
among Federal agencies whose missions or programs include providing
outdoor recreation and conserving or sustainably managing natural and
cultural resources. FICOR provides a framework to address common
outdoor recreation-related challenges and opportunities since each of
these land and water management agencies are also facing similar
challenges related to balancing resource protection, local
environmental and economic vitality, and visitor use and enjoyment.
Many of these agencies have also recently benefited from
significant Federal investments to address critical needs and improve
the visitor and outdoor recreation experiences provided through the
Great American Outdoors Act, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and the
Inflation Reduction Act.
Since FICOR's 2022 reestablishment, the agencies have collectively
developed an Operational Charter and a two-year workplan focusing
coordination on priority topics which include permitting and fees,
policy and regulations, equitable workforce, outdoor recreation for
all, intergovernmental and community collaboration, partnerships, youth
engagement, data and technology, and visitor use planning. The workplan
also includes coordination to ensure the long-term sustainability of
FICOR through identifying funding and establishing a well-vetted
organizational structure.
The Department would appreciate the opportunity to work with the
sponsor and the Committee on amendments to make the bill consistent, to
the extent possible, with the July 2022 interagency MOU, including the
areas identified for coordination. We would also recommend language
that assures long-term sustainability for funding and capacity, as well
as a federal family approach not driven by any one agency but rather
managed equally between Departments. DOI also recommends that all the
land and water management agencies currently participating in FICOR be
included in the proposed legislation, including by acknowledging that
the definitions referenced in the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement
Act do not apply to all the agencies currently participating and
referenced in the FICOR MOU.
H.R. 3200, ``Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the Department
of the Interior's views on H.R. 3200, to require the Secretary of
Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior to carry out certain
activities to enhance recreational opportunities for gateway
communities, to amend the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act to
provide for the establishment of a digital National Parks and Federal
Recreational Lands Pass, and for other purposes.
The Department supports the intent of H.R. 3200, but would like to
work with the sponsor and the Committee on certain provisions of the
bill. The Department defers to the Department of Agriculture for its
views regarding provisions that affect the U.S. Forest Service.
Section 3 of H.R. 3200 directs the Secretaries of the Interior and
Agriculture to collaborate with State and local governments, Tribal
governments, housing authorities, applicable trade associations,
nonprofit organizations, and other relevant stakeholders to improve the
understanding of the economic impacts of visitation on gateway
communities and identify community needs, including housing shortages,
demands on existing municipal infrastructure, and accommodation and
management of sustainable visitation. The bill further directs the
Secretaries to use existing authorities to seek to address the
identified community needs by entering into agreements with gateway
communities; offering corresponding leases, rights-of-way, or
easements; entering into public-private partnerships; or providing
financial assistance under existing programs.
Section 4, which is the only section of the bill that is specific
to the National Park Service, would require superintendents of national
parks to conduct public meetings, consult local stakeholders, and
provide a 60-day public comment period for any action that would reduce
access to a park for a reason not connected to a specific emergency-
type incident. Because the National Park Service currently conducts
public outreach and solicits public comments for access-related actions
at parks such as establishing reservation systems, the Department would
like to better understand the purpose of this provision and to work
with the sponsor and the Committee to clarify it accordingly.
Section 5 would require the Secretaries of Agriculture and the
Interior to establish a single visitation data reporting system to
report annual visitation data across all the units of Federal
recreational lands and on land held in trust for Indian Tribes, if
requested by a Tribe. The data would include estimates for multiple
categories of recreation activities. This section would also require
the establishment of a ``Real-time Data Pilot Program'' that would make
available to the public data on visitation at: selected Federal land
management units; other Federal, State, and local recreation sites near
the selected units; and other lesser-known recreation sites near the
selected units, in an effort to encourage visitation among recreation
sites. In selecting the Federal land management units to participate in
the pilot program, the Secretaries would be directed to solicit
feedback from gateway communities. The pilot program would consist of
15 units managed by land management bureaus of the Department and five
by the U.S. Forest Service; within five years, the program is to
include 80 additional sites, 50 of which would be managed by the
Department's bureaus.
Section 6 of the bill would require the Secretaries of Agriculture
and the Interior, by January 1, 2024, to establish a digital version of
the National Parks and Federal Recreational Lands Pass that can be
stored on a mobile device and make that pass available to pass
purchasers. The National Park Service, on behalf of all participating
Interagency Pass Program agencies, has been actively working on
establishing digital passes at individual sites as an option for
visitors since it launched a pilot in the fall/winter of 2016/2017.
Digital site-specific passes are currently offered at over 80 NPS
locations as well as other agency locations.
The Department appreciates the intent of this bill and is broadly
supportive of congressional efforts to provide the various Federal land
management agencies under its jurisdiction with greater authorities and
flexibility to respond, based on the best available data and evidence,
to changing needs and evolving challenges in a time of increased
visitation to our public lands. We would welcome the opportunity to
continue collaborating with the bill sponsors and the Committee to
advance these goals.
H.R. 4984, The D.C. Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus
Revitalization Act

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the Department
of the Interior's views on H.R. 4984, the D.C. Robert F. Kennedy
Memorial Stadium Campus Revitalization Act.
The Department supports the goals of H.R. 4984. Our principal
interest is in ensuring that the legislation provides sufficient
protection for park and recreational areas within the area that the
National Park Service (NPS) has long been responsible for
administering, directly or through a lease, in the part of the District
of Columbia (District) where the former stadium and adjacent parklands
are located. The Department defers to the General Services
Administration (GSA) for its views on the aspects of the legislation
that pertain to that agency.
H.R. 4984 would amend the District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957
to direct the Secretary of the Interior to transfer administrative
jurisdiction of the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus (Campus)
to the Administrator of the GSA. The GSA would assume the NPS's
responsibilities under the Federal government's current lease with the
District. The legislation would direct the development of a new 99-year
lease between the GSA and the District that would permit a number of
uses, including a stadium and commercial and residential development,
subject to the approval of the National Capital Planning Commission and
the Commission of Fine Arts.
Importantly from our perspective, H.R. 4984 would require that, as
a condition of using the Campus for commercial and residential
development, the lease would require that the District ensure that the
development does not materially degrade or adversely impact any lands
under the jurisdiction of the NPS; that 30 percent of the land be
designated as parks and open space; and that development provides for
public access to the Anacostia River and shall not interrupt the
Anacostia River Trail. These requirements would help preserve the
Federal government's historic commitment to maintaining significant
portions of land in this part of the District as park and recreational
space.
The Campus sits on land administered by the NPS as part of
Anacostia Park. Originally envisioned by the 1901 McMillan Commission
as public gardens and recreation space, Anacostia Park was established
in 1918 when Congress directed the Army Corps of Engineers to dredge
the Anacostia River flats and use the fill to create new parkland. In
1924, Congress established what would eventually become the National
Capital Planning Commission (NCPC) which directed the management of
Anacostia Park as part of the park, parkway, and playground system of
the Nation's capital. In 1933, Executive Order 6166 transferred NCPC's
responsibilities for management of the park, parkway, and playground
system, including Anacostia Park, to the NPS.
The District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 previously called for
transferring the entire Campus to the District following the repayment
of the costs to construct the stadium. However, the Campus remained the
property of the Federal government. As amended in 1986, the act
directed the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) to convey ownership
of the stadium building, only, to the District and establish a 50-year
conditional lease for the stadium grounds and surrounding parking. The
1986 amendments required that the property be used for the purposes of
recreation facilities, open space, and public outdoor recreation
facilities in addition to a stadium. The lease entered into between the
NPS and the District in 1968, pursuant to the 1986 amendments, is set
to expire in 2038.
The lease area is approximately 142 acres, including the 11 acres
that were occupied by the District-owned former stadium structure.
Under the current law, if the leased property were no longer used for
the purposes allowed by the 1986 amendments and under the lease, the
lands would revert to the Secretary to be administered as part of
Anacostia Park and the District would bear the costs of removing
structures, or rehabilitating the stadium or land, as the Secretary
determines appropriate.
The District currently manages approximately 851 acres of parkland
across the city and the leasing of land as directed in H.R. 4984 would
present an opportunity for the District to add to those lands and
improve its park system. The bill's additional permitted uses
(commercial and residential development) would allow the District to
implement its plan to transform the Campus from acres of asphalt to a
complex focused on community sports, recreation, park space and
cultural amenities. The bill's requirement that 30 percent of the land
be designated for parks and open space as a condition for residential
and commercial development would guarantee public access to a sizable
amount of park land and outdoor recreation areas.
Additionally, the bill's parks and open space requirements would
complement NPS park land in the immediate vicinity. Of particular note,
within the vicinity is a 32-acre riparian buffer which contains a
portion of the Anacostia River Trail and serves as a critical
transition from the 142 acres of leased lands to the Anacostia River.
This transition zone protects the river from runoff that would
otherwise carry sediments and pollutants into the water. It is critical
to ensure that this area is maintained as a riparian buffer.
The Department would like to recommend some amendments to the bill
as drafted and looks forward to working with Congress. Furthermore,
because there are three House committees reviewing this bill and many
more steps ahead in the legislative process, we would ask for your
support as the bill advances to ensure that it continues to provide for
the protection of a sufficient amount of land for open space, park and
recreation purposes, consistent with the Federal government's historic
commitment to that goal. We look forward to working with you toward
that end.

Chairman Tiffany, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or other members of the Subcommittee may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Mike Reynolds, Deputy
Director, Congressional and External Relations, National Park Service

Mr. Reynolds did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Tiffany
Question 1. During the hearing, you mentioned the National Park
Service (NPS) coordinates with local, county, and state governments
(``stakeholders'') based on civic engagement policies and have
definitions of communication and coordination in policy manuals.

1a) How does the NPS define coordination?

1b) Will you provide citations for laws, statutes, codes,
regulations, and policy manuals directing the NPS to coordinate with
stakeholders?

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Deputy Director Reynolds.
I would like to introduce Ms. Jacqueline Emanuel, the
Associate Deputy Chief of the National Forest Service.
Associate Deputy Chief Emanuel, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACQUELINE EMANUEL, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY CHIEF,
NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Emanuel. Chairman Tiffany, thank you very much for the
invitation to testify today. I am Jacqueline Emanuel, Associate
Deputy Chief for the National Forest System for the USDA Forest
Service.
My work in the National Forest System includes policy
oversight and direction for recreation management, which is the
subject of two bills you are considering today. Our recreation
program provides a wide array of recreational opportunities on
our public land, including 159,000 miles of trails, 370,000
miles of roads, and nearly 30,000 recreation sites. In fact,
our recreation program is the primary pathway that more than
160 million visitors used to connect with their national
forests last year alone.
Recreation is the largest economic driver of the national
forest, contributing more than $13.7 billion to America's GDP
and supporting more than 161,000 jobs. Gateway communities play
an important role in creating and sustaining this recreation
economy.
At the Forest Service, we see a strong need to engage
across boundaries in more comprehensive recreation planning
with gateway communities and other stakeholders to identify
sustainable solutions to the growing demand for outdoor
recreation on Federal and other public lands.
As we reimagine recreation, we are challenging ourselves to
think differently about how we deliver recreation into the
future. Our vision is grounded in engagement with others,
including new and diverse audiences such as our gateway
communities.
Regarding the bills being discussed today, H.R. 3200, the
Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act, aims to
enhance recreation opportunities for gateway communities and to
provide digital versions of the National Parks and Federal
Recreation Lands Passes. USDA supports the goals of this bill.
We would welcome an opportunity to work with the Subcommittee
and bill sponsors to improve upon the current legislation in
support of these goals.
USDA supports H.R. 3107, the Improving Outdoor Recreation
Coordination Act. This bill would codify the Federal
Interagency Council on Recreation, or FICOR. USDA is a charter
member of FICOR, an organization which has proven itself
instrumental in forwarding interagency initiatives in support
of outdoor recreation.
USDA supports the goals of H.R. 1657, Lake Winnibigoshish
Land Exchange Act of 2023. This bill would direct the Forest
Service to exchange approximately 13.8 acres of Federal land
located in the Chippewa National Forest for approximately 38
acres of non-Federal land in Itasca County, Minnesota. We would
like to work with the Subcommittee and bill sponsor on
technical improvements to the bill to address our concern with
the land exchange timeline.
We appreciate the Subcommittee's focus on improving
recreation management on public lands and in our neighboring
gateway communities. We also appreciate your interest in a
proposed land exchange that enjoys local support. We look
forward to working with you. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Emanuel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jacqueline Emanuel, Associate Deputy Chief,
National Forest System, U.S. Department of Agriculture--Forest Service
on H.R. 1657, H.R. 3107, and H.R. 3200

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the views of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service, regarding
various Federal land management bills. USDA defers to the U.S.
Department of the Interior (DOI) as to the effects of these bills on
any DOI bureaus and the federal lands under their jurisdiction.
Background

The USDA Forest Service manages 155 national forests and 20
national grasslands, comprising 193 million acres in 41 states and
Puerto Rico. National forest and grassland outdoor recreation offers
the widest possible array of opportunities to experience Federal lands,
which are home to three million acres of lakes, 400,000 miles of
streams, 122 Wild and Scenic Rivers for rafting, kayaking and other
watersports, and 159,000 miles of trails for horseback riding, hiking,
snowmobiling, mountain biking, hunting, and more.
The Forest Service is deeply committed to connecting all Americans
to the outdoors, and we value the important role played by outfitters
and guides, resorts, non-profit organizations, and other concessioners
in connecting people to recreation opportunities in the national
forests and grasslands. Outdoor recreation attracts people to visit,
live, and work in gateway and rural communities and supports the
health, well-being, and economic vitality of those communities. In
fiscal year 2021, recreation on National Forest System (NFS) lands
contributed more than $13.7 billion to America's gross domestic product
and supported more than 161,500 full and part-time jobs, the vast
majority of which are in gateway and rural communities.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2021 National Visitor Use Monitoring survey. These numbers
reflect total benefits (direct, indirect, and induced).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fiscal year 2021, there were 156 million recreation visits to
national forests and grasslands. When we include the number of people
who pass through these beautiful forests and grasslands to enjoy the
scenery and travel on scenic roads and byways, that number increases to
456 million visits. Recreation pressure has been particularly
significant in national forests close to urban areas.
Moreover, the recreation program on NFS lands sustains more private
sector jobs per program dollar than any other Forest Service program
and provides the single largest economic stimulus for many local
communities adjacent to or within NFS boundaries. Outdoor recreation
opportunities and amenities are consistently ranked as one of the
primary reasons people move to rural towns and can be a leading
contributor to small town economies. The Forest Service administers
over 30,000 commercial recreation special use authorizations for
activities that generate nearly $2 billion in revenue for special use
authorization holders. In particular, the Forest Service administers
127 ski area permits and approximately 8,000 outfitting and guiding
permits.
USDA appreciates the recognition by this Subcommittee of the
importance of recreation on Federal lands to our national economy, as
well as the sustained interest in finding solutions to recreation
management challenges. We understand these challenges, and we know that
we can further enhance recreation opportunities on Federal lands.
Seeking to continue the momentum built through the Great America
Outdoors Act and the Infrastructure, Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA),
the Forest Service has initiated a national strategy and action plan
called Reimagine Recreation. The Forest Service is also a foundational
member of Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR),
which is partnering across all land and water management agencies to
better coordinate delivery of opportunities and access for outdoor
recreation. This effort will clarify and change the way we deliver
recreation opportunities. We are building our vision by engaging with
new and diverse audiences.
H.R. 3200--Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act

H.R. 3200, the ``Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement
Act,'' requires the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the
Interior to carry out certain activities to enhance recreational
opportunities for gateway communities. The bill also amends the Federal
Lands Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA) to provide for the
establishment of a digital National Parks and Federal Recreational
Lands Pass.
Section 3 seeks to enhance understanding of the economic impacts of
visitation on gateway communities and to identify the needs of those
communities, such as housing and other infrastructure necessary to
accommodate and manage growing levels of visitation. The bill would
require the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior to seek to meet
the identified needs through a variety of mechanisms under existing
law, such as financial assistance, cooperative agreements, and public-
private partnerships.
However, Section 3 also includes the provision that USDA can
provide financial or technical assistance to a gateway community under
an existing program to remedy any identified economic needs, such as
housing shortages and to address demands on existing municipal
infrastructure. The Forest Service lacks authority to provide direct
economic development assistance in gateway or rural communities.
Authority for this function rests in USDA-Rural Development. Forest
Service initiatives in the recreation economy space are linked to
program authorities. Because the Forest Service lacks any authority to
provide financial assistance beyond NFS boundaries, this bill would
need to give that authority to the Secretary of Agriculture.
Section 4 of H.R. 3200 requires the National Park Service (NPS) to
conduct certain procedures before taking any action that will reduce
access to a National Park. USDA defers to the Department of the
Interior on any impacts on NPS related to this provision.
Section 5(a) of this bill would require the Secretaries to
establish a single visitation data reporting system to report annual
visitation data in a consistent manner. Section 5(b) of this bill would
require USDA to select five national forests for a pilot program to
make visitation data available to the public, including data and
resources publicly available from existing nongovernmental platforms.
The bill would allow the data to be provided directly by the agency or
indirectly through its partners. Within five years of enactment, the
Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior would be required to select
an additional 80 units for this program. Section 5 also would require
the Secretaries to share information about lesser-known recreation
sites through a variety of media platforms to disperse visitation among
recreation sites.
The Forest Service currently collects visitor use data and monitors
trends in visitor use annually through the National Visitor Use
Monitoring program and makes visitation data publicly available on its
website. To the extent this bill would require the agency to provide
real-time visitor use data to the public, the agency would like to work
with the bill sponsor to address technical concerns. USDA would like to
work with the Subcommittee and bill sponsors to better understand the
visitation data requirements in Section 5 and to make technical
improvements to the bill.
Section 6 of this bill would amend existing legislation under the
Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act and would require the
establishment of digital versions of the America the Beautiful--
National Parks and Federal Recreational Lands passes no later than
January 1, 2024. Due to technical requirements and the time needed to
implement the conversion to digital passes, we recommend amending this
deadline to January 1, 2026, to allow sufficient time to implement this
change responsibly and effectively.
USDA recognizes the important role and needs of gateway communities
in sustaining the recreation economy. We are helping to invest in
community well-being, expand the outdoor recreation economy, and
provide access to the outdoors for underserved populations. We have
partnered with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the
Northern Border Regional Commission to launch the Recreation Economy
for Rural Communities program, which provides planning assistance to
help rural communities leverage outdoor recreation as an economic
development strategy. USDA Forest Service, Rural Development, and the
National Institute for Food and Agriculture are also collaborating to
support the recreation economies of rural forest gateway communities by
providing technical expertise and funding to develop recreation
infrastructure and capacity beyond the boundaries of NFS lands. We have
identified a strong need to engage across boundaries in more
comprehensive recreation planning to identify sustainable solutions to
the growing demand for outdoor recreation on Federal and other public
lands. Collaborative, all-lands recreation planning is at the heart of
our Reimagine Recreation effort.
USDA supports the goals of H.R. 3200 to enhance recreation
opportunities for gateway communities and to provide digital versions
of the America the Beautiful--National Parks and Federal Recreational
Lands passes. We would welcome an opportunity to work with the
Subcommittee and bill sponsors to improve upon the current legislation
in support of these goals.
H.R. 3107--Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act

H.R. 3107 legislatively establishes an interagency council known as
the Federal Interagency Council on Recreation (FICOR), composed of
representatives from the National Park Service, Bureau of Land
Management, United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, Bureau of Reclamation, Forest Service, United States Army
Corps of Engineers, and the National Marine Fisheries Service. Among
other purposes, the bill would charge FICOR with coordination of
recreation management policies across Federal agencies, including
implementation of the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act (16
U.S.C. 6801 et seq.).
On July 20, 2022, the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, and the
Interior and the Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works signed
a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that re-established FICOR
administratively, with the purpose of creating more safe, affordable,
and equitable opportunities for Americans to get outdoors. This MOU
renewed and re-energized FICOR, which was originally created
administratively in 2011 but was suspended by the previous
administration. FICOR provides a focus on improving access to nature,
expanding outdoor recreation opportunities, and providing the public
with improved and more affordable experiences on America's public lands
and waters.
FICOR has been instrumental in forwarding interagency initiatives
promoting youth outdoor activities and policy and data coordination in
support of outdoor recreation. The USDA Forest Service is a charter
member of FICOR and supports H.R. 3107, which would codify FICOR in
statute.
H.R. 1657--Lake Winnibigoshish Land Exchange Act of 2023

H.R. 1657 would direct the Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest
Service to exchange approximately 13.8 acres of Federal land in Itasca
County, Minnesota located in the Chippewa National Forest within the
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Reservation boundary for approximately 38
acres of non-Federal land in Itasca County, Minnesota, which is owned
by Big Winnie Land and Timber, LLC, (BWLT). Subject to the provisions
of this Act, if BWLT offers to convey the non-Federal land to the
United States, the Secretary shall, not later than 180 days after
receiving the offer (1) accept the offer, (2) convey to BWLT all right,
title, and interest of the United States in and to the federal land;
and (3) accept from BWLT all right, title, and interest of BWLT in and
to the non-federal land. The exchange would be for equal value, or the
values shall be equalized by a cash payment, subject to an exception.
The land acquired by USDA would be added to and managed as part of
Chippewa National Forest.
USDA supports the goals of H.R. 1657, ``Lake Winnibigoshish Land
Exchange Act of 2023.'' The bill would extend benefits to the public by
exchanging developed shoreline for a larger, undeveloped parcel in
which the Forest Service would no longer need to administer a special
use permit. While we are supportive of the bill, the Department has
concerns with the 180-day time frame allotted to complete the exchange.
We would welcome the opportunity to work with the Subcommittee and the
bill sponsor to refine this language and make other technical
refinements to meet the bill's intent.

That concludes my testimony. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify. I am happy to answer any questions the Subcommittee may have
for me.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Jacqueline Emanuel, Associate
Deputy Chief, National Forest System, U.S. Forest Service

Questions Submitted by Representative Tiffany

Question 1. During the hearing, you mentioned the Forest Service
coordinates with local, county, and state governments
(``stakeholders'').

1a) How does the Forest Service define coordination?

Answer. The type of coordination with stakeholders conducted by the
Forest Service varies depending on the context and applicable legal
requirements, as discussed in response to Question 1b.

1b) Will you provide citations for laws, statutes, codes,
regulations, and policy manuals directing the Forest Service to
coordinate with stakeholders?

Answer. Several authorities provide for Forest Service coordination
with stakeholders. Examples include, but are not limited to, the
following:

Section 14(a) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable
Resources Planning Act of 1974, 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1612(a), and
its implementing regulations at 36 C.F.R. Part 216, require
the Forest Service to provide notice and opportunity to
comment on formulation of standards, criteria, and
guidelines applicable to Forest Service programs. Forest
Service directives implementing these authorities state
that it is the policy of the Forest Service to ensure
appropriate intergovernmental communication when developing
or amending directives that are subject to public notice
and comment. Forest Service Handbook (FSH) 1109.12, Ch. 30,
sec. 34.

Forest Service regulations at 36 C.F.R. Part 212, Subparts
A and B, require the agency to coordinate with stakeholders
when designating National Forest System (NFS) roads, NFS
trails, and areas on NFS lands for motor vehicle or over-
snow vehicle use.

The John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and
Recreation Act of 2019, Pub. L. No. 116-9, Title IV
(Sportsmen's Access and Related Matters) (Dingell Act),
requires the Forest Service to coordinate with stakeholders
on proposed temporary and permanent restrictions and
prohibitions on hunting, fishing, and recreational shooting
on NFS lands. Forest Service directives implementing this
requirement are in FSH 5309.11, Chapter 30, section 34.

Forest Service regulations at 36 C.F.R. Part 261, Subpart
C, provide for public notice and opportunity to comment on
permanent restrictions and prohibitions applicable to a
Forest Service region.

The Forest Service engages with stakeholders and other
members of the public on proposals to establish, modify, or
eliminate a recreation fee consistent with section 804 of
the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA), 16
U.S.C. Sec. 6803, and Forest Service directives at FSH
2309.13, Chapter 30, section 32.8.

The Forest Service also engages with stakeholders and
other members of the public in connection with National
Environmental Policy Act compliance for proposed projects,
including decommissioning of developed recreation sites
pursuant to recreation site assessments.

Question 2. H.R. 3200 would require the National Park Service to
coordinate with local stakeholders, hold public meetings, and open at
least a 60-day comment period before any action is taken to reduce
access. Does the Forest Service support including similar requirements
before reducing access to National Forest System lands?

Answer. Because the Forest Service generally conducts public
outreach and solicits public comments for access-related actions needed
on NFS lands, we would like to better understand the purpose of this
provision and to work with the sponsor and the Committee to clarify it
accordingly. The provision as drafted would preclude the agency from
timely issuing short-term orders to address immediate public health and
safety or resource concerns in specific areas, as authorized by the
Dingell Act (authorizing emergency orders without public notice and
comment) and the agency's travel management regulations at 36 C.F.R.
Sec. 212.52(b)(1) and (b)(2) (authorizing temporary, emergency closures
and temporary, emergency closures based on determination of
considerable adverse effects without public involvement).
Question 3. Earlier this year during another hearing focused on
recreation, the Forest Service followed up and assured me there are
plans and funding available to rehabilitate boat launches at Beaver
Lake, Cisco Lake, Stock Farm, Twin Lake, and Mondeaux. Will you provide
an update on the status of these boat launches?

Answer. The Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest remains on schedule
for the planned rehabilitation at Beaver Lake, Cisco Lake, Twin Lakes,
Stock Farm, and Mondeaux Flowage using funding under the Great American
Outdoors Act. The boat landing rehabilitations for Beaver Lake, Cisco
Lake, Twin Lakes, and Stock Farm are anticipated to be completed in
fiscal year (FY) 2024. Additionally, the planned fishing pier
rehabilitation or replacement at Mondeaux Flowage is anticipated to be
completed in FY 2025. The fishing ramp will remain open during
rehabilitation or replacement of the fishing pier at Mondeaux Flowage.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Associate Deputy Chief Emanuel.
I now recognize Mr. Cory Smith, District 1 Commissioner for
Itasca County in Minnesota.
Commissioner Smith, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CORY SMITH, COMMISSIONER, DISTRICT 1, ITASCA
COUNTY, MINNESOTA

Mr. Smith. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Cory Smith. I serve as
County Commissioner representing the citizens of Itasca County
in northern Minnesota, home of the Chippewa National Forest and
Lake Winnibigoshish.
I want to thank Representative Stauber for introducing H.R.
1657, the Lake Winnibigoshish Land Exchange Act of 2023, along
with Ranking Member Neguse and Representative Huffman for their
co-sponsorship of this bill.
The land exchange bill would transfer 13.8 acres along Lake
Winnibigoshish to the owners of Bowen Lodge, which is a
fishing-hunting resort that has played an important role in our
community since 1982. The transfer will ensure 1,640 feet of
shoreline and permanent access to the lake for recreation. In
return, Bowen Lodge would transfer 38 acres of land to the U.S.
Forest Service to be added to the Chippewa National Forest.
Transferring this acreage to the Chippewa National Forest will
allow greater management of land and ensure the public has the
best access to recreate and enjoy our beautiful natural
resources.
Bowen Lodge is a third-generation, family-owned resort
dating back to 1925. The Heig family, which operates the Lodge
today, and have done so for over 40 years. Over those three
generations, this family continues to be stewards of the land.
From their state-of-the-art septic systems to their shoreline
improvements, they have taken strides to protect the health of
Lake Winnibigoshish and the landscape around them. Bowen Lodge
has had an impact on so many other resorts on the lake, as
well, and that is one of the reasons that Lake Winnibigoshish
continues to thrive.
On a local level, there is nothing but support for this
land exchange. As a community leader, I would like to again
express that the Heig family and Bowen Lodge has gone above and
beyond for all Minnesotans when it comes to taking care of Lake
Winnibigoshish and the Chippewa National Forest that surrounds
them.
Not only an elected official in Itasca County, but also as
a local resident that is raising my family and a growing
business in the area, I feel the time is now to complete this
land exchange. This is an absolute win-win for everyone.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify on this
bill today, which I firmly believe will benefit the citizens of
Itasca County and ensure greater access to countless
Minnesotans who seek to recreate along Lake Winnibigoshish.
I look forward to answering any of your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
Prepared Statement of Commissioner Cory Smith, Itasca County
on H.R. 1657

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify
today.
My name is Cory Smith, and I serve as a County Commissioner
representing the citizens of Itasca County in Northern Minnesota, home
to the Chippewa National Forest and Lake Winnibigoshish.
I want to thank Representative Stauber for introducing H.R. 1657,
the Lake Winnibigoshish Land Exchange Act for 2023, along with Ranking
Member Neguse and Rep. Huffman for their co-sponsorship of this bill.
This land exchange bill will transfer 13.8 acres along Lake
Winnibigoshish to the owners of Bowen Lodge, which is a fishing and
hunting resort that has played an important role in our community since
1982. This transfer will ensure 1,640 feet of shoreline and permanent
access to the lake for recreation. In return, Bowen Lodge would
transfer 38 acres of land to the U.S. Forest Service, to be added to
the Chippewa National Forest. Transferring this acreage to the Chippewa
National Forest will allow greater management of the land, and ensuring
the public has the best access to recreate and enjoy our beautiful
natural resources.
Bowen Lodge is third-generation family-owned resort, dating back to
1925. The Heig family, which operate the lodge today, have done so for
over 40 years. Over those three generations this family continues to be
stewards of the land. From their state-of-the-art septic system to
their shoreline improvements, they've taken strides to protect the
health of Lake Winnibigoshish and the landscape around them.
Bowen Lodge has had an impact on so many other resorts on the lake
as well, and that is one of the reasons Lake Winnibigoshish continues
to thrive. On a local level there is nothing but support for this land
exchange. As a community leader I would like to again express that the
Heig family and Bowen Lodge has gone above and beyond for all
Minnesotans when comes to taking care of Lake Winnibigoshish and the
Chippewa National Forest that surrounds them.
Not only an elected official in Itasca County, but also as a local
resident that is raising my family and growing a business in the area,
I feel the time is now to complete this land exchange. It is an
absolute win-win for everyone.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on this bill today,
which I firmly believe will benefit the citizens of Itasca County and
ensure greater access to countless Minnesotans who seek to recreate
along Lake Winnibigoshish. I look forward to answering your questions.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Commissioner Smith.
I now recognize Mr. Randy Brodehl, Commissioner for
Flathead County in Kalispell, Montana.
Commissioner Brodehl, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RANDY BRODEHL, COMMISSIONER, FLATHEAD COUNTY,
KALISPELL, MONTANA

Mr. Brodehl. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, thank
you very much for holding this hearing to discuss legislation
to support gateway communities and enhance recreation in our
public lands. My name is Randy Brodehl, and I am a Flathead
County, Montana Commissioner. I previously served in the
Montana House of Representatives and as a local fire chief, and
I offer my testimony today on behalf of the National
Association of Counties.
Flathead County is in northwest Montana, and has a
population of 120,000 people. We are a gateway to three
national forests, a national wildlife refuge, the Pacific
Northwest National Scenic Trail, two national wildernesses, and
Glacier National Park. Recreational access to these Federal
lands is our primary economic driver.
Visitations to Federal lands have exploded in recent years.
Glacier National Park has seen approximately 3 million visitors
annually since 2017, apart from when it was closed for COVID.
While this has led to a rapid economic growth in our gateway
community, there are significant drawbacks to our population
increasing several times our number of residents for a few
months out of every year.
Three years ago, Glacier National Park implemented a
reservation permit system for Going-to-the-Sun Road. And Going-
to-the-Sun Road is the only road that goes all the way through
the park. This reduced visitation by about a half a million
people in 2022. This year the park requires permits for all
vehicles, likely further reducing visitation levels.
When the Federal Government pushes down on our gateway
communities, we can suffer millions of dollars in economic
loss. H.R. 3200, the Gateway Community and Recreation
Enhancement Act, requires Federal land agencies to conduct
public meetings, consult local stakeholders, and allow for
public comment. Counties appreciate Congressman Ryan Zinke and
Senator Steve Daines for introducing this bipartisan
legislation.
When visitors cannot acquire a park entry permit, they
recreate in our gateway communities. Flathead Lake is a massive
tourism draw. Unfortunately, for the first time in 50 years,
the Bureau of Reclamation did not release enough water to keep
Flathead Lake at full capacity, exposing the lake bottom,
closing marinas, stranding boats, and exposing irrigation pump
intakes.
With access to Glacier National Park and Flathead Lake
curtailed, our visitor numbers faded, doing significant harm to
our economy. Without the Gateway Community and Recreation
Enhancement Act we are destined to repeat this devastating
action every year because county and state officials do not
have a seat at the Federal decision-making table.
Flathead County's access to U.S. Forest Service lands,
wilderness areas, and national wildlife refuge lands has
remained virtually the same for the past 60 years, while
tourism numbers have quadrupled. The Gateway Community and
Recreation Enhancement Act will support expansion of recreation
enhancements in our gateway communities by considering more
option actions like adding campgrounds, opening roads in our
forests, trails in our wilderness areas, and greater access to
our wildlife refuge, and also educating our visitors about
options in gateway communities.
For us in the Flathead, the Act will let us help with best
practice decisions. H.R. 3200 would ensure the public has
access to their lands, and it lessens the burden of increased
visitations on communities. The bill requires the U.S.
Department of the Interior to collaborate with counties,
states, tribes, and various stakeholders to identify the needs
of gateway communities in affordable housing, infrastructure,
maintenance, and visitor accommodations.
The Department could provide technical or financial
assistance, issue leases or rights-of-way, and special use
permits to meet our community needs.
Additionally, the U.S. Department of Agriculture would also
be allowed to provide similar assistance to businesses like
hotels, campgrounds, and restaurants. These new authorities
will create the crucial partnerships that bring visitors back
to Federal lands and sustainability growth in gateway community
economies.
H.R. 3200 would create a digital version of the America the
Beautiful Public Lands Pass so visitors can more easily access
Federal lands of all kinds. This will reduce wait times at
visitor centers and entry gates.
The bill would also establish a pilot program, in
consultation with gateway communities, to provide real-time
visitation data and help to drive people to lesser-known
recreation sites, which will also reduce wait times and
decrease the pressure on the most visited Federal lands.
Thank you for the opportunity to tell Flathead County's
story. Counties urge Congress to adopt H.R. 3200 expeditiously,
and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Brodehl follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Randy Brodehl, County Commissioner,
Flathead County, Montana
on behalf of the National Association of Counties
on H.R. 3200

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse and members of the U.S.
House Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Federal Lands,
thank you for holding this hearing to discuss legislation to support
gateway communities and enhance recreation on public lands.
My name is Randy Brodehl, and I have been a Flathead County,
Montana Commissioner since 2019. I previously served in the Montana
House of Representatives and as Chief of the Kalispell, Montana Fire
Department. I offer my testimony today on behalf of the National
Association of Counties (NACo).
Flathead County is located in northwest Montana on the border with
Canada. We have a population of 120,000 people and serve as a gateway
to three national forests, a national wildlife refuge, the Pacific
Northwest National Scenic Trail, two national wildernesses, and Glacier
National Park. Recreational access to these federal lands is the
primary economic driver in Flathead County.
Impacts of increased visitation to gateway communities

Visitations to federal lands have exploded in recent years. Glacier
National Park alone has seen approximately three million visitors
annually since 2017, apart from 2020, when the Park was temporarily
closed due to the covid pandemic. While this has led to needed, rapid
economic growth in Flathead County, there are significant drawbacks to
our population increasing to several times our number of residents for
a few months out of the year.
Three years ago, Glacier National Park, under direction of the U.S.
Department of the Interior, implemented a reservation permit system for
the Going-to-the-Sun Road, the only road that goes all the way through
the Park. This reduced visitation by half a million people in 2022.
This year the Park chose to further restrict visitation by requiring
permits for vehicles coming into every entrance of the Park. While the
numbers impacted are not yet available, it will be significant and
likely more than last year. The financial impacts are not felt by the
National Park Service but are an incredible loss to our communities
where tourism is king. Park Superintendents do not respond to the needs
of gateway communities, so losses attributed to decisions made by the
National Park Service are ignored.
Like the rest of the counties surrounding national parks, we are a
tourism-based community, so when the federal government pushes down on
our gateway communities, we can suffer millions of dollars in economic
losses. H.R. 3200, the Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement
Act, is in response to this and requires Superintendents of affected
national parks to conduct public meetings, consult local stakeholders,
and allow for public comment.
When visitors are not lucky enough to get one of the coveted park
entry permits, it is typical for them to spend time and tourism dollars
recreating in our gateway communities. Flathead Lake, the largest
freshwater lake west of the Mississippi, is a massive tourism draw. An
unanticipated domino effect to the Park's ticketing system became
exceedingly apparent this year and left our community reeling when the
Bureau of Reclamation (Bureau) changed Flathead Lake water level policy
without consideration of the impacts to the economies of lake
communities. The Bureau chose to not release enough water to keep
Flathead Lake at full capacity, letting it drop 30 inches by mid-
summer, exposing the lake bottom and closing marinas, stranding boats,
and exposing irrigation pump intakes. This is something they have never
done in the 50 years they have been managing the lake level by release
of reservoir waters above the lake. With federal lands and water access
being curtailed, our visitor numbers faded, doing significant harm to
our economy, and discouraging future tourism. All of this was done
without seeking public or local government input. Without the Gateway
Community and Recreation Enhancement Act, we are destined to repeat
this devasting action every year because county and state officials do
not have a seat at the federal decision-making table.
Flathead County's access to U.S. Forest Service lands, wilderness
areas, and National Wildlife Refuge lands has remained virtually the
same for the past 60 years, while tourism due to our local federal
lands' attractions have quadrupled. The Gateway Community and
Recreation Enhancement Act will support expansion of recreational
enhancements in our gateway communities by considering more options and
actions like maintaining water levels, adding campgrounds, opening
roads in our forests, trails in our wilderness areas, greater access to
our wildlife refuge, and educating our visitors about more options in
gateway communities. The Act will give counties a seat at the table and
let us help with best practice decisions.
H.R. 3200, The Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act

Congress should ensure the public has access to their lands and
partner with counties and stakeholders to lessen the burden of
increased visitations on communities. H.R. 3200 would help meet these
goals. Counties appreciate Congressman Ryan Zinke and Senator Steve
Daines for introducing this bipartisan legislation and encourage
Congress to swiftly pass it to provide needed support to federal lands
gateway counties throughout the country, especially in the West.
First, the bill requires the U.S. Department of the Interior to
collaborate with counties, states, Tribes and various stakeholders to
identify the needs of gateway communities in affordable housing,
infrastructure maintenance and visitor accommodations. The Department
would be allowed to provide technical or financial assistance, issue
leases or rights-of-way and special use permits to meet community needs
in these areas. Additionally, the U.S. Department of Agriculture would
be allowed to provide similar assistance to businesses like hotels,
campgrounds and restaurants. These new authorities will create the
crucial partnerships that bring visitors back to federal lands and grow
the economies of gateway communities in a sustainable manner.
H.R. 3200 would create a digital version of the America the
Beautiful public lands pass so visitors can more easily access federal
lands of all kinds. This will help to reduce wait times at visitor
centers and entry gates, including during the summer tourist season.
The bill would also establish a pilot program in consultation with
gateway communities to provide real-time visitation data and help to
drive people to lesser-known recreation sites, which will also reduce
wait times and decrease the pressure on the most visited places in our
public lands system, like Glacier National Park.
Conclusion
Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to tell Flathead County's
story. Counties urge Congress to enact policies to help gateway
communities adjust to the rapid increase in visitations to federal
lands. We urge Congress to adopt H.R. 3200 expeditiously. I look
forward to your questions.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Commissioner Brodehl.
I now recognize Ms. Ambreen Tariq, Senior Program Director
for the Outdoor Recreation Round Table.
Ma'am, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMBREEN TARIQ, SENIOR PROGRAM DIRECTOR, OUTDOOR
RECREATION ROUNDTABLE, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Tariq. Good afternoon, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, and members of the Committee. On behalf of the Outdoor
Recreation Roundtable, thank you for having me here today.
Our industry is in strong support of several important
recreation provisions, including the Improving Outdoor
Recreation Coordination Act and the Gateway Community and
Recreation Enhancement Act.
I would also like to thank the sponsors of these bipartisan
bills: Representatives Zinke, Peltola, Neguse, Lawler, and
Moore, whose leadership will help strengthen coordination and
focus on the recreation economy for Federal agencies and rural
communities.
ORR is the nation's leading coalition of outdoor recreation
associations, representing more than 110,000 businesses in the
industry. According to the Department of Commerce, outdoor
recreation generated $862 billion and 4.5 million American jobs
in 2021. That is 2 percent of our GDP and 3 percent of all U.S.
employees. Our industry's growth rate tripled that of the
national economy from 2020 to 2021, as we saw people flocking
outdoors to benefit for their mental and physical health,
quality of life, and strengthening rural economies.
In my role as Senior Program Director, I work on issues of
workforce, access, and economic development related to outdoor
recreation. I also coordinate Together Outdoors, a coalition
aimed at making the outdoors more welcoming and inclusive for
all through business engagement and partnerships.
My family and I moved to the United States when I was
young, actually to Minnesota, and we somehow stumbled into the
outdoors, where we surprisingly found refuge through stressful
immigrant lives, and that is why I am passionate about
advocating for outdoor recreation so that everybody's American
dream can include access and benefits from the outdoors.
The bills we are discussing today are about Federal
Government working better for businesses, states, and the
American people so we can have a better return on investment
for taxpayer dollars and create the best policies for
industry's biggest opportunities and challenges. Whether it is
a motorcycle dealership in Wisconsin, a ski resort in Colorado,
or a family-owned outfitter by a national park, recreation
businesses need certainty to make investments in their
employees and better serve their customers.
Both bills provide this much-needed certainty through good
government collaboration and helpful tools for main street
businesses and rural communities.
There are many agencies whose work impacts outdoor
recreation. Coordination through the Federal Interagency
Council on Outdoor Recreation can help break down government
silos to resolve multi-jurisdictional challenges and improve
efficiencies. Institutionalizing FICOR will also help agencies
better collaborate around important issues like how to welcome
more people outdoors, including diverse and under-represented
communities. As outdoor recreation continues to grow, this
level of coordination is necessary to ensure agencies are
aligned internally and to streamline engagement externally for
industry stakeholders.
Post-pandemic, more people are choosing to live where
businesses can recruit and retain employees. Much of this
growth is happening in and around rural gateway communities.
Sustainable development of recreation economies near parks,
forests, and BLM lands is critical to supporting their
conservation needs and the needs of small and mid-sized
businesses who form the backbone of these communities.
The Gateway Communities and Recreation Enhancement Act will
help planning in ways that address challenges around housing,
overcrowding, and workforce development. Based on our
industry's growing workforce challenges, investing in
vocational training programs and public-private partnerships
could help increase the capacity and potential of rural
partnerships.
Also, a unified way of collecting and showcasing real-time
visitation data will help disperse visitor use to lesser
trafficked areas. This, in turn, can help alleviate
overcrowding without local communities feeling the economic
harms of reduced tourism.
As you finalize these pieces of legislation, I hope a few
minor changes in my written testimony can be made to the bills
before they move through Committee, especially around including
all agencies that manage Federal lands and waters.
This common-sense package of bills we hope will include the
two we are discussing today, which are wins for Republicans,
Democrats, businesses, and the American people, including
future generations of outdoor lovers who also deserve to
benefit from the outdoors.
We hope a transformative recreation package will pass and
be signed into law this year, and we look forward to working
with you and your Senate counterparts to ensure this. Thank you
again, and I look forward to answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Tariq follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ambreen Tariq, Outdoor Recreation Roundtable
on H.R. 3107 and H.R. 3200

On behalf of the Outdoor Recreation Roundtable, thank you for the
opportunity to submit testimony to this hearing. Our industry is in
strong support of several important recreation provisions, including
the Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act (H.R. 3107) and the
Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act (H.R. 3200). I would
also like to express our appreciation to the sponsors of these
bipartisan pieces of legislation--Representatives Zinke, Peltola,
Neguse, Lawler, and more--whose leadership on these bills will help
strengthen coordination and focus on the recreation economy for both
federal agencies and rural communities.
In my role as the Senior Program Director at ORR I work on issues
of workforce, access, and economic development related to outdoor
recreation. I also coordinate a program called Together Outdoors, a
coalition that aims to increase diversity and nurture an environment
where all people have welcoming outdoor experiences in outdoor
recreation through engagement, partnership, and action. I have over a
decade of experience in labor and environmental and this has given me a
unique perspective into how business bottom line is intrinsically
connected to our natural resources and land and water management
decisions and outcomes.
The Outdoor Recreation Roundtable (ORR) is the nation's leading
coalition of outdoor recreation associations representing the more than
110,000 outdoor businesses in the recreation economy and the full
spectrum of outdoor-related activities. Recently released data from the
U.S. Department of Commerce shows that outdoor recreation generated
$862 billion and 4.5 million American jobs in 2021, comprising 2% of
the nation's economy and 3% of all employees in the country.\1\ The
data also shows that outdoor recreation's growth tripled that of the
national economy from 2020-2021 as we saw more people flocking to the
outdoors and valuing how important time outside is to our mental and
physical health, quality of life, as well as helping strengthen rural
communities and economies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, ``Value added by Industry as
a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product'' (accessed Friday, September
15, 2023)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite the increased numbers our industry is seeing in visitation
and participation, there are growing challenges to consider. How do we
accommodate more visitors while ensuring quality outdoor recreation
experiences and the health of our public lands and waters? How do we
support businesses impacted by canceled trips and travel or closures
from fires and smoke? How do we make sure communities have the
assistance they need to support sustainable recreation while advancing
equitable access to front-country and backcountry outdoor recreation?
These bills, along with several other bipartisan and bicameral
provisions we hope to see come together in a recreation package by the
end of the year, are about the federal government working better for
businesses, states, the communities who rely on recreation assets, and
the American people who enjoy them. Whether it is a manufacturer in
Wisconsin, a ski resort in Colorado, or a family-owned diner outside a
popular national park, businesses in our industry are like others in
that they need certainty to continue to make investments in their
employees and serve their customers. Both bills provide this much-
needed certainty through good government collaboration at the highest
levels and on-the-ground tools for main street businesses and rural
communities.
Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR)

While several land and water management agencies have traditionally
been the main entities prioritizing outdoor recreation policies,
virtually the entire federal government is engaged with aspects of
today's thriving outdoor recreation economy. Coordination among these
agencies helps to build a collaborative culture by which they can share
innovative ideas, approach challenges that cut across various
jurisdictions, and work together to make long term and beneficial
impacts. This is much like what ORR does for our members every day--
bringing together industry leaders to work on issues that improve and
grow the entire recreation community, whether you are a hunter,
climber, RVer, hiker, boater, or biker.
As outdoor recreation continues to grow in importance for policy
priorities--from rural economic development and transportation to
health and equity--this level of coordination is critical because it
ensures that agencies are aligned internally and provides a single
point of contact externally for outdoor recreation stakeholders--
including our members and the industry.
The Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation could help
important efforts, like Together Outdoors, by bringing together
agencies around important issues of welcoming new users outdoors and
telling the stories of those communities who have diverse and historic
relationships to our public lands and waters.
At its core, the Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act is
about breaking down government silos so we can see a better return on
investment for taxpayer dollars and come up with the best policies for
our industries' biggest opportunities and challenges. This legislation
will result in better management of our federal lands and waters, more
coordinated policies across federal agencies, and valuable interactions
with non-federal partners.

As you finalize this legislation, I would like to suggest a few
small changes to the bill before it moves through committee.

1.  Many agencies are doing important work for our sector that are
not currently members of FICOR and we hope many others will
also engage in this policy space. As such, it is important
to ensure that FICOR has the ability to add new members, as
necessary.

2.  It would be more appropriate for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) as a whole to be included
in this group rather than NOAA Fisheries, because NOAA is
larger in scope and includes other recreation activities
like scuba diving and boating.

3.  FICOR should be supported equally across all necessary
Departments, rather than just by one agency, to ensure
commitment of support from the various land and water
management agencies. And, since FICOR is already up and
running with a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), this
legislation should be flexible enough in design to allow
continued coordination practices by the principals of the
agencies.

4.  We greatly appreciate that the legislation invites state
representatives to FICOR meetings, and we recommend this
invitation be extended to include Tribal participation as
well.

5.  The Outdoor Recreation Roundtable and several of our members have
been extremely active in working with states to create
state Offices of Outdoor Recreation. To date, 20 such
offices have been created. These offices are tasked with
state coordination around outdoor recreation and have had a
great impact on state policies as well as coordination
among red, blue, and purple states to leverage best
practices from across the country that drive business and
build thriving communities. FICOR should coordinate with
these states and any others who create state Offices of
Outdoor Recreation, as well as with state leaders and
interests.

Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act

Post-pandemic, more people are choosing to live where businesses
know they can recruit and retain employees. Much of this growth is
happening in and around rural gateway communities. Attention to the
authentic and sustainable development of recreation economies in places
near parks, forests, and Bureau of Land Management lands is critical to
supporting not only conservation of those natural resources that are
often the driving forces behind this growth, but also the small to mid-
sized businesses who are the backbone of these communities.

The Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act will help
communities plan for recreation in ways that support key areas like
housing, over-crowding, and workforce development.

1.  As we are seeing one of our biggest issues in workforce, the
opportunity to capitalize on vocational training programs
and public-private partnerships could help increase the
capacity and business potential of rural entrepreneurship.

2.  A unified way of collecting and showcasing real-time visitation
data will also help disperse visitor use to lesser-
trafficked areas. This will help alleviate the overcrowding
we are seeing in some of our iconic places, but without
local communities feeling the economic harms of reduced
tourism. Having a single model that can compare and
contrast location-based activities with accurate, real-time
data on visitor movements and recreational activities will
allow land managers, lawmakers, and businesses to make more
informed decisions around resource allocation and
management. This will also help visitors who plan and save
for months for such a trip to make better choices around
how, when, and where they take these trips.

3.  Similar to the FICOR legislation, we suggest that this bill
expand to other agencies like NOAA, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. A better
definition than using the Federal Lands Recreation
Enhancement Act-related agencies might be found in the
Every Kid in a Park Act, which encompasses a broader range
of agencies that provide recreation-related services on
public lands and waters.

First-ever Recreation Package

I would also like to thank this Committee for your continued work
on bringing together bipartisan and bicameral bills in a first-ever
recreation package. Similar legislation, the America's Outdoor
Recreation Act, has passed the Senate Energy and Natural Resources
committee unanimously twice. This common-sense package of bills, which
I hope will include the two we are discussing today, is a collection of
important outdoor recreation policies--some of which have been worked
on for decades. Many of them fix deeply urgent needs for climbers,
anglers, hunters, RVers, and all the businesses who provide world-class
outdoor experiences. There is no bigger legislative priority for the
entire outdoor recreation industry than AORA. We hope this
transformative bill will pass and be signed into law this year and we
look forward to working with you and your Senate counterparts to ensure
that happens.
Thank you for your continued commitment to the outdoors and for
advancing these important bills. Both recreation bills discussed today
are wins for Republicans and Democrats, American businesses, and the
American people--not just today's recreationists but also future
generations of outdoor lovers who we hope will gain the same benefits
we do from time spent in nature. Thank you again.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ms. Tariq.
I will now recognize Mr. Delano Hunter, the Acting Director
for the D.C. Department of General Services, to testify for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hunter.

STATEMENT OF DELANO HUNTER, ACTING DIRECTOR, D.C. DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL SERVICES, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Hunter. Good afternoon, Chairman Tiffany and members of
the Subcommittee on Federal Lands. My name is Delano Hunter,
and I am the Acting Director of the Department of General
Services for the District of Columbia under the leadership of
Mayor Muriel Bowser. And prior to 6 months ago, I served 4
years as the District's Director of the Department of Parks and
Recreation, where I developed a keen understanding of the
importance of recreation in our city. Now, as the Director of
DGS, I am responsible for the construction and maintenance of
facilities, including DC's parks.
What I know from both roles is that recreation and the
facilities where recreation happens contribute greatly to the
overall wellness of our community. With this understanding and
on behalf of Mayor Bowser and the 700,000 residents who call
Washington, DC home, I am pleased to testify in support of H.R.
4984, the D.C. Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus
Revitalization Act.
This bill was introduced by Chairman James Comer of the
House Oversight and Accountability Committee and our
Congresswoman, Eleanor Holmes Norton. For more than 30 years,
Congresswoman Norton has worked with Congress on legislation to
make the nation's capital a more dynamic place to live, work,
and visit. This monumental legislation has the potential to
transform and expand recreation in our city for generations to
come.
Washington, DC has a rich tradition of recreation and
sport. We are proud that for 3 consecutive years, DC has been
ranked the No. 1 big-city park system in the nation by the
Trust for Public Land, which ranks the 100 most populous cities
and is considered the gold standard for park evaluation. This
distinction recognizes that we have Federal parks and local
recreation amenities that complement one another, a system that
is the result of a strong, trusting, and long-standing
partnership between the District and National Park Service.
Look no further than the revitalization of Franklin Park in
downtown. This once under-utilized green space that over the
years has fallen into disrepair has now become a hub of
activity for residents, downtown office workers, and tourists
alike. In addition to having a beautiful space and a playground
for children, the park frequently hosts movie nights,
festivals, and concerts. This transformation of Franklin Park
was only made possible through a cooperative management
agreement between the District and the National Park Service.
This partnership is nothing new. The D.C. Stadium Act of
1957 is a foundational example of the early trust NPS placed in
the District. Of course, to many, the RFK site is synonymous
with the glory years of the Washington football franchise now
known as the Commanders. It was also home of the Washington
Senators, and enabled the return of major league baseball to
the District with the Washington Nationals. D.C. United also
called this site home during their early years, and it was
there that they won multiple major league soccer titles.
Beyond professional sports, RFK hosted countless high
school and college athletic competitions. And as a native
Washingtonian and former athlete at the Spingarn High School
across the street from RFK, I participated in the winning
spirit at RFK.
Today, however, the winning spirit along the Anacostia
River banks can only be found in a handful of youth soccer
fields surrounded by eroding parking lots, and lacking any
significant investments. Despite the District's investments in
fields and nearby trails, most of the 190-acre campus sits
empty day in and day out. Instead of connecting our community
or serving as a grand entryway to the east side of our
monumental core, it is mostly a desolate sea of asphalt.
We can do better. Under the District's stewardship, we can
transform and activate the RFK campus so that it becomes a
world-class destination for families, residents, and visitors,
while also better connecting our beautiful waterfront to the
neighborhoods along its banks. This revitalization will
complement investments already underway, including the 20-mile
Anacostia Riverwalk Trail; the investments in the fields at
RFK, which are a collection of soccer fields; and also
investments in environmental programing in Kingman and Heritage
Island.
We envision increased access to organized leisure and
recreation opportunities. We also see the potential for
economic development, which could include housing and
professional sports.
From the perspective of youth sports, we envision the
campus becoming a premier destination for athletic competition.
DC is no stranger to world-class athletes. Unfortunately, they
travel far and wide to participate in the highest level of
competition. Amenities at this type of sports complex, which
would be under the leadership of our Department of Parks and
Recreation, would include an Olympic swimming pool, a
gymnastics training facility, an indoor track and multi-purpose
field, a boxing training facility, a health and fitness club,
and so much more.
The expansive potential for the RFK campus is why Mayor
Bowser included seed funding, and she unequivocally supports
this legislation. However, to become a reality, the work of
this Committee and, indeed, this Congress is essential.
Today, the RFK site is at a legal stalemate, bound by a
nearly 70-year-old lease that expires in 15 years. This
stalemate prevents the comprehensive redevelopment necessary to
revitalize this site. The District has a proven history of
activating NPS lands to premier conditions that are consistent
with a world-class capital city. We did it at Franklin Park. We
have transformed Federal spaces across DC, including at the
wharf and Saint Elizabeth east campus and Walter Reed. And
given the opportunity, we will do it again at RFK.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to answering
your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Hunter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Delano Hunter, Director of the Department of
General Services for Washington, DC
on H.R. 4984

Good afternoon, Chairman Tiffany and members of the Subcommittee on
Federal Lands. My name is Delano Hunter, and I am the Acting Director
of the Department of General Services for the Government of the
District of Columbia under the leadership of Mayor Muriel Bowser. Prior
to six months ago, I served four years as the Director of the
Department of Parks and Recreation for the District of Columbia where I
developed a keen understanding of the importance of recreation in our
city. Now, as the Director of DGS, I am responsible for the
construction and leasing of facilities, including DC's parks.
What I know from both of these roles is that recreation, and the
facilities where recreation happens, contribute greatly to the overall
wellness of our community.
With this understanding, and on behalf of Mayor Bowser and the
700,000 residents who call Washington, DC home, I am pleased to testify
in support of H.R. 4984, the D.C. Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium
Campus Revitalization Act. This bill was introduced by Chairman James
Comer of the House Oversight and Accountability Committee and our
Congresswoman, Eleanor Holmes Norton. For more than 30 years,
Congresswoman Norton has worked with Congress on legislation to make
the nation's capital a more dynamic place to live, work, and visit.
This monumental legislation has the potential to transform and expand
recreational opportunity in the District of Columbia for our residents,
our region, and the more than 20 million visitors who come to our city
each year.
Washington, DC has a rich tradition of recreation and sport. We are
proud that for three consecutive years Washington, DC has been ranked
the number one big city park system in the nation by the Trust for
Public Land through its annual ParkScore Index, which ranks the 100
most populous U.S. cities and is considered the gold standard for park
evaluation.
This very honorable distinction recognizes that we have federal
parks and local recreation amenities that complement one another--a
system that is the result of a strong, trusting, and long-standing
partnership between the District and the National Park Service. Look no
further than the revitalization of Franklin Park in downtown. This
once-underutilized greenspace that, over the years, had fallen into
disrepair has now become a hub of activity for residents, downtown
office workers, and tourists alike. In addition to having beautiful
spaces and a playground for children, the park frequently hosts movie
nights, festivals, concerts, and more; including, just recently, a
celebration of the new football season. The transformation of Franklin
Park was only made possible through a Cooperative Management Agreement
executed between the District and NPS.
This partnership is not new. The DC Stadium Act of 1957 is a
foundational example of the early trust NPS placed in the District. Of
course, to many DC residents, the RFK site is synonymous with the glory
years of the Washington football franchise now known as the Commanders.
It was also the home of the Washington Senators and enabled the return
of Major League Baseball to the District with the Washington Nationals.
DC United also called the site home during their early years and it was
there that the team won multiple Major League Soccer titles. Beyond
professional sports, RFK hosted countless high-school and college
athletic competitions. As a native Washingtonian and former athlete of
the Spingarn Senior High School across the street from RFK, I
personally participated and enjoyed the winning spirit at RFK.
Today, however, the winning spirit along the Anacostia River banks
can only be found on a handful of youth soccer fields, surrounded by
eroding parking lots and lacking any significant investments. Despite
investments in these fields and nearby trails, most of the 190-acre
campus sits empty day in and day out. Instead of connecting our
community or serving as a grand entryway on the east side of our
monumental core, it is a mostly desolate sea of asphalt.
We can do better! Under the District's stewardship, we can
transform and activate the RFK campus so that it becomes a world-class
destination for families, residents, visitors, and athletes, while also
better connecting our beautiful waterfront and the neighborhoods along
its banks. This revitalization will complement investments already
underway, including investments in the 20-mile Anacostia Riverwalk
Trail, led by the District's Department of Transportation; investments
in The Fields at RFK, managed by Events DC; and investments in and
environmental programming on Kingman and Heritage Islands, under the
stewardship of the DC Department of Energy and Environment. We envision
increased access to organized recreation and leisure activities such as
cycling and kayaking, and more outdoor space for cultural activations.
We also see the potential for economic development, which could include
housing and professional sports.
From the perspective of youth sports, however, we envision the RFK
campus becoming a premier destination for youth athletic competition.
From basketball to cheerleading to boxing to ice skating and track and
field, the District is home to many young athletes at the top of their
sport. Unfortunately, without a centralized home or training facility,
our athletes routinely travel outside of DC to compete in the highest-
level tournaments and events. Mayor Bowser's vision is for Washington,
DC to host those events. That way we cannot only showcase our local
talent, but more families, coaches, and organizations will see DC as a
launching pad for America's athletes.

The amenities at this type of sports complex could include:

Olympic swimming pool

Gymnastics training facility

Indoor track and multipurpose field

Boxing training facility

Climbing center and obstacle course

Health and Fitness Club

Indoor bowling alley

Indoor skating rink

Learning & creativity center for children

Amphitheatre

Indoor/outdoor cafe

Outdoor and Indoor basketball and tennis courts

The expansive potential for uses at the RFK campus is why Mayor
Bowser included seed funding in her budget to build a DC DPR Sports
Complex.
Mayor Bowser also unequivocally supports this legislation. However,
to become a reality, the work of this Committee and, indeed, this
Congress is essential.
Today, the RFK site is at a legal stalemate bound by a nearly 70-
year-old lease that expires in 15 years. This stalemate prevents the
comprehensive development necessary to revitalize the site. The
District has a proven history of activating NPS land to premier
conditions that are consistent with a world-class capital city. We did
it at Franklin Park, we've transformed federal spaces across DC,
including at the Wharf, the St. Elizabeths East campus, at Walter Reed,
and, given the opportunity, we will do it at RFK.
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you
may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Director Hunter.
At this time, the Committee will stand in recess, subject
to the call of the Chair. I will be back here immediately after
votes, and we will resume Committee activities with questions
from Members as soon as we return.
Thank you very much for your testimony. We are in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Tiffany. The Committee will come to order.
And I would like to recognize Representative Stauber for 5
minutes on H.R. 1657.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair and Ranking
Member Neguse. I want to thank you for convening this important
hearing today and allowing me to present today H.R. 1657, the
Lake Winnibigoshish Land Exchange Act of 2023.
I, first of all, want to thank my constituent, Itasca
County Commissioner Cory Smith, for his willingness to testify
on the legislation.
I would also like to thank Ranking Member Neguse and
Representative Huffman for their co-sponsorship of this bill,
along with my Minnesota delegation colleagues, Representative
Fischbach and Representative Finstad, for their support.
This land exchange bill is a simple land exchange that will
help ensure management of our public lands is fit for purpose
and help accomplish the focus of this hearing: expanding access
to outdoor recreation on our public lands.
Lake Winnibigoshish, located in the Chippewa National
Forest, is home to Bowen Lodge, a premier, family-owned fishing
lodge right in the district that I have the privilege of
representing. And it has been in operation and welcoming
Minnesotans since 1925. For the past four decades, Bill and
Gail Heig have operated Bowen Lodge, serving as incredible
stewards of Lake Winnibigoshish and providing incredible
fishing and recreation for a countless number of my
constituents over the years.
Currently, Bowen Lodge has a 20-year lease with the U.S.
Forest Service to lease approximately 13.8 acres of shoreline
along the lake, where they operate their marina. Under the
Heig's stewardship, Lake Winnibigoshish has remained accessible
to the citizens of Itasca County. It is important that the
shores of Lake Winnie be open for all of those who want to
recreate and enjoy what it has to offer.
This land exchange bill would facilitate a land exchange
between Bowen Lodge and the Forest Service, providing permanent
access to the lakeshore and marina, along with certainty for
the greater Itasca community. In exchange for this land, the
resort would convey approximately 38 acres of nearby land to
the Forest Service, which then would be added to the Chippewa
National Forest.
Notably, the Heigs purchased the 38 acres of nearby land in
2021, after a California-based mega-resort developer sought to
purchase this parcel of land in order to build a massive luxury
resort which would have changed the face of Lake Winnie.
Instead, the Heigs purchased this land to preserve recreational
access for the local community and preserve the biodiversity of
the area. Now the Heigs are seeking to convey this land to the
Chippewa National Forest, since it is in the best interest of
the public for the Forest Service to take stewardship of this
land and preserve public access, rather than out-of-state
developers being able to change the community forever.
This exchange would better align proper boundaries, put the
right acreage under the right management, and ensure my
constituents have the ability to boat, fish, and enjoy
beautiful Lake Winnie. This exchange is supported by the local
community in Itasca County, including the local County Board of
Supervisors and environmental organizations. It is also
supported by the U.S. Forest Service and leadership of the
Chippewa National Forest, which we will hear about this
afternoon.
I appreciate the opportunity to present my bill before the
Committee today, and I look forward to our discussion.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Stauber.
Now, I would like to recognize the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, Representative Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. We are in the
question part of the panel, or not yet?
Mr. Tiffany. If you have a statement.
Mr. Grijalva. Oh, yes, I appreciate that. Thank you for
indulging.
Mr. Tiffany. And then we will go to questions after.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Let me first thank you for holding this
hearing and these four bills related to outdoor recreation.
I would like to address my remarks to H.R. 4984, D.C.
Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus Revitalization Act,
introduced by House Oversight Committee Chair, along with
Representative Holmes Norton, who fiercely represents the
District of Columbia.
The RFK Stadium has had a long and storied history. It was,
of course, home to the Washington football team during their
three championship runs. And in the 60-plus years since its
construction, it has hosted men and women's World Cup matches,
car races, bike rides, Grateful Dead shows, and much, much
more. It has had a good run, but the stadium is now past its
prime and slated to be torn down.
Of course, there is a lot of interest in the future
development plans for the site, and the stadium is located in a
prime location in the heart of Washington, DC. The land could
help address many of the city's needs, including increasing the
stock of available, affordable housing and securing access to
open space. I believe achieving the right balance here is key.
The land is currently administered by the National Park
Service as part of the Anacostia Park and, as highlighted in
the Interior Department's testimony, part of a long-standing
plan for public gardens and open space. As drafted, H.R. 4984
includes language that guarantees that 30 percent of the
property is issued for open space and park land. However, DOI
has requested to work on further amendments to ensure the
viability of these guarantees.
This is, Mr. Chairman, the critical part of this
legislation and any further plans for the site. So, I would
encourage the Committee to continue working with the Department
as this bill moves forward in the legislative process.
I also want to note that for over 50 years, the stadium
site has been an enduring tribute to the life and legacy of
Robert Francis Kennedy. One way or another, whether through
legislation or some other guarantee, this should remain a
lasting feature of the site.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge that while there
appears to be broad support in DC government for this bill,
there is not a unified position on what should be developed on
this site or whether or not, for example, there should be a new
stadium. And if so, if tax dollars should pay for it.
In addition, there is a strong desire to ensure affordable
housing is a part of the equation. I hope, Mr. Chairman, as we
move forward, that these issues remain part of the equation,
and there are not any attempts to hamstring the District's
decision-making ability on these issues, and that they work in
concurrence with the Department and with the sponsors of the
legislation to deal with those three points that I brought up.
With that, I yield back, sir, and thank you for the
indulgence.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Grijalva. Now we
will go on to questions at this time, and I am going to start
out with 5 minutes worth of questioning.
First, Ms. Emanuel, in regards to closures on Forest
Service land, I have experienced multiple closures on National
Forest Land System land and amenities throughout my district in
northern Wisconsin. I hear about it from frustrated
constituents. In fact, we are going to have a hearing in
regards to this coming early October. It is from people who
want to recreate, hunt, fish, camp, and enjoy our Federal
lands.
Does the Forest Service coordinate with local stakeholders
before reducing access?
Ms. Emanuel. So, the question is whether we coordinate with
the state entity on a closure?
Mr. Tiffany. State and local.
Ms. Emanuel. State and local. When we must close an area,
the closure is usually related to public health and safety, and
we have a process for noticing that, and we generally
coordinate with all affected parties any time we have to close
an area.
Mr. Tiffany. So, it is your understanding that you always
contact those local and state governments that are being
affected by this?
Ms. Emanuel. I would say that that is the plan. I mean, the
ideal situation would be to coordinate any closure with an
affected stakeholder. I don't know that that can always happen,
depending on what the situation is.
Mr. Tiffany. The requirement to coordinate, isn't that a
requirement?
Ms. Emanuel. To coordinate closures? If it is our land, and
it depends on the reason for closure, but I would think that we
would generally reach out and connect with all affected
parties, especially if it is a longer-term closure.
Mr. Tiffany. How does the Forest Service define
coordination?
Ms. Emanuel. Working with others, communicating.
Mr. Tiffany. If you go back to, like, FLPMA and some of the
other overriding statutes that were put in place over 50 years
ago, they specifically required coordination.
And I don't know, Mr. Reynolds, if you want to jump in also
in regards to this, you are certainly welcome to, either one of
you, if you want to answer that question.
How is coordination actually practiced with local
communities?
Mr. Reynolds. I will chime in and just say we, much like
our Forest Service colleagues, have it in policy. For example,
there are civic engagement policies under our director's
orders. There is the definition of communication and
coordination in our policy manuals for the field
superintendents. So, much like the Forest Service, we do
require that standard of our field employees, and we are happy
to talk about it if it is not happening.
Mr. Tiffany. Representative Zinke's bill would require the
National Park Service to coordinate with local stakeholders,
hold public meetings, and open at least a 60-day comment period
before any action is taken to reduce access. Would the Forest
Service support including similar requirements before reducing
access on the National Forest System? Either of you.
Ms. Emanuel. I am sorry, sir. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Tiffany. The National Park Service, under this proposal
before us, would require at least a 60-day comment period
before any action could be taken to reduce access. So, that is
really the heart of the proposal. Would you support something
similar to that for the National Forest System, in addition to
the National Park Service?
Ms. Emanuel. I think we would have to look and see what
policy is in place, and whether or not it is working. But we
certainly support whatever outcome you are trying to get after
here. If we can improve on the kind of coordination that is
needed to give people the kind of experience we want, we want
to do that.
Mr. Tiffany. Earlier this year, during another hearing
focused on recreation, I asked the Forest Service about
closures of boat ramps and other Forest Service facilities in
my district. The Forest Service followed up and assured me
there are plans and funding available to rehabilitate boat
launches at Beaver Lake, Cisco Lake, Stock Farm, Twin Lake, and
Mondeaux. Do you have an update on the status of those boat
launches?
Ms. Emanuel. I can certainly get you a status on those, but
I do understand that we are investing in those boat ramps.
Mr. Tiffany. So, I would just highlight for you that we are
having a hearing in regards to access that is coming up here
real soon in a couple of weeks. And it is a big concern by a
number of my constituents that access is being denied to the
National Forest System.
With that, I will yield and I would like to recognize
Representative Leger Fernandez for 5 minutes for questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, witnesses, for your testimony. As we were
moving back and forth between the votes, I was listening to it
in my office and over the microphones. And I was really
appreciative of the incredible work that each of you are doing
with respect for the importance that having coordination and
access to our public lands for all Americans is really key.
New Mexico is home to nearly 25 million acres of Federal
land, and we understand deeply the importance of creating ways
for our people, wherever you live and whatever your
socioeconomic circumstances are, to be able to enjoy those
lands, especially the beautiful outdoor areas. We have heard
over and over again the benefits that these have for your
health, the benefits that they have for how you feel, part of a
community.
I like to think that, as New Mexicans, we are a people of
the land, Native Americans, Latinos, ranchers, we are people
who really value our land and landscape.
Mr. Reynolds, thank you for your testimony. I noticed that
there is a 10-year survey that was released in 2020 from the
Park Service that showed that 77 percent of park visitors were
White. But we are a pluralistic society, a pluralistic country,
the beautiful mosaic of Black Americans, Native Americans,
Pacific Islanders, AAPI, the beautiful sort of diversity of our
country and of our states. And what is sad is sometimes you
read about people who live right next to a public land, but
somehow don't make it there.
Can you give us an example of how the Improving Outdoor
Recreation Coordination Act would help the Park Service
implement policies to improve that kind of access for everyone?
You can use New Mexico or other places, if you like. Of
course, I am from New Mexico, so if you tell me some New
Mexican things, I am going to like it a lot.
Mr. Reynolds. Yes. So, FICOR, which we have been under a
Memorandum of Understanding right now, is working really well
to talk about, particularly, I think, what you just eloquently
spoke of, of serving underserved populations and trying to
figure out how best to connect with them.
It is going to leverage, if we could get this to stick
around this Committee, the ability to communicate with these
communities, the ability for the communities themselves to
interact with the agencies. I will use a colloquialism of one-
stop-shopping, right? You can get all the land and water
management agencies at one time.
So, I think that the consistency in coordination and
communication would be a long ways, especially when we are
trying to reach larger populations that may not be using, to
your point, the public lands. So, that is why we are very in
favor of it from that side.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. And when we say this land is
public land, is your land, people need to really feel that, and
they are a part of it. And indeed, I think our public lands
helps us create unity in this country.
I think the people I serve with on this Committee really
love the countries and the states that they live in, and the
public lands that are there. They want to make sure everybody
has access to them. And I do appreciate that sentiment that we
have on this Committee.
Ms. Emanuel, thank you for your testimony. I also
understand that, while we want to increase access to our public
lands, we must do so in a way that minimizes the negative
impacts that visitors might have, and being respectful of the
community's surroundings. Can you discuss how the Gateway
Community and Recreation Enhancement Act would affect Forest
Service coordination with gateway communities on tribal lands?
Ms. Emanuel. Thank you for that. Yes, I think it can really
help us expand and enhance existing partnerships that balance
the needs, as you said, of holistic land management and travel
and tourism opportunities and support just a little bit better
understanding and coordination of how that balancing act can be
in service to both heritage and cultural resource tourism, as
well as protection of those resources.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much.
I have come so close to my time that I will submit any
additional questions for the record.
And I do want to appreciate, Mr. Chairman, the hearing you
are having today. I really appreciate the bills that you have
brought together as a group for us to listen to the testimony
and consider today. So, thank you very much.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlewoman yields. I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Stauber, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. Chair. The pieces of
legislation before us today are so important in expanding
access to outdoor recreation and ensuring our constituents have
access to our public lands.
I would first like to turn to Commissioner Smith.
Commissioner Smith, can you expand upon the importance of
the recreation economy to Itasca County?
And how does the Chippewa National Forest contribute to
your economy?
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Recreation is pretty much our sole
investment, especially in my district. It is about 80 percent.
Our population jumps up by about 80 percent in the county come
every opening of fishing.
Mr. Stauber. I have been part of that 80 percent, by the
way.
Mr. Smith. Yes. And if you haven't been there, I would tell
you to get there. That is the reason why our county jumps up in
population is because of the outdoors and the recreation that
we have, and that we have had for many a year.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you. In my opening remarks, I mentioned
how the Heig family was able to secure a 20-year permit from
the Forest Service to operate a marina at Bowen Lodge along
Lake Winnie, as well as secure the nearby private lands. If the
Heigs were not able to do so, and a large, out-of-state
developer was able to secure the land, what kind of effect
would that have on the community?
Mr. Smith. I am afraid it would have been a negative
effect.
We love visitors. We thrive on visitors. And that lake
association group has created a culture there that is why the
lake is pristine and beautiful the way it is.
And let's not forget the Heigs did step up to the plate for
our community and for our county when that group was going to
come in and maybe weren't in the financial position, but did
buy that property.
Mr. Stauber. Yes.
Deputy Chief Emanuel, in your written testimony you note
that the Forest Service has to spend resources to support a
special use permit for the acreage under discussion today. Can
you share how those resources can be better directed to other
parts of the Chippewa National Forest to better serve the local
community and its visitors?
Ms. Emanuel. Any time we free up resources, we are going to
be able to direct them into other local sites there on the
Chippewa. And I am sure that there is a list of recreation
infrastructure projects that could all benefit from additional
resources, and I am sure there is no short list for that forest
to make those decisions.
Mr. Stauber. I agree with you, thank you.
Along this area, there is currently a checkerboard pattern
of landownership between public and private lands which this
legislation would address. Can you expand upon the benefits of
consolidating this land?
Ms. Emanuel. Yes, absolutely. Thanks for that.
We see this a lot in the West, obviously, and it really
presents challenges for both private landowners and the Federal
land management agencies trying to manage for multiple purposes
and reasons. So, to the extent we can strategically connect
those places that make sense, it is going to be a better
experience for everybody involved.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I would like to take the last few minutes here
to talk about H.R. 3200, the Gateway Community Recreation
Enhancement Act. As I have discussed in this Committee
countless times, the district I represent is incredible with
public lands that Americans from across the country come to
enjoy.
In addition to the Chippewa National Forest, my home
county, St. Louis County, is home to the Superior National
Forest and the Boundary Waters Canoe Area. Individuals from
across the state and entire country travel there each year.
Unfortunately, however, some of those individuals get lost or
need medical attention. Rather than the Forest Service
responding to those calls, it is local emergency responders in
places like St. Louis County that respond to those calls and
lead search and rescue efforts. And it is these local emergency
responders that have to foot the bill.
It is important that we address these cost burdens that
fall on local and county governments in gateway communities in
and around our Federal lands. We can't leave our local and
county governments hanging. I believe H.R. 3200 can play an
important role in building upon collaboration in gateway
communities, and find solutions to the funding issue
jurisdictions like St. Louis County are facing. When somebody
gets lost or injured in the Boundary Waters, it is not
necessarily the Forest Service. It is the St. Louis County
Rescue Squad, it is the Ely Ambulance, it is the Cook
Ambulance, these volunteer rescue squads. And they expel
resources and they don't get paid for that cost, and it is
using their equipment, and that is a burden on the local
taxpayers.
So, one of the things that I think we ought to do, Mr.
Chair, is in that piece of legislation really look at how we
can reimburse those local communities that respond to our
Federal emergencies on our Federal lands.
And I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize Representative Grijalva, the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Reynolds, when Congress initially authorized the
District of Columbia to build a stadium, the terms of the lease
were very strict. It only allowed development for stadium
purposes. H.R. 4984 loosens those terms to include other
recreational and commercial development.
Can you discuss how a lease with these expanded areas can
remain consistent with what the National Park Service's long-
term plan for Anacostia Park is, i.e. the 30 percent public
access, open space, public recreation areas?
And in that process, how would issues such as the 30
percent the District of Columbia already has in terms of
affordable housing for new development, how would that be
mandated since it is a lease and not a law from the District?
And how would the appropriate legacy memorial for Robert F.
Kennedy be dealt with? Can they be dealt with in this lease
process, or is that a separate issue that Congress must
undertake?
Mr. Reynolds. Thank you, Congressman. Those are really
detailed questions, some of which we would be able to work out
if we could get our technical folks to sit down and work out
each of those.
But I will give you a top-level bottom line is the Park
Service is just very interested in working with GSA, working
with Washington, DC. And I defer to them about what they really
want with the property to make sure this piece of land is put
into a vibrant part of the city, while at the same time our
main concern is just making sure, as you mentioned, sir, the 30
percent areas, and particularly access to the Anacostia
Waterfront, Anacostia Trail are maintained and/or enhanced as a
part of the lease.
So, the leases can be flexible to address the needs, as all
the parties see fit, if the legislation doesn't prevent
something. So, we would be able to work with all of those
things you mentioned as long as we preserve some of the
recreation and access concerns.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you.
Let me follow that, Mr. Hunter, thank you for being here.
H.R. 4984, in addition to the bold outline in your testimony,
vision for the future of RFK Stadium, including recreational
and athletic outdoor recreation amenities. These would all be
possible under the expanded authorization of H.R. 4984.
In addition to a swimming pool, basketball courts, and
other training facilities, this bill is pretty open-ended on
the types of development that can be allowed. Can you explain
how the District will make decisions about future projects and
development on that land?
And if residential development is a component of future
plans, how will the District guarantee the construction of
affordable housing as part of the mix?
Mr. Hunter. Sure, thank you for the question,
Representative.
First, I would say that the reason we are really excited
about this bill is what it can do for recreation. And to your
point, it provides an opportunity to really transform how we do
recreation here in the city. We have always been proud of our
park systems that are comprised of both local and Federal
assets. In fact, we have been ranked as having the best big-
city park system in the nation for 3 consecutive years.
But there are some gaps there. We have longed for a
destination athletic complex where we can further the athletic
pursuits of our top athletes, also where we can host
tournaments, and also things that we just can't do in some of
our neighborhoods where we just don't have the space. So, I
think that this bill contemplates robust recreation
opportunities.
As it relates to some of the other components, the Mayor is
studying, though she is on the record in support of returning
RFK Stadium, but if you look at some of the adjacent
developments like in Hill East, it has a very substantial
affordable housing component. If you look at some of the other
developments along the Anacostia River, we have shown that we
can do both recreation, some retail, economic development, and
housing, how they can co-exist in the space.
Mr. Grijalva. Any reaction to that being part of a lease
agreement, this is also, as I see it, and as it was explained
earlier on in another form of this legislation, was part of a
redevelopment and revitalization initiative, as well, in terms
of the area and the region. Is it appropriate to list those as
part of a lease process that would kind of bind all the
parties, including the Federal Government and Congress, to that
commitment?
Mr. Hunter. That is correct. To Mr. Reynolds' point,
typically, when we get to the process of developing a lease, or
in some instances a cooperative management agreement, it would
spell out the specific uses for that property.
Mr. Grijalva. I yield back, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields, and now I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, Mr. Neguse,
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE NEGUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Neguse. I thank the Chairman, and good afternoon to all
of our witnesses. It is good to be back in the Committee room,
and want to start by saying that I appreciate the focus of
today's hearing on the four bills that all have some connection
to outdoor recreation, a topic that is incredibly important to
my constituents back home in Colorado.
With visitation numbers continuing to climb year after
year, the wide variety of outdoor recreation activities that
occur on and adjacent to Federal land really have become an
economic pillar for countless communities throughout the
country, including in my state in Colorado.
As I am sure you all know, the Bureau of Economic Analysis,
according to them, outdoor recreation contributed $454 billion
to the national economy in 2021. And my district happens to be
home to the most visited national forest in the country, the
White River National Forest, and some of the most beautiful
outdoor recreation opportunities in the nation. So, I am
grateful to have this opportunity to consider some bills that I
think are integral to that mission of supporting outdoor
recreation that I know is a bipartisan one, and one I think
that is shared across party lines.
I would be remiss if I didn't take a moment to talk about
my bipartisan bill, H.R. 3107, the Improving Outdoor Recreation
Coordination Act, which would, in effect, codify FICOR, an
entity with a proven track record of elevating recreation in a
way that makes it more accessible and visible for all
Americans. It has been responsible for critical improvements to
Recreation.gov and the incredibly popular Every Kid Outdoors
program, among a variety of other initiatives, and I am very
excited to help get that bill across the finish line.
I understand that the Department certainly has some
suggestions on potential improvements to the bill, and we are
very amenable to working, of course, with the Department, with
the National Park Service to ensure that the bill is ready to
be considered by the Full Committee, and ultimately by the
House.
With that, I don't have any particular questions. I
appreciate, as I said, the witnesses taking the time to testify
today and, of course, the written testimony you have submitted.
And I look forward to engaging on these four bills, in
particular, in the months ahead.
And with that, I yield back to the Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Mr. Neguse. And I just
want to follow up with just a couple of final questions here.
In regards to the Improving Outdoor Recreation Act, Ms.
Tariq, what does the membership that you represent, what do
they see as important in that bill?
What is the focus that you think is most important?
Ms. Tariq. Thank you for that question.
One of the most important things for the outdoor recreation
industry, in terms of businesses, is the need for certainty to
be able to plan and make investments, whether it is in your
workforce or your business in itself. So, in improving
coordination and improving efficiencies, the ability to be able
to plan toward that is extremely important.
Also, the cost effectiveness of not having to start and
shut down and start and shut down, and being able to depend on
points of contact and actual planning forward. So, in terms of
that, that is extremely important for the industry.
Also, the ability to plan forward in terms of the future of
equipment and technology. And we can only do that by having a
group that we can go to consistently in terms of whether it is
guidance, whether it is information, or just access to future
plans of whether there is going to be reduced access and what
not.
So, I would say that is probably at the center of our
priorities.
Mr. Tiffany. Would you say that notice requirement is
helpful?
Ms. Tariq. Correct, in terms of all stakeholders in
addition to businesses, but also local communities, and tribes,
and everyone who is really involved and affected.
Mr. Tiffany. I just want to wrap with one other question
for Deputy Director Reynolds.
How many facilities are currently closed or operating with
reduced access for reasons other than health and safety?
Mr. Reynolds. We try to not necessarily reduce access as
much as manage visitors. And there are about 25 parks right
now, 21 to 25 parks that I can think of off the top of my head,
that have some sort of managed access program.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you have a tracking on that that the public
can access?
Mr. Reynolds. We can certainly provide it if it is not
readily available. I think that something like this bill can
help us to shore those things up, just to be honest with you.
They are tracked locally very much, the parks, as we were
talking about earlier. The park superintendents are expected to
interface with their communities, and their counties, and their
folks around them. But on the national level, it may be harder
to find.
Mr. Tiffany. I think that tracking data would really be
nice to have.
Mr. Reynolds. Agreed.
Mr. Tiffany. To the Ranking Member, do you have any follow
up questions?
Mr. Neguse. I do not.
Mr. Tiffany. So, with that, I just want to thank all the
witnesses for the valuable testimony and Members for your
questions.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for our witnesses today, and we will ask that they
respond to those in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of
the Subcommittee must submit questions to the Subcommittee
Clerk by 5 p.m. on Friday, September 22, 2023. The hearing
record will be held open for 10 business days for these
responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 4:17 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Westerman

Statement for the Record
Trust for Public Land
In Support of
H.R. 3107 the ``Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act''

At Trust for Public Land, we connect people to the outdoors. We
create parks and protect land for people, ensuring healthy, livable
communities for generations to come. We were founded in 1972 on the
conviction that all people need access to nature and the outdoors,
close to home, in the cities and communities where they live. We work
with communities to create parks and protect public land where they're
needed most, as a matter of health, equity, and justice.

We are in support of this Act; however we encourage the Committee
to include language which directs FICOR to make part of its purpose to
focus on underserved communities, including Native tribes, that don't
have access to public parks within a 10 minute walk to their home.

Spending time outdoors is more than a nicety--it's a necessity for
a happy, healthy life. But access to parks isn't equal, and disparities
often fall on racial and economic divides. In low-income communities,
communities of color, and rural areas, parks are fewer, smaller, more
crowded, and less maintained than parks in higher-income or
predominantly white communities. People need to feel that they are
welcome and wanted at our public lands, and that they have open access
to the outdoors.

Increasing federal agency coordination and communication on public
lands usage must therefore be approached with equity in mind. We
therefore urge you to include provisions directing FICOR to focus on
bringing equity in the use, access, and opportunities for underserved
communities and public lands.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

NATIONAL PARKS CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION

September 19, 2023

Re: NPCA position on H.R. 3200--Gateway Community and Recreation
Enhancement Act

Dear Representative:

Since 1919, National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) has been
the leading voice of the American people in protecting and enhancing
our National Park System. On behalf of our 1.6 million members and
supporters nationwide, I want to share our concerns on H.R. 3200--
Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act.
H.R. 3200--Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act: NPCA
appreciates the intent of this legislation, as well as the continued
efforts of the Committee to ensure America's public lands are
protected. However, we are concerned H.R. 3200 lacks clarity on the
visitation data that will be collected, how that information will be
made available to the public, and undermines Superintendent authority.
The current budget for the NPS cannot bear the costs and staffing to
meet the goals outlined in the bill.
The Visitation Pilot Program as outlined is a massive, resource-
intensive undertaking that requires extensive data collection,
organization and publication. The Department of the Interior (DOI) and
Department of Agriculture (USDA) would require new funding to create a
new, publicly accessible visitation data program that meets a standard
of excellence visitors can trust when planning their travel and
recreation. DOI and USDA do not currently have the technical resources
to collect, organize, analyze or publish visitation data at the scale
outlined in H.R. 3200. As the Committee has heard before, many parks
with high visitation are already understaffed and have been dealing
with flat budgets for a decade. Without additional funding, the
requirements in this bill are not feasible and Congress cannot
reasonably expect successful program implementation.
While the purpose of the Visitation Pilot Program is not explicitly
stated in the bill, it is presumably intended to disperse visitors
across federal land recreation destinations in an effort to reduce
crowd density. Ensuring dispersal techniques are managed properly is a
complex and challenging endeavor. While visitor dispersal might provide
some relief to parks experiencing intense crowding, unintended
consequences of increased visitation in new places adds to management
burdens and poses long-term threats to park resources. Dispersal as a
visitor use management strategy must be further studied, and the
financial and human resource costs must be considered before
implementation on the scale proposed in this bill.
Of greatest concern in this bill is Section 4, which limits the
ability of an NPS superintendent to reduce access to a park unit unless
there is a risk to health and safety. 36 CFR 1.6 outlines the specific
circumstances that enable a superintendent to undertake closures.
Section 4 of this bill creates an unnecessary burden for
superintendents as they work to protect the resources the parks were
created to preserve. A park unit can temporarily restrict access to
areas of a park for a variety of reasons such as migrating fauna, trail
damage, or research. These types of closures do not pose a risk to
visitor health and safety, but they are instrumental to ensure the
protection of irreplaceable park resources. If this bill were to pass
as it is currently written, park managers would have to go through a
time consuming NEPA-style public engagement process for simple closures
that are routinely undertaken. 36 CFR 1.6 ensures that superintendents
can uphold the Organic Act mandate and act responsively to changing
conditions. Stripping superintendent authority to make timely closures
will harm natural and cultural resources and put some of our most
fragile national treasures at risk.
If you have any questions or need additional information, please
contact NPCA's Visitor Experience Program Manager Tucker Johnson
(
[emailprotected]
).
Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Christina Hazard,
Legislative Director, Government Affairs

______

OUTDOOR ALLIANCE

September 29, 2023

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Neguse, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
House Natural Resources Committee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: September 19th Federal Lands Subcommittee legislative hearing on
outdoor recreation

Dear Chair Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee:

Thank you for holding September 19th's legislative hearing on
outdoor recreation. Multiple bills before the subcommittee would
improve and expand sustainable recreation opportunities across the U.S.
and provide support to the nation's growing $862 billion outdoor
recreation economy. We encourage you to advance the bills noted below
and include them in a first-of-its kind outdoor recreation package in
2023.
Outdoor Alliance is a coalition of ten member-based organizations
representing the human powered outdoor recreation community. The
coalition includes Access Fund, American Canoe Association, American
Whitewater, International Mountain Bicycling Association, Winter
Wildlands Alliance, The Mountaineers, the American Alpine Club, the
Mazamas, Colorado Mountain Club, and Surfrider Foundation and
represents the interests of the millions of Americans who climb,
paddle, mountain bike, backcountry ski and snowshoe, and enjoy coastal
recreation on our nation's public lands, waters, and snowscapes.
Outdoor recreation on federal public lands and waters supports
numerous public health and environmental benefits and helps Americans
build a lasting connection with their public lands. Recreation also
provides far-reaching economic benefits, which are particularly
pronounced for rural communities and others in the vicinity of public
lands. As these benefits continue to grow alongside overall
participation in outdoor activities, action from Congress is needed to
modernize how federal agencies plan for and manage recreational use.
The bills before the subcommittee would help elevate outdoor
recreation as a priority across multiple federal agencies, and would
support needed updates and new initiatives to account for the type,
extent, and diversity of outdoor recreation activities occurring across
the U.S. today. The two bills mentioned below--H.R. 3107 and 3200--
closely resemble components of S. 873, America's Outdoor Recreation Act
(AORA), which recently passed out of the Energy and Natural Resources
Committee with a unanimous bipartisan vote. We are highly pleased to
see the subcommittee consider outdoor recreation policy in a similar
bipartisan manner, and we encourage you to move forward with a
bipartisan recreation package similar to AORA before the end of the
year.
Our comments on specific bills are below.
Improving Outdoor Coordination Act (H.R. 3107)

Outdoor Alliance supports H.R. 3107, which would make permanent the
Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR). As the
popularity, diversity, and economic impact of outdoor recreation
continues to grow, increased attention to recreation management is
needed across federal agencies. In many cases, the recreation
experience does not abide by jurisdictional boundaries, and
recreationists often pass through lands or waters managed by multiple
agencies during their time outdoors. FICOR can improve coordination
around recreation management between agencies, and can elevate outdoor
recreation as a land management priority across the federal government.
FICOR was renewed in 2022 with overwhelming support from the
outdoor recreation community. The council's goals include investing in
recreation infrastructure, expanding outdoor education and career
development, improving coordination with non-federal partners, and
improving access to sustainable recreation opportunities on federal
public lands and waters. H.R. 3107 builds on these existing goals and
would codify FICOR to provide more permanency and consistency to the
council's work.
Outdoor Alliance appreciates the bill sponsors' leadership on this
issue and respectfully recommends the following changes to H.R. 3107:

Expand the definitions of ``Federal Land Management
Agency'' and ``Federal Recreational Lands and Waters'' to
include U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). These
agencies play a critical role in managing recreation lands
and waters and recreation infrastructure enjoyed by our
community.

Change Sec. 200104(b) to include NOAA in its entirety,
rather than just the National Marine Fisheries Service.
Multiple departments within NOAA play a role in managing
coastal recreation and should be considered by FICOR.

Clarify that FICOR leadership is shared between agencies
by removing reference to ``The Secretary'' in
Sec. 200104(a).

Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act (H.R. 3200)

Outdoor Alliance supports H.R. 3200, which will help gateway
communities capitalize on their proximity to recreation amenities in
building local economies and also establish a digital National Parks
and Federal Recreation Lands pass. The significance of outdoor
recreation-related tourism in gateway communities has grown in recent
years following high levels of participation in outdoor activities
during the COVID-19 pandemic. As more communities adapt to high levels
of visitation and invest in their outdoor economies, additional support
and collaboration from federal land managers can help address housing
costs, infrastructure needs, workforce development, and other issues
that can accompany recreation-related economic growth. To accomplish
this goal, H.R. 3200 requires federal agencies to work with state,
local, Tribal, and nonprofit partners to create a needs assessment of
gateway communities, and would provide new pathways for resource
sharing between the federal government and local communities.
Outdoor Alliance supports Section 4's intent that local
stakeholders be notified and have an opportunity to weigh in on
potential closures of National Parks. We respectfully recommend adding
the phrase ``or resource conservation concerns'' to the parenthetical
language in the beginning of this section in order to account for
potential impacts on sensitive ecological resources.
We also appreciate Section 5, which improves how federal agencies
communicate with the public regarding visitation to public lands.
Current agency reporting makes it difficult for the public--and often
land managers themselves--to understand the true location, extent,
seasonality, and timing of recreational use across public lands.
Innovative approaches like the proposed Real-time Data Pilot Program
will help agencies adapt their recreation management to better account
for where and when significant recreational use is occurring, including
by identifying lesser-known recreation sites.

Thank you for considering our community's input, and thank you for
holding this important hearing. We look forward to working with you to
expand sustainable, high-quality outdoor opportunities across America's
public lands and waters.

Best regards,

Louis Geltman,
Vice President for Policy and Government Relations

______

THE WILDERNESS SOCIETY

September 19, 2023

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Neguse, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
House Natural Resources Committee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
House Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Federal Lands:

On behalf of our more than one million members and supporters, The
Wilderness Society (TWS) writes to express views on two of the bills
being considered by the House Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Federal Lands during a hearing on September 19, 2023.
We respectfully request that this letter be included in the hearing
record.
In general, we are pleased that the Committee is holding hearings
on recreation bills that can be incorporated into a House recreation
package later this year. Doing so moves us closer to getting a bill
through Congress. Unfortunately, we think two of the bills on today's
docket will need additional work before they will be ready for
inclusion in a recreation package. We detail our concerns about both
bills below.
H.R. 3107--Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act

TWS supports H.R. 3107 in its goal of making permanent the Federal
Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR). However, we have
several concerns with the bill as it is currently written. These
concerns need to be addressed for the FICOR to function effectively and
achieve its goals.
TWS joined in the views statement submitted by the Outdoors
Alliance for Kids (OAK). That statement enumerated our concerns with
the FICOR bill. We urge the committee to incorporate the changes set
forth in the OAK views statement when it prepares the FICOR bill for
markup. We have attached the OAK views statement to this letter.
H.R. 3200--Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act

TWS does not support H.R. 3200 as it is currently written. Our
concerns with the bill are described in detail below.

Significant unfunded mandates

Two sections of this bill impose significant unfunded mandates upon
the agencies:

1.  Section 3(a) directs the agencies to ``collaborate with State and
local governments, Indian Tribes, housing authorities,
applicable trade associations, nonprofit organizations, and
other relevant stakeholders to identify needs and economic
impacts in gateway communities . . .''

2.  Section 5(b) requires the Secretaries to create a data pilot
program that predicts visitation in real time and make that
data available to the public through multiple media
platforms.

In both cases, the agencies are instructed to carry out this work
``using existing funds available to the Secretaries.''
Both of these tasks are major undertakings that will require
significant agency resources. The second task in particular will be
very labor intensive and will require the integration of data sets from
multiple sources. This will be a challenging technological development
process. Congress should not require the agencies to take on this work
with existing funds available. Doing so will force the agencies to
neglect their other assigned responsibilities in order to comply with
these mandates. If Congress intends to impose new mandates on the
agencies, it has a responsibility to provide the additional funding
necessary to carry out those mandates.

Conflicting signals regarding technical assistance to communities

Sections 3(b)(1) and 3(b)(2) are internally inconsistent in a way
that raises questions about the agencies' obligations to provide
technical assistance to communities. Section 3(b)(1) requires the
Secretary of Agriculture to provide to businesses in gateway
communities the assistance described in section 3(b)(2). However,
section 3(b)(2) says the secretary ``may provide assistance under
paragraph (1)'' through certain enumerated means. Thus, the bill is
ambiguous as to whether this assistance is required or is merely
authorized and discretionary. Congress should resolve this ambiguity
before taking further action on this bill.

Unrealistic expectations regarding visitor use data

Section 5(a) requires the agencies to establish a single visitation
data reporting system that provides an estimate of the number of
visitors broken down by recreational activity. Developing a unified
visitation data reporting system would be a significant improvement
over the current piecemeal system. However, we urge the committee to be
realistic about the challenges of producing unified data across
multiple federal land management agencies. This task will difficult for
several reasons.

1.  Of the five agencies covered by this bill (BLM, BOR, NPS, USFWS,
USFS) only two have entrance gates at which visitors can be
counted as they arrive (NPS and USFWS). Two of the five
agencies (BLM and USFWS) have completely porous boundaries
that make it very difficult to count people upon their
arrival.

2.  Although some NPS and USFWS units have entrance gates at which
the agencies are able to count visitors, this data paints
an incomplete picture of visitation at Park Service units
and Wildlife Refuges. The reason for this because even
units with gates have other entry points through which
people can gain access without being counted. In addition,
some NPS and USFWS have no entrance gates. As a result,
visitation data for NPS and USFWS units is, inherently, an
underestimation of visitation.

3.  Because their borders are porous, BLM and USFS must use other
methods for measuring visitation. Some of the alternative
methods currently being used involve labor intensive field
surveys that can only be conducted once every five years.
This makes the task of producing unified visitation data on
an annual basis more difficult.

The differences in data collection methodologies and collection
frequency will make it challenging for the agencies to produce unified
annual visitation data. Some evolution in the agencies' data collection
strategies may be required. If so, the two-year deadline imposed by the
bill is likely unrealistic. For these reasons, we urge the committee to
revise the bill to give the agencies more time to comply with this
mandate.
Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Paul Sanford,
Director of Policy Analysis

*****

ATTACHMENT

Outdoors Alliance for Kids (OAK)

September 19, 2023

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Neguse, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
House Natural Resources Committee
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
House Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Federal Lands:

We, the undersigned members and partners of the Outdoors Alliance
for Kids (OAK) thank you for prioritizing legislation that improves
access to the outdoors for children, youth and families. We write to
express our views in support of H.R. 3107, the Improving Outdoor
Recreation Coordination Act sponsored by Mr. Neguse and Mr. Lawler,
although we recommend a series of changes to improve the bill. Our
recommendations are set forth below.
OAK is a national strategic partnership of more than 100 businesses
and organizations representing more than 60 million Americans with a
common interest in getting young people outdoors playing and learning
in nature. Our members and supporters believe that the need to increase
access to the outdoors has never been more apparent.
OAK supports H.R. 3107 in its goal of making permanent the Federal
Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR). FICOR is a council
made up of eight federal agencies that manage recreation on federal
lands and waters. The Council was originally chartered during a
previous administration and was reestablished through administrative
action in 2022. Passing legislation that makes the Council permanent
will ensure that the Council is able to work together to improve
recreational access over the long term.

Although we support legislation making FICOR permanent, we have
several concerns with the bill as it is currently written. These
concerns need to be addressed for the FICOR to function effectively and
achieve its goals. Our concerns are as follows:

1.  H.R. 3107 places the FICOR under the authority of the Department
of the Interior. This is inconsistent with the FICOR's
current structure and mode of operation under which all
four of the member departments have equal authority over
the council. This balanced operating structure is essential
to ensure equal representation and commitment from each of
the FICOR members. We recommend that the Committee amend
the language in H.R. 3107 to grant all member agencies
equal authority over the FICOR.

2.  The bill defines ``federal land management agency'' and ``federal
recreational lands and waters'' by cross-referencing
definitions in the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement
Act, 16 U.S.C. Sec. 6801 et seq. (FLREA). These definitions
should not be used in H.R. 3107 because they exclude three
of the eight FICOR member agencies--the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers. We recommend that the Committee formulate
definitions for these terms that are specific to H.R. 3107
and that include all FICOR member agencies.

3.  The Department of Commerce agency identified as a FICOR member in
section (b)(1) of the bill is different from the current
FICOR membership and is not the right agency to represent
Commerce on the FICOR. Section (b)(1) identifies the
National Marine Fisheries Service as a FICOR member. This
is the wrong agency. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration should be the identified Department of
Commerce FICOR representative.

4.  In addition to the eight federal land and water management
agencies, Congress should consider assigning a formal role
to two additional agencies within the federal government.

a.  Assigning a role to the Department of Agriculture's
Under Secretary for Rural Development would recognize that
outdoor recreation is an important type of rural development
that can be cost effective because it does not generally rely
on heavily built infrastructure. Bringing USDA Rural
Development into the FICOR community should help expand rural
development opportunities relating to sustainable outdoor
recreation activities.

b.  Working through its Office of Community Revitalization,
EPA runs a technical assistance program to support the
recreation economy in rural communities. EPA also manages the
Urban Waters Federal Partnership program. Through these
programs, EPA plays an important role in the nation's
recreation economy. To recognize this, Congress should consider
assigning EPA a formal role within the Federal Interagency
Council on Outdoor Recreation.

5.  FICOR representatives have reported to us that rotating the FICOR
leadership on an annual basis provides too short of a time
frame for effective management of the Council. We recommend
amending (b)(4) to rotate leadership among the Council
members on an interval to be determined by the Council and
not to exceed 3 years.

6.  The Additional Participants provision in section (b)(2) of the
bill identifies specific federal departments and agencies
that may be invited to participate in the FICOR meetings
and activities. We think this enumerated list is unwise and
unnecessary. The goal of collaboration with additional
federal agencies can be achieved by using language from
section 5(e) of the Memorandum of Understanding
establishing the existing FICOR. This MOU language broadly
welcomes participation from other federal entities as the
FICOR sees fit and does not limit the agencies with which
the FICOR may collaborate.

7.  We recommend that section (b)(3) be revised to address two
problems with the bill. First, the bill does not explicitly
call out collaboration with Tribal, Territorial or local
governments, which is an important part of the Council's
work. Second, we believe that section (c)(8), which
identifies the FICOR's work with partners outside of the
federal government, is too vague and is out of place in its
current location in the bill. To address these issues, we
recommend expanding section (b)(3) ``State Coordination''
to read as follows:

(3)  Other Coordination.--In determining additional
participants under this subsection, the Secretaries may----

(A)  invite participation in the Council's meetings
or other activities from representatives of State,
Tribal, Territorial, and local governments.

(B)  build partnerships between the parties and a
range of private, public, Tribal, and non-profit
entities.

8.  Section (c)(1) specifically calls out the implementation of the
FLREA as one of the purposes of the Council's work. As
explained above, three of the FICOR agencies are not
covered by FLREA. We recommend revising this statement to
cover existing and future policies more broadly in a manner
similar to the FICOR MOU. This can be accomplished by
changing the language of section (c)(1) to read:

(1)  recreation management policies across Federal
agencies, including implementation of new and existing
recreation legislation;

9.  Finally, it is essential that Congress identify a sustainable and
reliable funding source for FICOR operations and
operational capacity. Without it, the Council will not
succeed. Expecting the agencies to absorb the operating
costs of the Council without an identified funding source
is simply unrealistic. Congress should address this issue
in H.R. 3107.

For questions related to this views statement, contact Paul
Sanford, OAK Vice Chair and Director of Policy Analysis at The
Wilderness Society. Mr. Sanford can be reached at
[emailprotected]
.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit our views on H.R. 3107. We
look forward to working with the Committee to improve and pass this
vital piece of recreation legislation.

Sincerely,

[OAK member organizations]

[all]
