- OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON IMPROVING ACCESS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUNTING, FISHING, AND OUTDOOR RECREATION ON AMERICA'S FEDERAL LANDS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING ACCESS AND OPPORTUNITIES
FOR HUNTING, FISHING, AND OUTDOOR.
RECREATION ON AMERICA'S
FEDERAL LANDS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Monday, May 13, 2024 in Hayward, Wisconsin

__________

Serial No. 118-119

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-687 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Monday, May 13, 2024.............................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:

Stafsholt, Hon. Rob, State Senator, New Richmond, Wisconsin..     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Schienebeck, Henry, Executive Director, Great Lakes Timber
Professionals Association, Rhinelander, Wisconsin..........     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10

Hilgemann, Luke, Executive Director, International Order of
T. Roosevelt, Madison, Wisconsin...........................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13

Dougherty, Tom, President, Voyageur Country Houseboat
Operators Association, International Falls, Minnesota......    15
Prepared statement of....................................    16

Taylor, Duane, Director of Safe and Responsible Use Programs,
Motorcycle Industry Council, Specialty Vehicle Institute of
America, Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association,
Washington, DC.............................................    28
Prepared statement of....................................    30

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON IMPROVING ACCESS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR
HUNTING, FISHING, AND OUTDOOR RECREATION ON AMERICA'S FEDERAL LANDS

----------

Monday, May 13, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Hayward, Wisconsin

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m. CDT, at
The Steakhouse and Lodge, 15860 T Bone Lane, Hayward,
Wisconsin, Hon. Tom Tiffany [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Tiffany and Stauber.
Also present: Representative Collins.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order. I would like to welcome everybody to an official
Subcommittee on Federal Lands oversight field hearing entitled
``Improving Access and Opportunities for Hunting, Fishing, and
Outdoor Recreation on America's Federal Lands.''
My name is Tom Tiffany, and I represent Wisconsin's 7th
Congressional District. I also serve as the Chairman of the
Federal Lands Subcommittee for the House Committee on Natural
Resources.
I am thankful to be joined today by two of my colleagues
from the Natural Resources Committee. Just to my right,
Representative Pete Stauber represents Minnesota's 8th
Congressional District and serves as the Chairman of the Energy
and Mineral Resources Subcommittee. Representative Mike Collins
represents Georgia's 10th Congressional District and serves as
the Vice Chair of the Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations.
The Subcommittee is gathered here today to hold an official
hearing examining barriers that sportsmen and women face to
accessing our Federal lands and common-sense solutions that
promote greater hunting, fishing, and outdoor recreation
opportunities. I can truly think of no better place to discuss
such an important topic than northern Wisconsin, which is
surrounded by pristine lakes, trails, and forestland.
Before we begin, I would like to remind everybody about the
rules of decorum for official congressional proceedings. I ask
that there not be any kind of disruption regarding the
testimony given here today. It is important that we respect the
rules of the Committee and of the House, and to allow the
Members and the public to hear our proceedings.
I would like to welcome a couple of special guests that we
have here today. First of all, Chequamegon-Nicolet Supervisor
Jenn Youngblood is here. Jenn, if you would raise your hand,
please. Thank you very much, Jenn, for joining us today. We
really appreciate it.
Also from the State Legislature, Representative Chanz Green
is here. Representative Green, it is good to have you joining
us today.
And with that, Representative Green, if you would lead us
in the Pledge of Allegiance, we would really appreciate it.
All. I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States
of America, and to the republic for which it stands, one
nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for
all.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Green.
Finally, I would like to address a few housekeeping items.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the Subcommittee at any time.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Collins, be allowed to participate in today's hearing from
the dais.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. I want to begin by thanking the people of
Hayward for hosting us here today, including the local
superintendent of schools. Thank you so much for joining us
today.
It is my privilege to welcome my colleagues from the
Natural Resources Committee to the Badger State, a place that I
am blessed to call home and honored to represent in Congress.
Today's hearing is focused on ways we can improve access
and opportunities for sportsmen and women on America's Federal
lands--hunting, fishing, trapping, shooting, and we talked
about berry picking earlier also--and many other forms of
outdoor recreation are engrained in our American culture and
heritage.
Here in Wisconsin, we have some of the greatest places to
recreate in the country. There are over 6.6 million acres of
land open for recreation in Wisconsin, along with over 15,000
lakes and 84,000 miles of rivers. The lands and waters provide
excellent habitat for a wide variety of fish and wildlife,
which is why Wisconsin is ranked among the top 10 states in the
country for hunting and fishing participation.
I know firsthand how critical access and proper management
of our public lands is for small businesses and local gateway
communities. For over 20 years, my wife and I owned and
operated Wilderness Cruises, a riverboat excursion business in
Wisconsin's beautiful North Woods.
Sadly, the public lands access that sustains the lifeblood
of our communities is under attack. Public lands in Wisconsin
and across the nation are under threat from extreme
preservationists that want to lock up lands, limit access,
prevent responsible management, close roads and trails, and
shut down many of the activities Americans love participating
in on our public lands.
Since taking office, President Biden has been using tools
like the Antiquities Act to lock up lands in pursuit of his
radical 30x30 agenda, which has set a goal to preserve 30
percent of the land and water in the United States by 2030. For
hunters and sportsmen, this radical agenda is unfolding in a
death by a thousand cuts.
One prominent example of this is the Biden administration's
attempts to ban lead ammunition and tackle in Fish and Wildlife
Service refuges. Radical environmentalists have also weaponized
laws like the Endangered Species Act to prevent the delisting
of recovered species like the gray wolf, an issue that we are
all too familiar with in Wisconsin. And these are just the
threats to access that have been grabbing national headlines.
A lesser-known but still important threat to access is the
closure and decommissioning of roads and trails. Since 1991,
the Forest Service has decommissioned an average of 2,000 miles
of roads per year. Many of these road closures correlate with a
decline in the local forest products industry. Wisconsin has
historically been a leader in forest management and responsible
timber harvesting.
In addition to important economic benefits, forest
management is a critically important tool for maintaining
forest health, supporting wildlife populations, and providing
outdoor recreation areas and opportunities. A vibrant forest
products industry also ensures that forest roads are well
maintained so all Americans can readily access their public
lands, regardless of physical ability. Maintaining and
increasing motorized access is not only vital to both public
access and enjoyment but also instrumental in better managing
our Federal lands.
Wisconsin has unfortunately seen far too many of these road
closures. Just this morning, my colleagues and I visited a
Forest Service road that has been closed indefinitely. There
are many similar closures throughout the Chequamegon-Nicolet. I
am committed to finding solutions to increase access here in
Wisconsin, including making sure these roads stay open.
Why does this matter? A lack of access to our public lands
is commonly cited as one of the primary reasons why sportsmen
and women stop hunting. The more difficult we make it to enjoy
these lands, the more we risk participation of the next
generation of sportsmen and sportswomen.
The Natural Resources Committee has traveled to Wisconsin
today not only to highlight these issues but to continue our
fight against the radical Biden agenda. This year, we have
advanced innovative, common-sense, and bipartisan solutions
that will help restore access to our public lands for hunting,
fishing, and outdoor recreation. Last month, the House passed
the EXPLORE Act, a comprehensive outdoor recreation package
that cuts red tape for small recreation businesses, improves
access to Federal lands, and creates new opportunities for
hunting, fishing, shooting, and other forms of outdoor
recreation.
And just a few short weeks ago, the House passed the Trust
the Science Act and the Protecting Access for Hunters and
Anglers Act. These two bills would delist the gray wolf from
the Endangered Species List and permanently protect the use of
lead ammunition for hunters and anglers.
These pieces of legislation will improve the management of
our Federal lands to leave them in better condition for future
generations. They are good pieces of legislation for Wisconsin
and good for the nation.
I would like to thank everybody for joining us here today
so we can continue our discussion on this important topic. I
would especially like to thank our esteemed panel of witnesses
for providing their expert insights that we are about to hear
on this important topic.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.

By the way, I would like to thank local law enforcement for
joining us today. Thank you very much for being here. We
appreciate that very much. And we also want to thank our hosts
here at the Steakhouse for opening up their facility for us
today. Thank you very much.
We are going to move on to our panel of witnesses. Let me
remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you must limit
your oral statement to 5 minutes, but your entire statement
will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, press the ``on'' button on the
microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the light
will turn green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please wrap up your statement.
I would now like to recognize our first witness, the
Honorable Rob Stafsholt, Wisconsin State Senator for the 10th
Senate District, and a very capable guide here in our tour this
morning.
State Senator Stafsholt, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB STAFSHOLT, STATE SENATOR, NEW
RICHMOND, WISCONSIN

Mr. Stafsholt. Good afternoon. I would like to start by
thanking the Chair and the Committee for coming here today. In
your roles as Federal representatives, you face many issues
from all areas of our great country as well as from an array of
places around the world that require your attention. So, thank
you very much for taking the time and the hassle of
arrangements to be here today. I really do appreciate it.
A little background on me first. Although it is true that I
am before you today as a member of the Wisconsin State Senate,
and in my role there I am the Chair of the Senate Committee on
Sporting Heritage and Financial Institutions, perhaps that is
not my most applicable trait for the hearing today. What is
more relevant in today's discussion is that I am a lifelong fan
of our national forests. My father began hunting in the
Chequamegon National Forest in the early 1960s, so by my
arrival some years later, multiple trips to the Chequamegon
National Forest were a normal occurrence in my family
activities each year.
My love of the Chequamegon began with hunting, but during
college years I made spending cash by getting the required
permit from the Forestry Office and harvesting balsam boughs to
sell to the people who make Christmas trees and other holiday
decorations. A few years after that, as a husband and a father,
I started bringing my own family to the Chequamegon to share
and enjoy the beauty it had to offer on hiking trips, going
boating, taking pictures, berry and mushroom harvesting,
believe it or not, ATV riding, wilderness exploring, and many
other activities, all which involved getting off the main roads
and seeing what was really out there in our national forest.
In my early twenties, I managed to purchase a chunk of land
with an old single-wide trailer house on it, a rough bunkhouse,
and an outhouse, within the borders of the national forest. I
still have that property today, although I now have a small
cabin there with more modern facilities, and I go there as much
as my schedule permits, maybe even more than it permits if you
would ask my staff.
My point is the conservation of, and the appreciation of,
the Chequamegon National Forest is in the backbone of who I am.
Over all these years, one of the things that I believe
threatens the Chequamegon National Forest the most is a slow
but determined reduction in access to the forest, which slowly
reduces the number of people who come here. My greatest concern
is that with the continued loss of access to the Chequamegon
National Forest there will be a loss of use of the forest,
which then slowly leads us to a reduction of the percentage of
the general public who appreciates our National Forest.
If any of you on the Committee have been in politics very
long, you probably have figured out that we begin to question
why we preserve things and fund things if not many people care
about them.
We need to re-open closed access roads and make sure people
continue to cherish our forests and not just consider them to
be flyover areas.
Some time ago, the forest established the Travel Use Map.
The Travel Use Map is flawed in the fact that it did not catch
all of the access roads that already existed in the forest at
that time, some of which had, or still have, Federal forest
road numbers on them. It is a big task to map it all, no doubt.
The problem is, when roads did not make it on the map they were
deemed unauthorized roads. I have called in or attended
meetings and brought certain roads to their attention, only to
be told, ``Someone must have put that in there illegally and it
can't be used.''
That simply is not the case. Almost all roads were made
with a bulldozer for the sole purpose of a forestry logging
job. Regardless, those roads are now closed.
Lately there has been a significant increase in logging in
the Chequamegon Forest due to some court cases and policy
decisions, and that is great. Logging is fundamental in the
health of our national forests. It revitalizes the forest with
new growth that creates better habitat for a vast array of
wildlife that live here. Logging also helps prevent mass forest
fires that would sweep through and be detrimental to the forest
and private property as well, and logging definitely generates
revenue for our forestry to use in the maintenance of this
great public land. But it is also important to local economies
that rely on those jobs and support service revenues.
However, there is an issue with the logging contract, or
the policy if you will, on how we manage the roads that are
required to be able to be completed on a logging job. Currently
it is my understanding from discussions with local loggers that
are out there doing the work, that they are required to berm
these roads off at the end of a logging project. Now I can
understand if this area was riddled with roads everywhere, and
adding all the new roads would really make a forest an area of
roads with some woodland in between them. But the truth is they
are massive tracts of land, most not square in shape, that are
often 5 miles by 7 miles in size, between major fire lanes.
We should also consider the cost of putting in these roads
to the taxpayers who fund the forest. We do not write out
checks for road development or improvement on these logging
roads, but the loggers who bid these jobs take that into
account on how they bid their job. I believe that if we are
paying for these roads to be built that we should be able to
use them to access these massive tracts of land after the
logging job is over.
Even more egregious to me is that when we have logging
roads that are on the Travel Use Map, and have been in
existence for decades and decades, and been used by the public
the entire time, and these roads are used, or at least
partially used, to get back to log a new logging job, these
roads are sometimes bermed off at the end of the logging
operation at that site. I have asked the loggers, ``That road
has been here for 30 years. Just because you used the first
mile of it to get to the logging site, why are you berming it
now that you are done?'' And the response that I get----
Mr. Tiffany. Senator Stafsholt, we have reached the end of
your time, if you could wrap up your testimony.
Mr. Stafsholt. Sure. The response I get is that because it
was used as part of a logging contract, it must be bermed up.
I just want to reiterate my thanks for the Committee coming
here, and emphasis how important these access roads are.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stafsholt follows:]
Prepared Statement of Senator Rob Stafsholt,
Wisconsin 10th Senate District

Good afternoon. I would like to start by thanking the Chair and the
Committee for coming here today. In your roles as federal
representatives, you face many issues from all areas of our great
country as well as from an array of places around the world that
require your attention, so thank you so much for taking the time and
the hassle of arrangements to be here today. I really do appreciate it.
A little background on me first, although it is true that I am
before you today as a member of the Wisconsin State Senate, and in my
role there, I am the Chair of the Senate Committee on Sporting Heritage
& Financial Institutions. Perhaps that is not my most applicable trait
for the hearing today. What is more relevant in today's discussion is
that I am a life-long fan of our National Forests. My father began
hunting in the Chequamegon National Forest in the early 1960s, so by my
arrival some years later, multiple trips to the Chequamegon Forest were
a normal occurrence in my family activities each year. My love of the
Chequamegon began with hunting, but during college years, I made
spending cash by getting the required permit from the Forestry office
and harvesting balsam boughs to sell to people making Christmas wreaths
and other decorations. A few years later as a husband and a father, I
started bringing my own family to the Chequamegon Forest to share and
enjoy the beauty it had to offer on hiking trips, going boating,
picture taking, berry and mushroom harvesting, ATV riding, wilderness
exploring, and many other activities, all of which involved getting off
the main roads and seeing what was really out there in the National
Forest. In my early 20s, I managed to purchase a chunk of land with an
old, single-wide trailer house, a rough bunkhouse, and an outhouse on
it within the borders of the Forest. I still have that property today,
although I now have a small cabin there with more modern facilities and
I go there as much as my schedule permits, maybe even more than it
permits! My point is, the conservation of, and an appreciation of the
Chequamegon National Forest is in the backbone of who I am.
Over all these years, one of the things that I believe threatens
the Chequamegon National Forest the most is a slow but determined
reduction in access to the Forest, which slowly reduces the number of
people who come here. My greatest concern is that with a continued loss
of access of the Chequamegon National Forest, there will be a loss of
use of the Forest, which slowly leads us to a reduction of the
percentage of the general public that appreciates our National Forests.
If any of you have been in politics very long, you probably have
figured out we begin to question why we preserve things if not very
many people care. We need to reopen closed access roads and make sure
people continue to cherish our Forests and not just consider them to be
``fly-over areas''.
Some time ago, the Forest established the Travel Use Map. The
Travel Use Map is flawed in the fact that it did not catch all the
access roads that already existed in the Forest, some of which had or
still have Federal Forest Road numbers on them. It is a big task to map
it all, no doubt. The problem is, when access roads did not make it on
the map, they are deemed ``unauthorized roads''. I have called in or
attended meetings and brought certain roads to their attention, only to
be told ``Someone must have put that in there illegally and it can't be
used''. That simply is not the case. Almost all roads were made with a
bulldozer for the purpose of a Forestry logging job. Regardless, those
roads are now closed.
Lately, there has been a significant increase in logging in the
Chequamegon Forest due to some court cases and policy decisions, and
that is great. Logging is fundamental in the health of our National
Forest. It revitalizes the forest with new growth that creates better
habitat for our vast array of wildlife that live here. Logging also
helps prevent mass forest fires that would sweep through and be
detrimental to the Forest and private property as well. And logging
definitely generates revenue for our Forestry to use in the maintenance
of this great public land, but it is also important to local economies
that rely on those jobs and support service revenues. However, there is
an issue with the logging contract term, or the policy, if you will, on
how we manage the roads that are required to be able to complete a
logging job. Currently, it is my understanding from my discussions with
the loggers themselves that are out there doing the work that they are
required to berm these roads off at the end of the logging project.
Now, I can understand if this area was riddled with roads everywhere
and adding all the new roads would really make the Forest an area of
roads with some woodland in between them here and there, but the truth
is, these are massive tracts of land, most not square in shape, that
are often 5 miles by 7 miles in size between fire lanes. We should also
consider the cost of putting in these roads to the taxpayers who fund
the Forest. We do not write out checks for road development or
improvement on these logging roads, but the loggers who bid these jobs
take that into account on how high their bid is. I believe that if we
are paying for these roads to be built that we should be able to use
them to access these massive tracts of public land after the log job is
over.
Even more egregious to me is when we have logging roads that are on
the Travel Use Map and have been in existence for decades and decades,
and been used by the public the entire time, and those roads are used,
or at least partially used, to get back to a log job, those roads are
sometimes bermed off at the end of the logging operation at that site.
I have asked the loggers, ``That road has been here for 30 years. Just
because you used the first mile of it to get to the logging site, why
are you berming it now that you are done?'' The response I got was, ``I
know, and I don't want to, but it is required in my logging contract.''
I believe, and I hope I am right, that this is simply an oversight in
the Forest's logging management and not an intentional method to
conveniently reduce access to our National Forest.
Lastly, you may wonder why all these ``two-track'' logging roads
that are almost all dead ends are so important. That's a great question
and deserves an answer. There are a few main reasons I would like to
highlight. When these roads are not used by the public, they grow in
with vegetation and are no longer passable with motor vehicles or
equipment. In the unfortunate event that we do get a wildfire, our
firefighting teams will not be able to use these roads to get ahead of
the fire faster. We also have a wide array of users of the Forest. As
officials entrusted to do what is best for the general public, we
should seek to reduce user conflicts. Bow hunters use these two-track
roads to get off main fire lanes to access hunting areas, but also so
vehicles are not parked out where log trucks would have to navigate
around them. With a little rain at the right time, we usually get a
pretty good berry crop out in the Forest, and both local residents and
tourists will tell you some of the best berry picking is at the far end
of these logging roads where there is usually a primitive cul-de-sac
that the log trucks used to turn around. If the public can't use these
roads, they can't get there to pick the berries and enjoy our resource.
Trout fishermen/women use these two-track trails to get to the middle
of these land tracts to get to fishing holes that are not accessible
when they are closed. Bear hunting is a very popular sport in the
Chequamegon National Forest and is often done in groups. I have talked
to many of these groups over the years, and almost all of them would
prefer to be on two-track roads with their bait sites and not out on
main fire lanes. Although gun deer hunters in the Chequamegon are in a
definite decline in their numbers, in previous times of higher hunter
numbers, these access roads were almost required just to allow people
to spread out and get away from each other in order to have some
solitude to experience. Bough cutters, like I mentioned I was back in
the day, use these roads to get to new areas to cut boughs, ensuring we
don't overharvest along all the main fire lanes. Bird hunters use these
two-tracks to hunt on, and you might think they would be better off if
the road was closed so they could walk it without interruption, but
after a few years without vehicle access, the grow up and the bird
don't use those areas anymore. So in a nutshell, we need all these
access roads to allow user groups access to the resources and elbow
room away from others.
Again, I really want to thank all of you for coming here today and
listening to me talk about how important access roads are in the
Chequamegon Forest historically, in today's use, and for the future
appreciation of the Forest by the general public, because they can get
to the remote areas and enjoy it!

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Senator Stafsholt.
I now recognize Mr. Henry Schienebeck, Executive Director
of the Great Lakes Timber Professionals Association. Mr.
Schienebeck, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HENRY SCHIENEBECK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GREAT LAKES
TIMBER PROFESSIONALS ASSOCIATION, RHINELANDER, WISCONSIN

Mr. Schienebeck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Committee
members, for the opportunity to appear before you today. My
name is Henry Schienebeck, Executive Director of Great Lakes
Timber Professionals Association. I am also a member of the
Federal Forest Resource Coalition Policy Committee and
Legislative Chair for the American Loggers Council.
Most U.S. Forest Service roads in the Lake States region
were built to provide access for timber harvest, which remains
a major economic driver for the Lake States and the United
States. In addition, most recreational opportunities such as
snowmobiling, off-road vehicle trails, hunting, and fishing
access are possible because of roads built for forest
management.
According to the 1986 Chequamegon National Forest plan, the
forest transportation system consisted of over 2,000 miles of
forest system roads, 231 miles of state and county Forest
Service highways, and 3,600 miles of low-standard roads, mostly
primitive, two-track dirt roads that required high-clearance
vehicles to traverse, which were not included in the roads
inventory used for the 1986 plan.
With inclusion of the 3,600 miles of uninventoried roads,
the average total road density for the Chequamegon Forest was
estimated at 3.5 miles per square mile of forest in 1986.
Current access restrictions on the Chequamegon-Nicolet are
based on a 2004 Forest Plan, which calls for a target forest-
wide road density of 3 miles per square mile of forest, a
reduction from the forest-wide Chequamegon-Nicolet plan road
density of 3.9 miles per square mile of forest in the 1986
plan.
In general, the road closures have been focused on non-
motorized areas, low-density areas, wolfpack areas, and areas
where roads were causing negative environmental impacts. In
November 2004, the Forest Service released its final rule for
Motorized Recreation in National Forests and Grasslands, which
began limiting access for recreational motor vehicles,
including all-terrain vehicles, off-highway motorcycles, and
off-road vehicles such as 4x4 trucks or jeeps.
In 2008, the 2008 Travel Management Rule began a more
intensive push to further reduce recreational motorized vehicle
use access to national forestlands. With a flat or declining
road budget, the Forest Service adopted a new transportation
policy, Roads Analysis, with the objective of reducing the
number of roads needing costly repair and maintenance.
Beginning in 2000, the Roads Analysis is required for all
project-level management decisions, including all forest-wide
analysis of higher-standard roads.
The final EIS for the Chequamegon-Nicolet Forest Plan
states that, ``Achieving the road density upper limits set for
the forests will require targeted road closures and
obliterations to gradually reduce the number of roads traveled
by public motorized vehicles. Road closures and other
obliterations will focus on lower-standard roads.'' Basically,
Maintenance Level 2 and higher standard roads are unaffected.
In examination of the Forest Plan, what appears to be
happening is that Congress' failure to fully fund the Forest
Service roads program has given the agency cause to have to
place restrictions on roads having a significant investment in
them to be used for future management activities. However, a
person must question why there is so much time and money being
spent to block the use of Level 2 roads built by the forest
industry for logging operations, which, in turn, provides
recreational opportunities until they are no longer passable
because of natural regeneration.
The reality is that Congress' lack of funding is not only
delaying needed forest management, but misdirecting scarce
resources by forcing the Forest Service to spend money closing
roads when it should be expanding access for taxpayers.
Recreation and healthy forests go hand in hand. For these to
occur it is essential that the access roads on the landscape
currently in place be made available for use by taxpayers.
Increased timber harvest focusing on economically viable
timber sales that meet the needs of local industry can generate
revenue which could be used for repair of existing roads while
benefiting wildlife habitat and recreation. In the short to
medium term, however, Congress should prioritize funding used
for road maintenance and repair to provide not only access to
timber but provide hunters, anglers, outdoor recreationalists,
and first responders like firefighters and search and rescue,
greater access.
Thank you for your leadership on these forest issues, and I
would be happy to take any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Schienebeck follows:]
Prepared Statement of Henry Schienebeck, Executive Director, Great
Lakes Timber Professionals Association

Chairman Tiffany, and Committee members,

Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. My name
is Henry Schienebeck, Executive Director of the Great Lakes Timber
Professionals Association (GLTPA). GLTPA is a Michigan/Wisconsin
organization representing 1,000 members with a mission of ``Enhancing
Multiple Use Forests for Future Generations.'' I am also a member of
the Federal Forest Resource Coalition Policy Committee and Legislative
Chair for the American Loggers Council.
The national forest road system has several maintenance levels, all
of which are designed to provide access to the forest for multiple use
purposes. Most USFS roads in the Lake States Regions were built to
provide access for timber harvest, which remains a major economic
driver for the Lakes States and the United States. In addition, most
recreational opportunities such as snowmobiling, off-road vehicle
trails, hunting and fishing access are possible because of roads built
for forest management.
According to the 1986 Chequamegon National Forest Plan the Forest
Transportation system consisted of over 2,200 miles of Forest System
Roads with an additional 231 miles of state and county Forest Service
highways. In addition, a more comprehensive inventory showed that there
were an additional 3,600 miles of low standard roads, mostly primitive
two-track dirt roads that require a high clearance vehicle to
traverse--which were not included in the roads inventory used for the
1986 Plan. With the inclusion of the 3,600 miles of uninventoried
roads, the average Total Road Density for the Chequamegon Forest was
estimated at 3.5 mi/sq. mile of forest in 1986.
Total Road Density measures the total miles of all open or closed
roads per square mile of National Forest Land. This includes roads
under jurisdiction of the FS as well as those managed by the state,
county, and local governments, and other federal authorities.
Current access restrictions on the Chequamegon-Nicolet National
Forest (CNNF) are based on the 2004 Forest Plan which calls for a
target forest wide road density of 3.0 mi/sq mile of forest, a
reduction from the forest wide CNNF road density of 3.9 mi/sq mile of
forest in the 1986 Forest Plan. In general, the road closures have been
focused on non-motorized areas, low road density areas, wolf pack
areas, and areas where roads were causing negative environmental
impacts.
In November 2004 the USFS released its final rule for Motorized
Recreation in National Forest and Grasslands which began limiting
access for recreational motor vehicles including Off Highway Vehicles,
(OHVs), all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), off-highway motorcycles (OHMs) and
off-road vehicles (ORVs), such as 4-by-4 trucks or Jeeps. In 2008 the
``Travel Management Rule'' began a more intensive push to further
reduce recreational motorized vehicle use access to national forest
lands.
For the last three decades or more, the USFS has been consistently
underfunded to meet its needs for Capital Improvements, Maintenance,
and Roads (CMRD). The Forest Service estimates the current road
maintenance backlog at $5.3 billion. One significant budget decrease
came during the 2013 ``Sequester'' which was supposed to be a 2.5%
decrease across the board for all discretionary spending programs.
Instead, it wound up being a 13% budget cut in the CMRD by the Obama
administration from which the USFS has still not recovered. With flat
or declining road budgets, the FS adopted a new transportation policy
(Roads Analysis) with the objective of reducing the number of roads
needing costly repair and maintenance. Beginning in 2000, the Roads
Analysis is required for all project level management decisions
including all forest wide analysis of higher standard roads.
As part of the development of a ``Roads Analysis'' process,
improved technology has led to the development of more accurate
estimates of total road densities. The current average road density,
for instance, in the Chequamegon National Forest is 3.1 mi/sq mi and
the Nicolet has a total road density of 4.9 mi/sq mi of road. To
achieve the total road density target of 3.0 mi/sq mi of road on both
forests, another 2% and 39% respectively will have to be decommissioned
on the CNNF, which according to the final EIS will require a
significant amount of time and funding to accomplish.
The final EIS for the CNNF Forest Plan states that ``Achieving the
road density upper limits set for the forests will require targeted
road closures and obliterations to gradually reduce the number of roads
traveled by public motorized vehicles. Road closures will affect only
Forest Service roads; the Forest Service cannot close roads managed and
maintained by State, County, or local authorities. Road closures and
obliterations will focus on lower standard roads (Maintenance Level 2).
The higher standard roads that comprise much of the forest road network
will be largely unaffected by road closures, and many will remain open
to licensed street vehicles. Recreationalists who enjoy driving lower
standard roads will have fewer opportunities over time.''

As a representative of the forest industry and an avid sportsman, I
am very concerned about recent and ongoing closures on Maintenance
Level 2 roads and the movement toward the more expensive Maintenance
Level 3 Roads, Maintenance Level 2 and 3 roads are described as
follows:

Maintenance Level 2: Applies to infrequently traveled, primitive
roads that are drivable by high clearance vehicles or used for
transporting timber. These roads are usually too rugged for passenger
car traffic.

Maintenance Level 3: Assigned to roads that are drivable by
standard passenger cars. Most are single land roads designed for low-
speed travel. Part or all of the roads may be surfaced with native or
processed material.

Given the lower value of wood in the Lake States as compared to
other parts of the county, Level 2 roads provide critical, economically
feasible access to commercial timber and these are precisely the low
maintenance roads which provide access for hunting and fishing
activities. GLTPA would strongly question any move to require all
logging roads to be built to Maintenance Level 3 standards. Doing so
will drive up logging costs, reducing the competitiveness of the Lake
States timber industry.
Higher standard roads could also lead to additional acres being
restricted for access by recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles
operators are not necessarily known for being easy on road surfaces.
The higher the value of the road surface such as that provided with the
use of crushed gravel, the higher the maintenance costs. In addition,
increased road costs could also make it easier to justify bypassing
timber that may not have the highest on the stump value, but still
needed for local markets and require management to maintain forest
health as opposed to dropping them from consideration for treatment.
In examination of the forest plan what appears to be happening, is
that Congress's failure to fully fund the USFS roads program has given
the agency cause to have to place restrictions on roads having a
significant investment in them to be used for future management
activities. However, a person must question why there is so much time
and money being spent to block the use of Level 2 roads built by the
forest industry for logging operations, which in turn provides
recreational opportunities until they are no longer passible because of
natural regeneration.
The reality is that Congress's lack of funding is not only delaying
needed forest management, but misdirecting scarce resources by forcing
the FS to spend money closing roads when it should be expanding access
for taxpayers. Recreation and healthy forests go hand in hand. For
these to occur, it is essential that access roads on the landscape
currently in place be made available for use by taxpayers.
Increased timber harvest focusing on economically viable timber
sales that meet the needs of local industry, can generate revenue which
could be used to repair existing roads while benefiting wildlife
habitat and recreation. In the short to medium term, however, Congress
should prioritize funding used for road maintenance and repair to
provide not only access to timber, but provide hunters, anglers,
outdoor recreationists, and first responders like firefighters and
search and rescue greater access as well.
Thank you for your leadership on forestry issues, and I'd be happy
to take any questions.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Schienebeck.
I will now recognize Mr. Luke Hilgemann, Executive Director
for the International Order of Theodore Roosevelt, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hilgemann.

STATEMENT OF LUKE HILGEMANN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL
ORDER OF T. ROOSEVELT, MADISON, WISCONSIN

Mr. Hilgemann. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Federal Lands. It
is my pleasure to be here with you today to testify on the
importance of Federal land access for hunters and anglers. My
name is Luke Hilgemann, and I am the Executive Director of the
International Order of T. Roosevelt. Our organization has been
in existence since 1975, and we are dedicated to upholding
President Theodore Roosevelt's conservation legacy and
advocating for the preservation of our sporting heritage.
Over the past several decades, the decline in hunter
numbers is a troubling trend that cannot be ignored. In just
the last 5 years alone here in America, we have seen our hunter
numbers decline by nearly 2 million. One of the top reasons
cited by hunters for leaving the sport is the lack of access to
public lands.
Why does it matter if we lose hunters? It matters because
hunters are the lifeblood of funding for conservation. The
North American Model of Conservation, recognized worldwide for
its success in restoring and maintaining healthy populations of
game and non-game animals, relies on the financial
contributions of hunters, anglers, trappers, and recreational
shooters. According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, in
2022 alone, hunting, fishing, and other wildlife-related
activities generated $394 billion in combined economic
activity. It is a user-pay system, and it is the hunters,
anglers, and trappers who willingly invest in licenses, stamps,
and conservation efforts, benefiting us all.
However, the threats to our sports extend beyond access.
Predator management is a critical issue, and none more so than
right here in Wisconsin. A study conducted in Wisconsin
revealed that wolves killed more deer than hunters in five
northern counties, highlighting the need for effective predator
control measures. Without proper management, our game species
suffer, and our hunting traditions will be jeopardized. After
all, if there is no game to pursue on our public lands, access
will no longer be the issue. We applaud Chairman Tiffany and
his colleagues for passing the Trust the Science Act, a
bipartisan legislative proposal that will return management of
the recovered wolf populations to the states. And we now call
on Senator Baldwin to take up that bill and pass it through the
U.S. Senate as quickly as possible.
Another concerning issue is the lead bullet and hook ban
that was recently passed by the Biden administration. While
environmental concerns are important, expanding the ban on lead
bullets and fishing equipment will only make the problem worse
when it comes to hunter and angler numbers. Lead ammunition and
hooks have been affordable and widely accessible, enabling
participation in our sports. We applaud Representative Wittman
and his colleagues in the House of Representatives for passing
H.R. 615.
To address these challenges, though, and threats to our
outdoor traditions, it is imperative that we prioritize the
preservation and enhancement of public lands. IOTR has
developed some suggested policy benchmarks for public land
access for the Subcommittee to consider. These include:
1. Responsible Management. Encouraging coordination between
Federal agencies, state wildlife agencies, and local
stakeholders to ensure that access decisions are made with the
input of those who rely on these lands for hunting and fishing.
Limiting onerous land designations that often prohibit access
for these recreational opportunities is critically important.
2. Balanced Conservation. Recognizing that responsible
hunting and fishing are integral components of effective
wildlife management and conservation.
3. Streamlined Permitting. Simplifying the permitting
process for hunting and fishing activities on Federal lands,
reducing bureaucratic hurdles, and ensuring timely access for
the use of these lands by sportsmen and women.
4. Infrastructure Investment. Allocating resources to
improve and maintain access to roads, trails, and facilities on
Federal lands, ensuring that everyone that enjoys the outdoors
has an opportunity to get there and use these vital resources.
5. Education and Outreach. Promoting public awareness and
education about the importance of hunting and fishing as
conservation tools.

Taking these steps will ensure continued access and
availability for hunters, anglers, and other recreational users
to enjoy our greatest outdoor resources.
In conclusion, Chairman Tiffany and members of the
Subcommittee, the threats to our sports are real and growing.
The decline in hunter numbers, the need for effective predator
management, and the potential impacts of lead bullet bans are
all significant challenges that must be addressed. By
prioritizing the needs of hunters and anglers, you can ensure
the preservation of our natural resources, support local
economies, and uphold the legacy of one of our nation's
greatest conservationists, President Theodore Roosevelt.
Thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Hilgemann follows:]
Prepared Statement of Luke Hilgemann, Executive Director, International
Order of T. Roosevelt

Chairman Tiffany and distinguished members of the Subcommittee on
Federal Lands,
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the critical
issue of federal public lands access for hunters and anglers. My name
is Luke Hilgemann, and I am the Executive Director of the International
Order of T. Roosevelt (IOTR). Our organization is dedicated to
upholding President Theodore Roosevelt's conservation legacy and
advocating for the preservation of our sporting heritage.
Over the past several decades, the decline in hunter numbers is a
troubling trend that cannot be ignored. In the last five years alone,
American hunter numbers have decreased by 2 million. One of the top
reasons cited by hunters for leaving the sport is the lack of access to
public lands (Source: NSSF study 2021).
Why does it matter if we lose hunters? It matters because hunters
are the lifeblood of funding for conservation. The North American Model
of Conservation, lauded worldwide for its success in restoring and
maintaining healthy populations of game and non-game animals, relies on
the financial contributions of hunters, anglers, trappers, and
recreational shooters. According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
in 2022 hunting, fishing, and other wildlife-related activities
generated $394 billion in combined economic activity--securing public
lands, habitat restoration, and the entire suite of wildlife
conservation work across North America. (Source: 2022 FHWAR). It is a
user-pay system, and it is the hunters, anglers, and trappers who
willingly invest in licenses, stamps, and conservation efforts,
benefiting us all.
However, the threats to our sports extend beyond access. Predator
management is a critical issue that must be addressed to maintain
healthy game populations and sustain hunting opportunities on federal
public lands. A study conducted in Wisconsin revealed that wolves
killed more deer than hunters in five northern counties, highlighting
the need for effective predator control measures (Source: Deer and Deer
Hunting 2019). Without proper management, our game species will suffer,
and our hunting traditions will be jeopardized. After all, if there is
no game to pursue on our public lands, access will no longer be the
issue. We applaud the efforts of Subcommittee Chairman Tiffany and his
colleagues for passing the Trust the Science Act, H.R. 764 bipartisan
legislation that will return management of the recovered wolf
populations to the states.
Another concerning issue is the lead bullet and hook ban recently
passed by President Biden's administration. While environmental
concerns are important, expanding the ban on lead bullets and fishing
equipment will only exacerbate the decline in hunters and anglers. Lead
ammunition has been affordable and widely accessible, enabling
participation in our sports. Increasing costs and limiting options for
ammunition will only discourage participation and hinder access to
public lands. We applaud Rep.Wittman and his colleagues in the House of
Representatives for passing H.R. 615--the Protecting Access for Hunters
and Anglers Act which establishes a process for evaluating the use of
lead ammo and fishing equipment on federal public lands that allows for
public input rather than blanket policies that deny public input.

To address these challenges and threats to our outdoor traditions,
it is imperative that we prioritize the preservation and enhancement of
public lands access for hunters, anglers, and other wildlife-related
activities. IOTR has developed some suggested policy benchmarks for
public land access for the Subcommittee to consider. These include:

1. Responsible Management: Encouraging coordination between federal
agencies, state wildlife agencies, and local stakeholders to ensure
that access decisions are made with the input of those who rely on
these lands for hunting and fishing. Limit onerous land designations
that often prohibit access for hunting, fishing, and other outdoor
pursuits without clear justification.

2. Balanced Conservation: Recognizing that responsible hunting and
fishing are integral components of effective wildlife management and
conservation. By maintaining healthy populations of game species, we
can also protect the habitats and ecosystems they depend on.

3. Streamlined Permitting: Simplifying the permitting process for
hunting and fishing activities on federal lands, reducing bureaucratic
hurdles, and ensuring timely access for sportsmen and women.

4. Infrastructure Investment: Allocating resources to improve and
maintain access roads, trails, and facilities on federal lands,
ensuring that hunters and anglers can reach their desired destinations
safely and efficiently.

5. Education and Outreach: Promoting public awareness and education
about the importance of hunting and fishing as conservation tools,
fostering a sense of stewardship among current and future generations.

Taking these steps will ensure continued access and availability
for hunters, anglers, and other recreational users to enjoy our
greatest outdoor resources.

In conclusion, Chairman Tiffany and members of the Subcommittee,
the threats to our sports are real and growing. The decline in hunter
numbers, the need for effective predator management, and the potential
impacts of lead bullet bans are all significant challenges that must be
addressed. By prioritizing the needs of hunters and anglers, you can
ensure the preservation of our natural resources, support local
economies, and uphold the legacy of one of our nation's greatest
conservationists, President Theodore Roosevelt.

Thank you for your attention, and I am ready to answer any
questions you may have.

References:

1.  Deer and Deer Hunting Magazine: ``More Wolves Killed by Deer than
hunters.'' December 2019.

2.  ``Making Public Lands Public: Access to Our Nation's Public
Lands.'' 2023.

3.  2022 National Survey on Fishing, Hunting and Wildlife Associated
Recreation. U.S. Dept of Interior--U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

4.  Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. ``Predation by Wolves on
White-tailed Deer in Wisconsin: A Review and Meta-Analysis.'' 2017.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Hilgemann.
Next, I would like to introduce Mr. Tom Dougherty,
President of the Voyageur Country Houseboat Operators
Association in International Falls, Minnesota. Good to have you
down here in Hayward, Wisconsin, Mr. Dougherty. You have 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF TOM DOUGHERTY, PRESIDENT, VOYAGEUR COUNTRY
HOUSEBOAT OPERATORS ASSOCIATION, INTERNATIONAL FALLS, MINNESOTA

Mr. Dougherty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Committee, for this opportunity to testify on this very
important matter involving water access and opportunities to
our outdoor recreation within Voyageurs National Park, a water-
based national park in northern Minnesota.
I am Tom Dougherty, President of the Voyageur Country
Houseboat Operators Association, representing area houseboat
rental operations, including my family's business, Rainy Lake
Houseboats. I also serve on the Board of Directors for the
Voyageur Country ATV Club.
I am here today to speak on behalf of stakeholders
surrounding Voyageurs gateway communities, advocating for local
outfitting operators, fishing guides, resort owners, houseboat
operators, local government, visitors, and locals alike. We are
faced with the unnecessary barriers when accessing the vast
waterways in Voyageurs.
When Voyageurs was formed nearly 50 years ago, the park was
intended to complement the neighboring Boundary Waters Canoe
Area Wilderness, allowing Voyageurs to boast a broader range of
outdoor recreational opportunities that are prohibited in
BWCAW. The newly formed national park would allow the use of
motorized crafts, boats of all sizes, snowmobiles, and other
forms of mechanized travel, a unique, best-of-both-worlds
scenario for the region.
Fast forward 50 years. The National Park Service has
enforced new water rights restrictions on more than 50 percent
of the park. We now fight for easy access to more than 218,000
acres of Voyageurs National Park, including one-third of it
which is underwater. Unrestricted water access is critical to
our livelihood, local tourism economy, and necessary for an
inclusive visitor experience.
The state of Minnesota contends that it did not cede
jurisdiction to the waters of Voyageurs National Park, and now
the Federal over-reach into the state-managed waters has led to
conflicts and challenges for local stakeholders and visitors
alike.
According to State Statute 84B.061, ``none of the navigable
waters in Voyageurs National Park and the lands under them have
been donated to the United States.'' The lack of cooperation
and support from the NPS has strange relationships among
Federal and state authorities and stakeholders.
The NPS now deems state-regulated waterways within park
parameters an extension of Federal land once they are frozen
over. The new policies have restricted traditional winter
activities, such as snowmobiling and ATV use, which previously
contributed to the local tourism economy and outdoor
recreation.
There once was 100 miles of snowmobile trails on the
Kabetogama peninsula. Today, there are only 18 miles of land
trails.
Recently, a truck portage through Mukooda Lake was
restricted to permit-only access, making it no longer
accessible by automobile and ATV. The route provided a safe
passage around dangerous ice conditions from Crane Lake,
Mukooda, Sand Point, and Namakan Lake, ending in Ontario,
Canada.
The public has long relied on access to the frozen lake
surfaces for winter recreational activities. Access by all
types of vehicles is crucial to providing opportunities,
especially those with disabilities.
The economic impact on local operators has been
detrimental, with reduced access limiting the scope of their
operations and ultimately restricting access to the public.
Increased Federal law enforcement presence has resulted in
a less welcoming environment for park visitors.
The NPS has introduced new Commercial Use Authorization
guidelines that impose additional regulatory burdens on local
businesses who are not concessionaires. These new regulations
threaten to undermine local operators and the area's tourism
economy. The local operators have been working aggressively to
obtain CUAs since December 2023. As of the 2024 Fishing Opener,
some of our CUAs are still pending approval.
The proposed CUAs will limit access by hindering the
ability of businesses to operate effectively within Voyageurs
as they have in the past. The visitor experience is compromised
as fewer services and recreational opportunities are available,
especially for those with disabilities. The local tourism and
recreation economy is at risk due to the restrictive policies.
In conclusion, we urge Congress to recognize the challenges
posed by the current management policies of the NPS by taking
decisive action and considering the following solutions:
Introduce an amendment to CFR 36 to clarify and reaffirm
state water rights by eliminating the need for restrictive CUAs
and water-based constraints.
A Federal audit surrounding decision-making about
Voyageurs' water right jurisdiction and CUA guidelines.
The state of Minnesota's jurisdiction over the park's
waters should be reaffirmed to prevent Federal over-reach and
support public access to all. We want to offer full access to
our nation's uniquely water-based Voyageurs National Park.
We sincerely thank the members of this Committee for
considering our request.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Dougherty follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tom Dougherty, President, Voyageur Country
Houseboat Operators Association

INTRODUCTION

Thank you Mr. Chairman and members of the committee for the
opportunity to testify on this very important matter of improving water
access and opportunities for outdoor recreation within Voyageurs
National Park--a water-based park in northern Minnesota.
I am Tom Dougherty, president of Voyageur Country Houseboat
Operators Association, representing area houseboat rental operators,
including my family's business--Rainy Lake Houseboats. I also serve on
the board of directors for Voyageur Country ATV Club.
I am here today to speak on behalf of stakeholders surrounding
Voyageurs gateway communities--advocating for local outfitting
operators, fishing guide services, resort owners, houseboat operators,
local government, visitors and locals alike. We are faced with
unnecessary barriers when accessing the vast waterways.
When Voyageurs National Park was formed nearly 50 years ago, the
park was intended to complement neighboring Boundary Waters Canoe Area
Wilderness (BWCAW), allowing Voyageurs to boast broader outdoor
recreational opportunities that are prohibited in BWCAW. The newly-
formed National Park would allow the use of motorized crafts (boats of
all sizes, snowmobiles, and other forms of mechanized travel, etc.)--a
unique, best of both world's scenario for the region.
Fast forward 50 years, the National Park Service (NPS) has enforced
new water rights restrictions around more than 50% of the park. We now
fight for easy access to more than 218,000 acres of Voyageurs National
Park, including 1/3 of that acreage which is water. Unrestricted water
access is critical to our livelihood, local tourism economy, and
necessary for an inclusive visitor experience.

BACKGROUND

I. Minnesota Not Ceding Jurisdiction

The state of Minnesota contends that it did not cede the waters of
Voyageurs National Park, and now federal overreach into state-managed
waters has led to conflicts and challenges for local stakeholder and
visitors alike.

A.  According to state statute 84B.061, ``none of the navigable
waters within Voyageurs National Park and the lands under
them have been donated to the United States.''

B.  The lack of cooperation and support from the NPS has strained the
relationship among federal and state authorities, and local
stakeholders.

(See Exhibit A)

II. Frozen Lake Surface Plan

The NPS now deems state-regulated waterways within park parameters
an extension of federal land once frozen over.

New policies have restricted traditional winter activities such as
snowmobiling, which previously contributed to the local tourism and
outdoor recreation economy.

A.  There once was 100 miles of snowmobile trails on Kabetogama
peninsula. Today there are only 18 miles of land trails.

B.  Recently, the truck portage through Mukooda Lake was restricted
to permit-only access making it no longer accessible by
automobile and ATV. The route provided a safe passage
around dangerous ice conditions from Crane Lake, Mukooda,
Sand Point, and Namakan lakes, ending in Ontario, Canada.

C.  The public has long relied on access to the frozen lake surfaces
for winter recreational activities. Access by all types of
vehicles is crucial to providing opportunities, especially
those with disabilities.

D.  The economic impact on local operators has been detrimental, with
reduced access limiting the scope of their operations and
ultimately restricting access to the public.

E.  Increased federal law enforcement presence has resulted in a less
welcoming environment for park visitors.

(See Exhibit B)

III. New Commercial Use Authorization (CUA)

The NPS has proposed new CUA guidelines that impose additional
regulatory burdens on local businesses who are not concessionaires.
These new regulations threaten to undermine local operators and the
area's tourism economy.

A.  Local operators have been working aggressively to obtain CUAs
since December 2023. As of the 2024 Minnesota Fishing
Opener, some of our CUAs are still under approval.

B.  The proposed CUAs will limit public access by hindering the
ability of businesses to operate effectively within
Voyageurs.

C.  The visitor experience is compromised as fewer services and
recreational opportunities are available, especially for
those with disabilities.

D.  The local tourism and recreation economy is at risk due to
restrictive policies.

(See Exhibits C + D)

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we urge Congress to recognize the challenges posed
by the current management practices of the NPS by taking decisive
action and considering the following solutions.

A.  Introduce an Amendment to CFR 36 to clarify and reaffirm state
water rights by eliminating the need for restrictive CUA's
and water-based constraints.

B.  A federal audit surrounding decision-making about Voyageurs'
water right jurisdiction and CUA guidelines.

The state of Minnesota's jurisdiction over the park's waters should
be reaffirmed to prevent federal overreach and support public access to
all. We want to offer full access to our nation's uniquely water-based
Voyageurs National Park to all people.

We sincerely thank the members of this committee for considering
our request.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Dougherty.
Finally, I would like to recognize Mr. Duane Taylor,
Director of Safe and Responsible Use Programs for the
Motorcycle Industry Council, the Specialty Vehicle Institute of
America, and Recreational Off-Highway Highway Vehicle
Association.
Mr. Taylor, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DUANE TAYLOR, DIRECTOR OF SAFE AND RESPONSIBLE USE
PROGRAMS, MOTORCYCLE INDUSTRY COUNCIL, SPECIALTY VEHICLE
INSTITUTE OF AMERICA, RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE
ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Taylor. Thank you. Chairman Tiffany and members of the
Subcommittee, on behalf MIC, SVIA, and ROHVA, together
referenced as the Associations, thank you for this opportunity
to provide testimony.
The Associations have a long-standing interest in the
protection of the values and natural resources found on Forest
Service lands. And to open, the Multiple Use Sustained Yield
Act is clear. It states, ``it is the policy of the Congress
that the national forests are established and shall be
administered for outdoor recreation, range, timber, watershed,
and wildlife and fish purposes.''
As a result, the Forest Service should implement its
multiple use mission by ensuring that any policies it develops,
including managing for climate resilience and wildfire
mitigation, integrate recreation.
There is no question recreation on Forest Service lands are
in high demand and result in significant economic impact to the
communities in which they are located. The Forest Service's
National Visitor Use Monitoring Survey results state national
forests average 150 million visits annually, that contribute
more than $11 billion to the economy.
As far as OHV recreation, the power sports industry,
motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, recreational off-highway
vehicles, sometimes referred to as side-by-sides, are a $47.7
billion-a-year industry in the United States, with a
significant number of these vehicles being utilized off-road.
The Forest Service continues pushing new proposed rules,
environmental impact statements, and other regulations in
accordance with its Climate Adaptation Plan, Wildfire Crisis
Strategy, and other plans and strategies. This concerns us, as
these strategies often ignore recreation, or worse yet,
establish that providing for recreation is adversarial to other
priorities.
The Climate Adaptation Plan states, ``Climate change will
affect the ability of the nation's forests and grasslands to
furnish important services to the public, including clean water
and air, carbon storage and uptake, timber and nontimber forest
products, productive grazing land, and recreation
opportunities. These benefits may be lost or altered due to
changes in wildfire, extreme events, and chronic stresses on
watersheds and ecosystems.''
It is important to note that recreation and other multiple
uses are referred to as ``benefits.'' This is not accurate.
Again, the Multiple Use Sustained Yield Act established
national forests to provide for recreation and other multiple
uses.
We assert that recreation can help the Forest Service
become more resilient and able to respond to climate change and
prepare for and mitigate wildfires. We encourage the Forest
Service to follow the lead of the FHWA, which has already
recognized the role that trails can play in helping to manage
for resilience. We refer the Forest Service and other land
management agencies to FHWA's 2023 Trails as Resilient
Infrastructure guidebook. This guide demonstrates how trails
are part of resilient transportation infrastructure, how trails
can be planned and designed to be resilient and sustainable,
and how trails have a role in emergency planning and response.
Trails as Resilient Infrastructure recognizes that trails,
and by extension recreation, can, with proper research, benefit
resilience and provide tools to respond to weather and fire
events and to mitigate impacts from climate change. We submit
that this is where the Forest Service should start any
rulemaking, policy, or guidance.
Trails as Resilient Infrastructure also includes a case
study on the utility of OHV trails during a natural disaster.
It says, ``In 2011, Tropical Storm Irene caused floods that
damaged roadway bridges throughout Vermont. Residents used ATVs
on trails to move people and supplies to and from isolated
communities. Following the initial response effort, local
officials decided to create trails more accommodating of ATV
use to support future disaster response needs.''
I would also like to note that Trails as Resilient
Infrastructure highlights the Prison Hill Recreation Area in
Carson City, Nevada. At the time, I served as Executive
Director of the National Off-Highway Vehicle Conservation
Council, which led efforts to improve recreational
opportunities at Prison Hill while mitigating impacts from
climate change and wildfires.
Trails as Resilient Infrastructure notes, ``A 100-year rain
event in November 2021 tested the trails' design, with
successful results. Culverts and trail grading improvements
allowed the trail tread to shed water rather than convey it and
contribute to erosion. Trails have been used to respond to
wildland fires, including an incident where water was air-
dropped by helicopter directly onto a trail. The trail design
and infrastructure performed well under the heavy load of
water. Trails have also been used for search and rescue along
the Carson River.''
These are exactly the type of combined responses that
should be inherent in Forest Service's decision-making
processes.
Finally, the Associations would like to call attention to
volunteers helping in any number of ways with resilience and
recovery. We highlight the post-wildfire OHV Recovery Alliance,
a national organization founded to protect and restore
sustainable OHV recreation from the devastating effects of
intense wildfires and other natural disasters. Any Forest
Service rulemakings and strategies should include continued
opportunities for volunteers to help the USFS meet resilience
and recovery goals.
Thank you for your consideration.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]
Prepared Statement of Duane Taylor, Director, Safe and Responsible
Use Programs

Chairman Tiffany and Members of the Subcommittee--On behalf of the
Motorcycle Industry Council \1\ (MIC), Specialty Vehicle Institute of
America \2\ (SVIA), and Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association
\3\ (ROHVA)--together referenced as the Associations, I appreciate the
opportunity to submit testimony relevant to Improving Access and
Opportunities for Hunting, Fishing, and Outdoor Recreation on America's
Federal Lands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC) is a not-for-profit,
national trade association representing several hundred manufacturers,
distributors, dealers and retailers of motorcycles, scooters,
motorcycle parts, accessories and related goods, and allied trades.
\2\ The Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA) is the
national not-for-profit trade association representing manufacturers,
dealers, and distributors of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) in the United
States. SVIA's primary goal is to promote safe and responsible use of
ATVs.
\3\ The Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) is a
national, not-for-profit trade association formed to promote the safe
and responsible use of recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs--
sometimes referred to as side-by-sides or UTVs) manufactured or
distributed in North America. ROHVA is also accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) to serve as the Standards
Developing Organization for ROVs. More information on the standard can
be found at https://rohva.org/ansi-standard/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Associations have a long-standing interest in the protection of
the values and natural resources found on public lands, including
Forest Service lands, and we regularly work with land managers to
provide recreation opportunities, sustain resources, and promote
cooperation between public land visitors. The Associations also
prioritize educating enthusiasts and the public about responsible off-
highway vehicle (OHV) recreation, including practicing Tread Lightly
principals, wearing appropriate safety gear, and avoiding the on-road
use of vehicles designed solely for off-highway use.

To open--The Multiple Use Sustained Yield Act is clear. It states
(emphasis added):

. . . it is the policy of the Congress that the national
forests are established and shall be administered for outdoor
recreation, range, timber, watershed, and wildlife and fish
purposes.

As a result, the Forest Service should implement its multiple use
mission by ensuring that any policies it develops including managing
for climate resilience and wildfire mitigation, integrate recreation
and find ways to utilize the conservation ethic inherent in
recreational activities to help the Forest Service meet its ecological,
social, and economic goals.

There is no question recreation on Forest Service lands are in high
demand and result in significant economic impact to the communities in
which they are located The Forest Service's National Visitor Use
Monitoring Survey Results state:

Outdoor recreation is the most popular activity supported by
America's public lands. National forests average 150 million
visits annually that contribute more than $11 billion to the
economy.

As for off-highway vehicle recreation--The powersports industry
(motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), and recreational off highway
vehicles (ROVs or side-by-sides)) are a $47.7 billion/year industry in
the United States with a significant number of the vehicles being
utilized off-road. This includes dual sport and adventure motorcycles
which are the quickest growing segment of motorcycle sales in the U.S.
As a result, the Associations strongly support ensuring sustainable
off-highway vehicle (OHV) recreation opportunities continue to be
available on our public lands including National Forests as
appropriate.

The Forest Service continues pushing new proposed rules,
Environmental Impact Statements, and other regulations in accordance
with its Climate Adaptation Plan, Wildfire Crisis Strategy and other
plans and strategies. This concerns us as these strategies often ignore
recreation, or worse yet, establish that providing for recreation is
adversarial to other priorities, which is simply not the case. Consider
this from the Climate Adaptation Plan (emphases added):

Climate change will affect the ability of the Nation's forests
and grasslands to furnish important services to the public,
including clean water and air, carbon storage and uptake,
timber and nontimber forest products, productive grazing land,
and recreation opportunities. These benefits may be lost or
altered due to changes in wildfire, extreme events, and chronic
stresses on watersheds and ecosystems.

It is important to note that recreation and other multiple uses are
referred to as ``benefits.'' This is just not accurate. Again, the
Multiple Use Sustained Yield Act established National Forests to
provide for recreation and other multiple uses.

We assert that recreation can help the Forest Service become more
resilient and able to respond to climate change and prepare for and
mitigate wildfires. We urge the Forest Service to develop strategies
that recognize recreation and other multiple uses are not distractions
that must be provided for in some de minimis way. Instead, any new
plans or proposed rules must carefully consider how recreation and
recreationists can be preserved as assets to managing for resilience.

We encourage the Forest Service to follow the lead of the Federal
Highway Administration which has already recognized the role that
trails can play in helping to manage for resilience. We refer the
Forest Service and other land management agencies to FHWA's 2023 Trails
as Resilient Infrastructure guidebook:

This guidebook (``the Guide'') demonstrates how trails are part
of resilient transportation infrastructure, how trails can be
planned and designed to be resilient and sustainable, and how
trails have a role in emergency planning and response. Trails
of all kinds are places for recreation, exercise, and time
outside. Trails are used for active transportation, whether for
daily commuting or errand running, and also during unique
events or emergencies. Trails are also a crucial tool for
making communities more resilient in the face of climate change
and other emergencies. This guidebook examines the ways in
which trails can be made more resilient and how trails can
serve as resilient infrastructure, providing information and
guidance in support of these goals.

Trails as Resilient Infrastructure recognizes that trails (and by
extension recreation) can, with proper research, benefit resilience,
provide tools to respond to weather and fire events, and can be
designed in such a way to mitigate impacts from climate change. We
submit that this is where the Forest Service should start any
rulemaking, policy, or guidance.

Trails as Resilient Infrastructure also includes a case study on
the utility of OHV trails during a natural disaster:

In 2011 Tropical Storm Irene caused floods that damaged roadway
bridges throughout Vermont. Residents used ATVs on trails to
move people and supplies to and from isolated communities.
Following the initial response effort, local officials decided
to create trails more accommodating of ATV use to support
future disaster response needs.

I would also like to note that Trails as Resilient Infrastructure
highlights the Prison Hill Recreation Area in Carson City, Nevada. At
the time, I served as Executive Director of the National Off-Highway
Vehicle Conservation Council which led efforts to improve Prison Hill.

The Prison Hill Recreation Area was conveyed to Carson City by the
Bureau of Land Management in 2015. NOHVCC was subsequently contracted
to improve recreational opportunities while mitigating impacts from
climate change and wildfires. NOHVCC's efforts were a huge success.
Trails as Resilient Infrastructure notes:

A 100-year rain event in November 2021 tested the trails'
design, with successful results. Culverts and trail grading
improvements allowed the trail tread to shed water rather than
convey it and contribute to erosion. Trails have been used to
respond to wildland fires, including an incident where water
was air dropped by helicopter directly onto a trail. The trail
design and infrastructure performed well under the heavy load
of water. Trails have also been used for search and rescue
along the Carson River.

These are exactly the type of combined responses (using a
recreational opportunity to address a broader resource issue) that
should be inherent in the Forest Service's decision-making processes.
Finally, the Associations would like to call attention to
recreationists who serve as volunteers helping in any number of ways
with resilience and recovery. For example, we highlight the Post
Wildfire OHV Recovery Alliance (PWORA), a national organization founded
to protect and restore sustainable OHV recreation from the devastating
effects of intense wildfires and other natural disasters. PWORA
collaborates with a diverse array of multi-interest strategic partners
to mobilize volunteers and deploy resources to mitigate post-disaster
impacts to recreation areas.
Any Forest Service rulemakings and strategies should include
continued opportunities for motorized volunteers to help the USFS meet
resilience and recovery goals.

Thank you for your consideration.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Taylor and all of you, thank you for your
testimony. We are now going to turn to the Members for a round
of questions, and first we are going to start out with my
neighbor, Representative Stauber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Chair Tiffany. I want to
thank you for inviting us to your beautiful district in Hayward
here, where one of the greatest KOAs is just down the roadway.
I spent many nights there.
The district I have the honor to represent just over the
border in Minnesota is very similar to the Chairman's, as it is
home to significant tracts of Federal land, including Voyageurs
National Park and borders the Chippewa and Superior National
Forests. Our great public lands are part of our way of life in
northern Minnesota. That is why it is so important to my
constituents that we are ensuring the greatest access possible.
And I can't help but note that like here in northwestern
Wisconsin, in northern Minnesota, our public lands often look
like a checkerboard. Our Federal lands are mixed in with state,
county, tribal, and private lands. It is impossible for any
land manager to manage their respective acreage without working
with those around them.
That is why I am such a big supporter of the Good Neighbor
Authority. It has been a successful program in Minnesota, and
we need to expand it to bring tribes and counties into the
fold, as well. I am proud to stand with my Republican
colleagues on this Committee in leading the charge past the
legislation that will do just that.
I want to welcome a great constituent of mine in
Minnesota's 8th Congressional District, Tom Dougherty, who
traveled here from International Falls, and as he states, he
operates a multi-generation, family-run houseboat rental
business on Rainy Lake, right along the U.S.-Canadian border.
Mr. Dougherty, I want to ask you to expand upon the
economic impact that the recreation economy has in northern
Minnesota, and can you share a little bit with the Subcommittee
about how important this is for the communities that surround
Rainy Lake?
Mr. Dougherty. Mr. Chair and Members, I would be happy to
talk about that. We have the gateway communities of Crane Lake,
Ash River, Kabetogama and International Falls. When the park
was first formed, we were promised an increase in visitors to
the area. We really haven't seen that, although the visitorship
is good and it is solid. But it is important to the area
community. The number of resorts that are there, it is
astronomical. Some of the resorts have been there for a number
of years, and then some new ones have popped up along the way.
As to put a number on it, I am not prepared to do that
today, but I certainly could submit something in the next few
days that could back up a number.
Mr. Stauber. That would be great. We would ask you to do
that. Over the past year, I know you and other operators within
Voyageurs National Park have been facing new policies that
basically make it harder and much more expensive to obtain
commercial use authorizations, or CUAs, from the National Park
Service to operate your business. Very briefly, can you share
how the CUA process has changed, and what was the historic
process to obtain a CUA, and what kind of hoops will you now
have to jump through to obtain a CUA under the National Park
Service's new policies?
Mr. Dougherty. Mr. Chairman and Members, the previous
process was rather simple. It was just basically one paragraph.
Now we have several pages of stipulations, essentially, is what
they are. For instance, for the houseboat operators, they
developed a list of stipulations due to a set of unfortunate
circumstances that arose in 2022, where we had an operator
actually get arrested, a disagreement with law enforcement, and
then out of that these stipulations were developed.
And the stipulations are broad. When you rent a houseboat,
for instance, there are a number of things that are on board
the boat and could possibly go wrong, at no fault of anybody,
and you need to go out and take care of those issues for your
customers. We basically spent the entire winter negotiating
with Superintendent DeGross who was accommodating. I think that
most of the recommendations for these stipulations and things
are coming from Region and possibly Washington.
Mr. Stauber. As we talk about the Winter Use Plan, do you
feel comfortable that it is going to increase access, or
restrict access, from your point of view, at this moment? And I
know it is not finalized.
Mr. Dougherty. Mr. Chairman and Members, the best example I
can use of the Frozen Lake Surface Plan would be Lake
Kabetogama, for instance. It is 27,000 acres in size. Right
now, you have access to all of it, with an ATV, a vehicle
providing that you can get around on the lake surface, there is
not too much snow or slush ice conditions.
They are going to take that and shrink it down
significantly. With one of the preferred plans, it will be less
than 800 acres would be available to take an ATV or a motor
vehicle to pull a fish house, to access your favorite fishing
area.
Mr. Stauber. And I suspect the locals will not support it,
and that I will be in that fight with you.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I now turn to Mr.
Collins, from Georgia, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I don't think you
had to tell these folks I was from Georgia. They probably know
I am not from around here. I have kind of a little bit of a
different accent.
I like to tell people, first of all, I am a freshman in
Congress. I spent over 30 years in the private sector. I am
second generation in the trucking industry. We started moving
over to road building products some 30-odd years ago, and I
actually started my career at the age of 12. My parents hauled
logs out of the woods. I tell people I have had pine sap and
resin in every nook and cranny of my body you can think of over
the years, working on those log trailers.
And I always take a look, when we come to these field
hearings, and I kind of ask myself, what is the problem, what
is the solution, and how do we ensure that that never happens
again? And I want to focus right now just on timber and on
forestry, since that was kind of my background growing up.
And if you take a look, we are just down the road from the
Lumberjack Championship arena of the world. The forestry
industry here in the state of Wisconsin produces 64,000 jobs,
$24 billion in annual revenue. You are the largest producer in
paper in the nation, and you are one of the top 10 timber
producers in the Federal national forestry system. And
Wisconsin continues to be responsible when it comes to forestry
products and producing, and you have added to the timber that
you cut out there with a net gain of 185 million cubic feet of
saw timber yearly. And just to put that in context, that is
enough to frame up over 139,000 homes a year.
So, with that in mind, I am going to start out with Mr.
Schienebeck. In my home state of Georgia, we have harvested
more timber than any other state, and the overall tree volume
in our forests has still increased every year since 1953. And
while that may seem pretty simple, here is the kicker. Many of
our forests in Georgia are private working forests with fuel
restrictions than what you have on Federal forest lands.
So, here is my question. What can we do to empower our
Western states to start managing their forests, many of which
are federally owned, more like what we do in the state of
Georgia?
Mr. Schienebeck. Well, I think the issue is over-regulation
and over-reach in the Western states. When I look at the
Western states, they pretty much destroyed the infrastructure
that they had. And I know when all the fires started there was
a lot of discussion about, oh, we need to manage more forests.
Well, they had that opportunity to manage those forests and got
rid of the infrastructure that was there. Now, what do you do
with the wood, once you have cut it?
And that is one of the things that we are afraid of that
could end up happening in the Lake States, if we keep seeing
more restrictions on business. I mean, we have lost a lot of
mills. Georgia is losing mills. Why is that? We are totally
under pressure of foreign ownership of our mills, which I see
is an issue, because even though we have the jobs and stuff
here, they are not loyal to the United States in their jobs and
in their forest management. They are obviously going to be
loyal to the home country, just like we would be.
But I think we really need to start looking at the
regulation, and we need to start going back to science for
forest management. I think that would be a big step in the
right direction.
Mr. Collins. Leading over into the pulp and paper industry
side of it, I know you have different levels for different type
of timber that you cut. Can you speak more, I was reading on
the Level 2 maintenance versus the Level 3 maintenance on these
roads that the timber industry is providing.
Mr. Schienebeck. Yes. So, Level 2 maintenance applies to
infrequently traveled, primitive roads that are drivable by
high-clearance vehicles, used basically for transportation of
timber. Those are usually too rugged for passenger cars. I
think we saw an example of that today.
Level 3 is assigned to roads that are drivable by standard
passenger cars. Most are single-lane roads designed for low-
speed travel. And part or all of the road may be surfaced with
native reprocessed material. We saw an example of that on the
field trip today too. The one road actually had crushed granite
for probably the first 100-150 yards, and then after that it
was a lot of native material. And actually for forest
management, you do not need a superhighway because you are not
going to be going back in there for probably 20 or 25 years, or
whatever the timber growth is.
Mr. Collins. Right. I appreciate that. Mr. Chairman, before
we finish up, too, we saw these roads. And the thing is, you
are talking about a timber industry which has very little
profit. And when you start making a timber company pay more to
have a Level 3 maintenance road instead of a Level 2, that is
going to take away from the profit to the point where they
can't make any money on it. And then on top of that you make
them go in there, and when they get through with it they are
having to barricade these roads. We just saw that this morning,
where no one has access to it. And it really does not make
sense.
And I think you hit the nail on the head when you first
said it. It is over-regulation from Federal Governments that
are out of control.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time, and I
yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, thank you, Mr. Collins. I would put out
this one little silver lining as I start my questioning, is
that we are fortunate here with Chequamegon-Nicolet that it is
probably the best managed in terms of timber management of the
national forests in America. Now Jenn, I am not going to let
you off the hook with that, but it is worth mentioning that the
Chequamegon-Nicolet is probably the best managed. Oftentimes,
we see the most harvest coming off from the forest here in the
Upper Great Lakes states, including the Chequamegon-Nicolet,
which is a good thing. And if you look back to 10 years ago, I
know when we were raising these issues when I was in the State
Legislature, we have gotten better since then on the national
forests.
So, that is a ray of sunshine that is going on, but to me,
the dividing line was in 1988, when they decided to go to a
preservationist mentality at the Federal level, rather than a
management mentality. And ever since then, we have seen the
decline in harvest that has gone on across the United States of
America. And we also have a very good graph. I don't think we
have it along with us. While we see this decline in harvest, we
see an upward climb on that same graph of the number of fires
and the amount of fire here in America, especially in the West.
There really is not a reason for that to be the case.
Senator Stafsholt, we really appreciate the tour that you
gave for us today. Could you kind of summarize what you showed
us today and the concerns that you have been raising, certainly
with my office, and over the last, what, 30 years that you have
been coming up here?
Mr. Stafsholt. Sure, and I appreciate you guys taking the
time to come on the tour so we could show you some real
examples. I think that is time well spent.
What I tried to do today was show you some recent logging
jobs that had concluded. In those jobs, we showed how the roads
had been improved, both with new culverts, large rocks to
prevent erosion, as well as gravel on top of the roads, and 3-
inch crushed rock on the roads, and then also the berm that was
put over the end of those roads once the logging job is
concluded.
We went to a couple of other sites that had been closed off
some time ago, and I think it is important to notice that we
talk about how we closed them off and some of them are deemed
foot travel only, but we looked at some of those that had grown
so shut that foot travel wasn't even possible. And I think
Henry here talked about it, as we keep these roads for future
harvest, we are going to have to bulldoze them right back out
like they were never even there. So, leaving those roads open
for access for the public maintains those roads better than it
does closing them down. That is kind of what we tried to show
you today.
Mr. Tiffany. We have heard from some people, as a
justification for doing this, that the roads get rutted up. If
you just allow public unfettered access you are going to end up
with roads that are all rutted up. You are going to see people
just tearing through the forest, tearing it up.
Was that your experience 20 to 30 years ago?
Mr. Stafsholt. Sure, that is a great question. I am just an
old farm kid, but we build these roads to hold 80,000-pound
logging trucks, so suggestions that a 5,000- or 6,000-pound
passenger vehicle is going to make them impassible and
extinguish them seems a little crazy to me. Are there some that
have mud puddles on them that we drive through? Absolutely. But
if you are talking about overall erosion and things of that
nature, they are built to withstand 18-wheeler log trucks. So,
over time, over the last 20 or 30 years, I have just seen a
continued reduction in the access for all members of the public
to use those roads.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Hilgemann, I was surprised to hear you say
that, and I want to make sure that we clarify this, there were
more deer taken by wolves in how many counties here in northern
Wisconsin than by hunters?
Mr. Hilgemann. Yes, that was a study that was done by a
partner organization of ours called Wisconsin Wolf Facts. And
they went in and looked at the number of deer that were
harvested in five northern counties in comparison to the
harvest by hunters. And what they found was, according to the
science, yes, five northern counties here in northern Wisconsin
had more deer harvested by wolves than by hunters for the first
time in our state's history, since hunting has been allowed.
Mr. Tiffany. So, with more predators, less access, what is
happening in northern Wisconsin to the hunter?
Mr. Hilgemann. The hunters are being pushed out. As a
hunter who spent a significant amount of time up here in the
North Woods, driving around on a lot of the roads that we just
talked about, we saw 10 times more predator tracks than we did
any other type of wildlife in forestlands that have been open
for hunting for decades. And what that is doing is it is
pushing hunters out. We are losing access, and my numbers
indicate it. We have less participation from hunters buying
licenses in the state of Wisconsin because we have an
uncontrolled predator population that is killing the
harvestable game that most hunters pursue.
Mr. Tiffany. I always enjoy when I read the Wisconsin
Outdoor News, you go back through the years and you look back
50, 60 years ago at the deer poles that were put out, and
people would have the picture of the deer hanging from their
deer poles. And inevitably you would see it was communities
here in northern Wisconsin that were in the subtitle, whether
it was Siren or Spring Brook or wherever it may be. And you no
longer see that happening. It has to have had a great economic
impact. Is that right?
Mr. Hilgemann. Without a doubt. And I think that is one of
the areas of study that our organization is going to be looking
a lot more into, is to figure out what has been the detriment
of property values here in the North Woods of Wisconsin, where
we see more For Sale signs up on hunting land that have been
held for generations in this state, that now, because of a lack
of deer to hunt, are being put on the market. We are losing a
generation of people that have passed on these traditions here
in this state, and it is a real detriment to our local economy.
And all you have to do is look around up here during the
winter months, when usually the bars, the restaurants, and the
hotels are busy, packed with hunters. That is just not
happening anymore.
Mr. Tiffany. If I may take the liberty, isn't there also an
environmental impact to this?
Mr. Hilgemann. Without a doubt.
Mr. Tiffany. Because people will say, ``OK, sure, it has an
economic impact. But this is benefiting the environment by
reducing the access, by having these predators on the
landscape. That while there may be an economic impact, it is
simply benefiting the environment.''
Mr. Hilgemann. Again, what you have to look at is the
number of animals that you don't see up here anymore. The
diversity of the ecosystem has gone down as a result of an
overpopulation of predators. I spent some time with Senator
Stafsholt, touring around Iron County, where it used to be one
of the biggest populations of hunters in the state of
Wisconsin. This year they harvested and registered 330 deer in
Iron County, total, 330 deer.
So, you go from a population that used to be in the
thousands now down to 330, clearly that is going to have an
environmental impact. And worse yet, what people in the
southern part of the state don't realize is that those animals,
those predators, are starting to move further south. And that
is one of the biggest problems we have with our wolf-counting
operation here, or statistics and science here in Wisconsin, is
we don't count wolves that move into the southern part of the
state. It is not even a consideration.
Mr. Tiffany. If I may, I am going to continue with a couple
more minutes. I am going to take another round of questioning,
and I am going to kick it off here.
Senator Stafsholt, aren't we actually, by reducing access,
you have a lot of different people that utilize the forest,
right, I mean, for a variety of purposes. Are we starting to
push those people together in terms of the user groups, where
sometimes you will have conflicts?
Mr. Stafsholt. Sure. As representatives of the public, when
we have a public asset like our national forests, or our public
lands, I think it is our responsibility to try to reduce user
conflict as much as possible. We looked at a lot of roads
today. I think your average bow hunter for deer would just as
soon drive in off a main fire lane and park in there and find a
deer stand. He is being forced back out to the main fire lane.
I spent a lot of time at Clam Lake, Wisconsin. There are
some local ladies up there that like to go out and pick the
raspberries when they are in season, and they tell me the best
spot to do that is at the end of a dead-end road where the log
landing was because it is open, there are no trees over the top
of it, and that is where the best crop is. And you are forcing
them out to the main fire lanes too.
Bear hunters are forced out to the main fire lanes. They
would just as soon have their hunting locations not out on the
main road.
Basically, we take all these groups, and again, back in the
day when we had a high deer population we had a ton of people
up here deer hunting during the 9-day gun deer season. We had
to have all those roads to kind of get people to be able to
spread out. It is not such an issue now anymore because we have
lost a whole ton of hunters because we don't have the deer
population.
But we literally force all of the user groups onto the main
fire lanes, and that increases user conflict.
Mr. Tiffany. With the advent of so many predators,
including wolves, hasn't that also reduced the number of game
animals? I hear anecdotally from hunters, you see far fewer
snowshoe hares than you used to, as well as grouse hunters are
starting to now become very concerned about bringing their dogs
to northern Wisconsin, which if you go right over to Park
Falls, as you well know, rough grouse capital of the world,
where some grouse hunters will no longer come to northern
Wisconsin because of the number of wolves. Is that accurate?
Mr. Stafsholt. Yes. In my time at Clam Lake, like I said, I
have grown up there. We spent all of our family recreation
time. I remember back in the day when there were lots and lots
of groups of bird hunters that would come from Kentucky,
Georgia, Alabama, the Carolinas, Tennessee. They would come up
for a couple, 3 weeks at a time and bird hunt. And all of those
guys, they are not used to dealing with wolves down home, so
they are in fear, and they don't come anymore. That, combined,
I think, with some of the access issues.
There used to be a big group that used to camp out on Fire
Lane 182, that we went by today and we didn't point that out.
But they used to pull off into a clearing that was part of the
old E.L.F. site, and they would set up camp there. And because
they would park off the road for safety they were told they
couldn't park in there. So, that whole group doesn't come here
anymore. I actually found them. They are over by Gordon, on
County Line.
Mr. Tiffany. That is really taking us way back, when you
bring back the E.L.F. site.
Mr. Stafsholt. I didn't suggest to bring back the E.L.F.
site.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. For sure.
Mr. Taylor, are we meeting the multi-use mandate at this
point? Is the Federal Government meeting the multiple use
mandate?
Mr. Taylor. That, to me, is an interesting question. It is
easy to say no, but what I would like to highlight is I have
had the opportunity to work with a lot of great land management
folks in the Forest Service, BLM, and we are basically ending
up with silos. We have some recreation staff who are firmly
committed to recreation goals, and who really want to see
opportunities for OHV and other recreational access occur on
their lands. But then you have other staff who are not focused
on recreation, who are focused on wildfire or climate
resilience, or those sorts of things. And they do not seem to
all have the same ideas.
I think what we really need to ensure we have our multiple
use mandate met is to get everybody on the same page. And there
are ways to provide for recreation that can meet resiliency
goals, that can help us fight wildfires, and that can make the
forests more sustainable and more healthy in the future. And if
we do that we can absolutely meet our multiple use goals.
Mr. Tiffany. Some people view this just as recreation as a
use and do not say that there is a benefit. Talk a little bit
about that, those two things, use versus benefit.
Mr. Taylor. Sure. To some extent, of course, it is a use,
but there are all these myriad benefits that aren't sort of
readily apparent. Most of us who love the outdoors love it
because we have a chance to get out there. You have heard most
of the panelists today talk about their personal experience
getting outside and seeing something. Well, if we lock up lands
and eliminate recreation or other ways to get out there, we are
not going to be growing future stewards of our public land. We
need to make sure that young people get out there and see it.
And by the way, young people get a bad rap a lot of times
from gray-haired people like me. But I find that when we have
young people in the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land
Management, other land management agencies, they want to go on
an ATV ride one day, they want to fish the next day, they want
to hike the next day, they want to do it all. So, if we give
them room to say, hey, let's not only allow for this
recreational use, let's find a way to make sure this
recreational use helps us meet our resilience goals, I think we
could go a long way.
Mr. Tiffany. I yield and turn to the gentleman from
Minnesota, Mr. Stauber.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. Mr. Taylor, thanks for
those comments. I agree that the multiple use concept can be
met. But you have to remember, and I think you know this, there
are bureaucrats in these agencies that have been there for
years, and they do not want to change, and that is a
frustrating thing. And that is why I think these hearings are
very important.
Senator, I appreciate your tour today. And one of the
things that I find striking is these logging roads that went in
where they harvested the timber, they came out, they are really
nice logging roads. And then you see the berm built up. And, in
fact, one of them, you said that you normally could walk or
drive your 4-wheeler to a beautiful trout lake, which now they
are probably not going to walk 2\1/2\ miles in to the trout
lake. So, you have lost most of the trout fishing, you have
lost the ability for the ATV-ers to drive down there.
And it is frustrating because it is taxpayer money that
helped put that road in, and the loggers are not able to get
their last dumpage check until that road is checked off. And
Mr. Taylor brings up the youth. We all remember where we were
when we shot our first deer. We all remember specifically where
we shot our first grouse. I have six children. I want them to
enjoy this. And when you restrict access like this and you make
it more difficult, we are not growing those recreational
opportunities.
And it is not just here in Minnesota and northwest
Wisconsin. It is across the nation. And I think that leadership
at the Federal level really needs to understand that. I am not
so sure they do.
And I want to talk to you, Senator, about the economic
benefits. We talked about the ATVs and the hunters. I know that
in Minnesota the 2 weeks or 3 weekends, it used to be just busy
up in northern Minnesota. These businesses are hurting right
now because the young hunters aren't coming. The old ones
aren't seeing anything because of the wolf issue. Talk to me
more about the economic issue here in northwest Wisconsin.
Mr. Stafsholt. Yes, and we toured a couple of spots where I
know there used to be deer camps that would show up, and they
were third-generation deer camps. And a couple of things have
happened. Those camps aren't there anymore. They don't show up
anymore.
In the National Forest you can camp for up to, I believe,
21 days in one spot without moving, and people used to come up
for the deer season and they would do that. And two things have
kind of happened. One, the depletion of the population of deer
and the things that they are here to hunt. A lot of those folks
come from southern Wisconsin, maybe from the Twin Cities of
Minnesota, and they drive from areas that are farmland, that
have more deer, and they see deer every night at home. It is
hard to get that youth to come up here for 9 days in northern
Wisconsin where it is a little colder, and the snow is a little
deeper, and stay in a tent, and they do not see any deer.
The second thing that has happened is some of those camps
are in locations, and we pointed out some today, where they
used to be able to camp. They could pull their vehicle off the
road, and the policy has been if it is not on the Travel Use
Map that vehicle cannot be off the main fire line, so they have
to put their vehicles back out on the road. It is not safe for
them. It is not safe for the log trucks going back. Everybody
would be in a better spot if they could just pull off and camp
where they are going to camp.
Mr. Stauber. Grouse hunting is very important, all
recreation but grouse hunting, in particular. My mother is from
Glidden, Wisconsin. My mother is 89. She still grouse hunts. My
father is 91. They still grouse hunt. And they started down
near Glidden, and it is near and dear to their hearts.
When we talk about recreational opportunities, I can tell
you the three of us on this panel understand it. We have to get
more people educated on how awesome it is. For those of us who
represent rural America, I think it is important that we have
conversations like this.
In just my time left, I can't remember which panelist
mentioned this, but you talked about overburdened rules and
regulations. I have to tell you, under this Administration,
thus far, there has been $400 billion, and that is with a B,
$400 billion of additional rules and regulations on American
small businessmen and women, and I am looking at them right
here. I mean, that is challenging.
Mr. Dougherty, when you talk about an extra several
thousand dollars a year, just because of rules and regulations,
you add that up year after year, and then other resort owners,
that is a lot of money, and I think that some folks just don't
think it is worth it, and leave the resort business, et cetera.
We don't want that. We want to grow it. And we live in the
North Woods and Midwest for a reason. We want to be able to go
out our door and get on the best walleye lake or the best
grouse hunting within minutes of our home. That is why we live
here.
And I want to thank all the panelists for coming and
sharing your experience with us, and Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Mr. Collins, would you
like to take a few more minutes for questions?
Mr. Collins. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Actually, I
think I should get 8 minutes because I talk a lot slower, but
we are not going to argue too much about it.
Look, I want to pick up right where Congressman Stauber
left off, and that is focusing on these regulations. Mr.
Dougherty, I would love to hear just a little more, because I
read your testimony, about water rights, and about the frozen
lakes and how they are taking the state land.
Mr. Dougherty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members. Water
rights in Minnesota is an interesting topic. In our Minnesota
state constitution, all of the water in the state is held in
trust for the citizens of Minnesota. It is a non-negotiable
item. They can't sell it. They can't give it away. It is held
in trust for the citizens of Minnesota.
And there was a recent court case in Alaska. I believe it
was called Sturgeon v. U.S.A.. And there is an exemption now in
CFR 36 for the state of Alaska, where the state water rights
were reaffirmed. We feel that this solution that we are
offering is viable. It is a heavy lift, but it would certainly
solve a lot of our problems in Voyageurs, because it was never
intended that they would have jurisdiction over the waters in
Minnesota.
The DNR is behind us. On your packet of supporting
documents, there are comments from Shelly Patten, who is the
Northeast Director for the Minnesota DNR. We conferred with
Mrs. Patten on our testimony here, and she is all on board. The
state of Minnesota is on board with it. Senator Hauschild read
a resolution in the Senate just a couple of weeks ago, in the
Minnesota Senate. That resolution passed. And we are going to
keep moving with this, with the fact that we never relinquished
and ceded the jurisdiction to those rights.
Mr. Collins. I appreciate that. Mr. Hilgemann, I was
reading in yours, you were talking about streamlining the
permitting process on the other side, for hunting and fishing
activities on Federal lands. I didn't know if you wanted to
mention a little bit of that.
Mr. Hilgemann. Yes. When we look at nationwide, when you
look at the reasons why hunters are walking away from the
sport, complex regulations is usually one or two, depending on
your source. And for us, when it comes to those regulations, I
think the perfect illustration of this is here in Wisconsin.
When we started hunting deer we had a one-page regulation, one
page. It was one page. Now our regulation is 73 pages for
hunting deer, and it says on the bottom, in very small print,
that this is not the regulations in their entirety. You are
supposed to go to Statute Chapter 73 for the full book. It is
over 200 pages of regulation just to hunt deer in Wisconsin.
You feel like you need to walk into the woods with an attorney
to tell you what you can shoot, what you can't shoot, and when.
And that is the type of regulations that we have to get a grasp
on, because it is one of the leading drivers as to why the next
generation is not taking up this sport.
Mr. Collins. I appreciate that. Mr. Chairman, I know I
don't have much time left, but I want to tell you, I think you
all have been hitting the nail on the head in what we have been
seeing is the problem here. And I have had the opportunity to
go all over the country and do field hearings, whether it be on
mining issues, Mr. Stauber, whether it be on border issues,
whether it be on fisheries, just all over.
When we sit up here and we sit across from communities, and
we look at business owners and families, I see the concern and
I see the worry, not just for you, not just for your business,
but for the next generation. Because all small businesses are
generational, and they are family businesses.
And the problem is very easy. I think it has even been
mentioned here over and over. It is an over-reaching, out of
control Federal bureaucracy. And it has been that way as far as
I can remember. And I think it picked up steam during the Obama
administration. It is Federal agencies that feel like they
don't have to answer to anyone.
We have passed good legislation. Mr. Hilgemann, you are
exactly right. We passed tons of legislation. You notice we
don't have anybody from the other side of the aisle sitting
here today? We have legislation that has been sitting in the
Senate for 300-plus days that they won't take up. They don't
plan on taking it up. It is because there is a socialistic
movement out there. There is a socialistic movement to get
everybody on the same page to where you don't want to hunt, to
where you don't want to own guns, to where you just want to be
urbanized, where you want to live in apartments and everybody
be the same. Just earn enough money just to get by, and then
let the Federal Government take care of you from that point on.
Well, I have news for you. We can do things in Congress.
One of the big things we can do right now is pass
appropriations. If we do our appropriation bills and we do our
job in Congress, then we can rein in some of these crazy
regulations that are killing us out there, either you
personally or small businesses.
So, Congress needs to wake up and do their job. We need to
do that in the House. That is what we fail at doing.
Another thing, we have the REINS Act out there, Mr.
Chairman. That needs to be passed. I encourage you. Write these
down and make sure that the people who represent you understand
that, and call folks that don't.
And the last thing I think we need out there to rein in
these environmentalists that are putting up lawsuit after
lawsuit, we need some good tort reform in this country, to
where when these people bring up these crazy lawsuits, by God,
we can get money back from them when they lose these suits,
because all they do is flip over to the next one, just bottom
fishing.
The other good thing I want to tell you, Mr. Chairman, I
think there is change coming in this country, and it is coming
fast. Be here in November. With that, I am sorry I went over,
but I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I appreciate Mr.
Hilgemann's comments in regard to solutions. I would turn to
Mr. Schienebeck. Tell us what you think would be a few
solutions here to the concerns that we have brought up here
today in regard to access to Federal lands.
Mr. Schienebeck. That is a big question. There is a lot
that can be done, and regulation is something we have talked
about.
We have lost a lot of our pulp industry in the state of
Wisconsin. We have lost that because we are not competitive. We
are not competitive with transportation. We don't have rail. In
fact, we have lost more rail in this state than we have gained
for quite a few years, and that was a big part of it.
Meanwhile, I am seeing other countries build new pulp mills
and export that over here without any regulation attached to
it, no tariffs, whatever. I think that is one thing, but the
regulation, I will just give you one example. When Huber
Industries decided not to build in Minnesota, after 2\1/2\
years of trying to get that mill permitted to build, I called
the owner of Huber up and I asked him, ``Why not Wisconsin?''
And what he said to me was, ``We are going to go someplace
where we can get that done in much quicker time.'' And I did
talk to another gentleman about building a new pulp mill in the
state of Wisconsin and he said it would be $2 billion. And he
is a retired environmental engineer, after 35 years. But he
said, ``That's not the problem. The problem is that it would
take 10 years to get it permitted.'' 10 years.
When Huber left Minnesota, they went down south and they
got that thing done in 8 months, 8 months from start to finish
to get a brand new mill built. Why aren't we doing that here?
And we are lucky that we have the infrastructure we have, so
transportation is one thing that could be done. I think
removing some of the regulation. I mean, it is no secret right
now the Forest Service, I think they are about $5.3 billion
behind in their infrastructure. A lot of that started during
the sequester period, under the Obama administration, when the
sequester was supposed to see a cut of 2.6 percent across the
board. They actually saw a 13 percent cut across the board,
which has led to some of what we are seeing today with these
roads.
But, ultimately, I don't think we need to be maintaining a
lot of these Class 1 and Class 2 roads. I don't know why they
are not open, because they don't need much maintenance. They
are just forest roads, right, so why aren't we able to use
them?
I think attracting some industry here, making sure that we
have a place. I mean, we are growing 2.7 times more timber than
we are harvesting. We are going to run into more problems with
forest regeneration. We are going to run into more problems
with a lot of different things.
Mr. Tiffany. Are we growing over twice as much timber as we
are harvesting?
Mr. Schienebeck. Absolutely.
Mr. Tiffany. Is that in Wisconsin?
Mr. Schienebeck. That is all over.
Mr. Tiffany. Nationwide?
Mr. Schienebeck. If you look at the Forest Inventory
Analysis, we are losing more timber to mortality than we are to
harvesting. That is a big number. And we can't even get a
cotton-picking renewable fuel standard passed. We have a lot of
companies that want to make fuel from wood, right. We can't
even get regulations. We have two people hanging us up in the
EPA. Why is that? And Congress is not allowed any oversight on
that? To me, that is almost a crime that Congress isn't being
able to have some oversight on those regulation when the EPA
passes them, and driving our costs up. Ridiculously high.
So, I think those are a couple of things that could be
done, rein in the Environmental Protection Agency. I mean, we
have rules for a reason, and some of the permits that we are
not getting are not because of the rules. It is just simply
because of the time that is being stalled to get the permits
done. I mean, I have a hard time contacting people in agencies
anymore because ever since COVID they are not in their offices,
and that has made it difficult. That adds a lot of time onto
what we are doing and what we are trying to get accomplished.
And Representative Stauber, you mentioned before about
these roads and stuff. A lot of times I look at these roads and
I am thinking, what is more important, a little bit of gravel
and maybe some roadwork to fix the road up or freedom to
actually be able to use them? To me that is a big deal.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for your comments. Any closing
comment you want to make, Senator Stafsholt?
Mr. Stafsholt. Again, I would just like to show my
appreciation for you guys coming here. It is important that you
come to sparsely populated northern Wisconsin to see what is
truly going on, and I appreciate that.
One of the things that has been talked about is where do we
go from here, and I guess my suggestion would be that we have
some interaction between the forestry and maybe local folks, or
maybe local user groups. We would like to have some input onto
what roads are closed or which ones are open, hopefully some
roads that are opening back up. And I would volunteer to be a
part of that.
Mr. Tiffany. We appreciate that very much, and that, I
think, would go to the issue of coordination, which we won't
open that up right now or we will be here for another couple of
hours, which is a very important issue.
I want to thank Committee staff who helped put this
together today. Thank you very much for the time and effort
that you put into this and coming to Wisconsin. I want to thank
the House recording studio for joining us today and making the
trip from DC. I hope you enjoyed your trip here to northern
Wisconsin.
With that, thank you, witnesses, for your testimony, and
Members for your questions.
Members of the Committee may have some additional questions
for our witnesses today, and we will ask that you respond to
those in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Thursday, May 16, 2024. The hearing record will be held
open for 10 business days for those responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee on Natural Resources stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:23 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
