- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2687, TO AMEND THE ALASKA NATIVE CLAIMS SETTLEMENT ACT TO EXCLUDE CERTAIN PAYMENTS TO AGED, BLIND, OR DISABLED ALASKA NATIVES OR DESCENDANTS OF ALASKA NATIVES FROM BEING USED TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES; AND H.R. 7516, TO AMEND THE INDIAN HEALTH CARE IMPROVEMENT ACT TO ADDRESS LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES OR COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH PROVISION OF PURCHASED/REFERRED CARE SERVICES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "PURCHASED AND REFERRED CARE IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2024"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 2687 AND H.R. 7516

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, April 30, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-114

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-585 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, April 30, 2024..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     2
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3

Panel I:

Johnson, Hon. Dusty, a Representative in Congress from the
State of South Dakota......................................     5
Peltola, Hon. Mary Sattler, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Alaska........................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Egorin, Hon. Melanie, Assistant Secretary for Legislation,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Washington,
DC.........................................................     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Clay, Hon. Frank White, Chairman, Crow Tribe of Indians, Crow
Agency, Montana............................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16
Erickson, Hon. Jarred-Michael, Chairman, Confederated Tribes
of the Colville Reservation, Nespelem, Washington..........    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    21
Buretta, Sheri, Chairman of the Board, Chugach Alaska
Corporation, Anchorage, Alaska.............................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    24
Alkire, Janet, Great Plains Area Representative, National
Indian Health Board, Washington, DC........................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    27
Questions submitted for the record.......................    31

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of the Assistant
Secretary--Indian Affairs, Statement for the Record........    42

Submissions for the Record by Representative Peltola

ANCSA Regional Association, Statement for the Record in
Support of H.R. 2687...................................    43
Bering Straits Native Corporation, Letter to the
Committee in Support of H.R. 2687......................    45
Chugach Alaska Corporation, Letter to the Committee in
Support of H.R. 2687...................................    47
Old Harbor Native Corporation, Letter to the Committee in
Support of H.R. 2687...................................    49

Shee Atika, Inc., Letter to the Committee in Support of
H.R. 2687..............................................    51

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2687, TO AMEND THE ALASKA NATIVE CLAIMS
SETTLEMENT ACT TO EXCLUDE CERTAIN PAYMENTS TO AGED, BLIND, OR DISABLED
ALASKA NATIVES OR DESCENDANTS OF ALASKA NATIVES FROM BEING USED TO
DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES; AND
H.R. 7516, TO AMEND THE INDIAN HEALTH CARE IMPROVEMENT ACT TO ADDRESS
LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES OR COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH PROVISION OF
PURCHASED/REFERRED CARE SERVICES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``PURCHASED
AND REFERRED CARE IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2024''

----------

Tuesday, April 30, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:33 p.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Chair Harriet
M. Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, LaMalfa; and Leger
Fernandez.
Also present: Representatives Stauber, Johnson of South
Dakota; Peltola and Schrier.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess of the Subcommittee at any time. The Subcommittee is
meeting today to hear testimony on two bills, H.R. 7516, and
H.R. 2687.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements to be made part of the hearing
record if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule
3(o).
Without objection. So ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Minnesota,
Mr. Stauber, the gentlewoman from Alaska, Ms. Peltola, the
gentleman from South Dakota, Mr. Johnson, and the gentlewoman
from Washington, Ms. Schrier, be allowed to sit and participate
in today's hearing.
Without objection. So ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Today, the Subcommittee is meeting to consider
two bills. First, we have H.R. 7516, the Purchased and Referred
Care Improvement Act of 2024, sponsored by Representative Dusty
Johnson.
This legislation would amend the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act to hold the Indian Health Services, or IHS,
completely and fully liable for payments for authorized,
purchased and referred care or PRC services instead of the
patient.
The IHS provides healthcare to approximately 2.7 million
American Indians and Alaskan Natives through a network of more
than 600 hospitals, clinics, and health stations on or near
Indian reservations.
When IHS cannot provide a needed healthcare service for a
patient through this network, the PRC Program allows a private
provider to give needed care and then bill IHS for it.
However, when IHS does not pay the bill, that private
provider usually seeks payment directly from the patient.
Rather than purchased and referred care, tribal members have
seen purchased and unreferred care, resulting in them being
hounded by collection companies and seeing their credit scores
adversely impacted.
Patients should not be held liable for the IHS's inability
to function properly. H.R. 7516 will ensure that it is
abundantly clear that IHS is who is liable for the PRC related
care payments and not the patient.
Additionally, H.R. 7516 would allow any patient who pays
out of pocket for IHS authorized PRC services to be reimbursed
by the IHS no later than 30 days after submitting the necessary
documentation.
Secondly, we have H.R. 2687, sponsored by Representative
Mary Peltola, which would amend the Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act to exclude certain payments to aged, blind, or
disabled Alaska Natives or descendants of these Alaska Natives
from being used to determine eligibility for certain programs.
The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, or ANCSA, settled
the aboriginal land claims of Alaska Natives. Alaska Native
Corporations, or ANCs, were established to receive land and
payments through the settlement and also to promote the social,
cultural, and economic advancement of their Alaska Native
people and their communities in perpetuity.
When Congress enacted ANCSA, Section 29 stated that no
provision of the Act would replace or diminish any obligation
of the United States or Alaska to, ``protect and promote the
rights or welfare of the Natives.''
In 1988, Congress amended ANCSA to exclude the first $2,000
that any Alaskan Native received from an ANC when determining
eligibility for means best based benefits, such as the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistant Program or SNAP.
These 1988 amendments also allowed Alaskan Native
Corporations to create settlement trusts as a tool for the
distribution of benefits from the corporations to Alaska Native
beneficiaries.
However, Congress did not exclude settlement trust benefits
from being used in determining an individual's eligibility for
government assistance programs as they had with other benefits
from ANCs.
As a result, many Alaska Natives, particularly those who
are over 65, blind, or disabled, find themselves in the
position of having to choose between receiving their settlement
trust income or qualifying for government assistance programs.
H.R. 2687 would rectify this by excluding settlement trust
income when determining eligibility for means tested Federal
benefits for aged, blind, or disabled Alaska Natives.
Both of the bills today are technical and small fixes that
could have a large impact on individuals' lives. Often,
Congress can be perceived as only focusing on the big ticket or
national items, but we all know that these local issues
generally have a major impact, particularly on individual
Native lives.
I look forward to discussing both of these bills today and
thank the witnesses for being here.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for
her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Good afternoon everyone, and thank you
so very much for being here to share your stories. I know you
have come a long distance and it is important that we on this
dais and throughout Congress hear the stories of how you are
facing these struggles and what your communities are doing to
overcome some of the barriers that Congress is actually
responsible for. So, thank you sharing that with us.
I want to thank the sponsors of the two bills that we will
be hearing today because they are good bills, they are fixes to
a problem that Congress can take care of, and I am glad we are
moving forward.
The two bills would expand eligibility for need based
Federal programs under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
and clarify the Indian Health Services responsibility to
reimburse purchased and referred services.
As we heard, ANCSA was passed in 1971 to address land
claims in the state of Alaska. Per the agreement, Alaska Native
Corporations were established and transferred 44 million acres
and received $962.5 million in compensation funds.
Under the 1976 ANSCA amendments, the first $2,000 Alaska
Natives received from ANC was excluded when determining
eligibility for need based Federal programs like SNAP, Social
Security, and housing assistance.
Further amendments to ANCSA over the years have failed to
exclude settlement trusts in such funding to determine
eligibility for need based Federal programs, ultimately forcing
Alaska Natives to choose between receiving the settlement trust
benefits or qualifying for need based Federal benefits.
Alaska is huge. We made an agreement. The United States
owns all of these lands. Why have we not lived up to the ideals
in that claim settlement? And thank you, Representative
Peltola, for asking us to do that now because your bill would
exclude ANC benefits provided to aged, blind, or disabled
Alaska Natives, often the people who need these services the
most.
I am also pleased to see Mr. Johnson's H.R. 7516, the
Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act on today's agenda.
IHS provides critical, culturally competent healthcare services
to American Indians and Alaska Natives across the United States
through its own facilities, tribal operated facilities, and
urban Indian organizations.
Unfortunately, IHS and tribal facilities can't always
directly provide all the necessary healthcare services. To fill
the gap for much needed services, the Purchase Preferred Care
Program was created.
Under existing law, the Purchase Care Program authorizes
the purchase of service from a network of private providers
when care is not available at IHS or tribal facilities. We must
remember that many of these are rural facilities without access
to the specialty care needed by tribal members.
The contract services most often needed are mental and
behavioral health treatment and prevention, long-term care
services, dialysis services, and care for Indian benefits.
Patients often must travel to receive this care to find the
specialty workers, the experts who can provide it, or go to
adjacent providers in their community. But then we hear time
and again how IHS does not process reimbursements quickly, and
this not only impacts the patient's medical condition, but it
also impacts a patient's credit score and puts that patient in
financial stress and risk.
Mr. Johnson's legislation will clarify that IHS is required
to reimburse patients within 30 days of their submission of the
PRC services they paid for. I am proud to be an original co-
sponsor and look forward to the adoption of the legislation as
it will remove the financial stress on patients who are already
struggling with their medical conditions.
But we must also remember that while IHS remains
responsible for providing healthcare services, Congress remains
responsible for funding the IHS. Everyone in this room knows
IHS has been chronically undersized and underfunded for
decades, which interferes with the agency's ability to keep
Native Americans healthy and to remove their financial debt.
To successfully carry out the intent of this legislation,
we need to ensure that IHS has the funding to appropriately
operate it and maintain services and staffing. The Tribal
Budget Formulation Work Group's Fiscal Year 2025 request shows
that the total need for purchased and referred care services is
over $9 billion.
The Fiscal Year 2024 enacted amount was a tenth of that
$996 million, and the recent request is only $1 billion. I know
we will be holding budget hearings in the coming weeks, so I
implore my colleagues to remember what our witnesses will be
telling us today.
Both bills in this hearing highlight that in many places
across Indian Country, difficult choices are being made,
whether it is paying off medical debt or purchasing medication,
or its elders in Alaska choosing to give shares away to get the
housing interests and services they need.
We on this dais must take our responsibility to Indian
Country seriously and advocate for their needs, but also fund
our trust responsibility.
I urge my colleagues to support these bills and I look
forward to hearing, in detail, from the witnesses on what a
difference it would make in their own communities. Thank you
for traveling, and I yield back.

Ms. Hageman. I now recognize the gentleman from South
Dakota for 5 minutes to speak on his bill.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DUSTY JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam Ranking
Member, for this bill hearing on my bill, which would make much
needed improvements to the Purchased and Referred Care Program
within IHS.
The Hippocratic Oath tells us to first, do no harm. I am
not a medical provider, but of course, I have heard that a
hundred times, do no harm. Unfortunately, we are not living up
to those principles with regard to the PRC and the IHS.
To take a step back and explain what our witnesses know all
too well. Of course, we have the Purchased and Referred Care
Program to fill the gaps in IHS. When somebody needs a service
that IHS does not provide, they can be referred out.
Of course, there is a process for that. Existing law says
that the tribal citizens are not responsible for the payment of
those services. That obligation really belongs to IHS. Section
222 already makes that clear.
Current law also says that IHS must pay completed PRC
claims within 30 days of completion. Now, we come to the
problem. We have a 2020 HHS Office of Inspector General report
that says that 32,000 claims, during the investigated time,
were not paid within the 30-day time frame.
Of course, this puts providers in a bad spot as well. All
too often, they are not knowledgeable about the existing rules
requiring that it is IHS on the hook and not the tribal
citizens.
They will, unfortunately, in many cases, when they don't
get paid, and they don't get paid, and they don't get paid,
they will submit these claims to the IHS enrollee.
Of course, many of the tribal citizens know that this is
not their bill to be paid, so they don't pay it. So, then the
provider will turn this claim over to a credit rating agency,
which can cause, as Chairman White Clay said, a cascading
problem, a cascade of issues.
When your credit report is hit, that makes it more
difficult to get loans. Of course, that means it is more
difficult to get a home. That means it is more difficult to get
cars.
We don't have to have these ripple effects if we would just
have a system that worked better. That is really at the heart
of this bill.
The bill is straightforward insofar as it does just three
things:
(1) it strengthens Section 222 by making it even more clear
that tribal citizens, IHS enrollees, are not obligated to make
these payments. This is the responsibility of IHS alone.
(2) it instructs the Secretary that he or she is required
to do a better job of letting PRC providers and patients know
that the patients are not to be held liable for any of these
debts.
And then, (3) it also holds IHS accountable by making sure
that they pay patients, to the extent that patients voluntarily
opt in to making some of these payments. If they provide that
evidence to IHS, IHS has 30 days to make the patient whole.
So, again, relatively straightforward, but addressing a
much-needed problem. I want to offer a special thank you to
Chairwoman Alkire. We all know that being an effective leader
in Indian Country is pretty difficult because you have lots of
competing demands and there is kind of a patchwork quilt of
various jurisdictions.
Not only does she have to deal with the state of South
Dakota and Congressman Dusty Johnson, but what is much worse is
that she has to deal with North Dakota's Kelly Armstrong in the
House as well, and yet she does a wonderful job.
And then I also want to thank Chair Erickson for the
Colville Tribes. This idea really was advanced, obviously, by a
number of different Tribal Nations, but none more than the
Colville Tribes, who were passionate, focused, and data driven
on explaining the problem to us.
It is an honor for me, Madam Chair and Madam Ranking
Member, to be in the presence of great tribal leaders who are
helping us tell this story so we can get it right. With that, I
would yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. I will now recognize
the gentlewoman from Alaska for 5 minutes to speak on her bill.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARY SATTLER PELTOLA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ALASKA

Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Madam Chair. In current law,
settlement trust benefits can, and they do, exempt Alaska
Native people from their governmental assistance program
benefits.
H.R. 2687 allows blind, elderly, and disabled Alaska Native
people to keep their settlement trust income and access
critical Federal benefits. Shareholders shouldn't have to
choose between these benefits, both of which are essential to
the livelihood of these vulnerable populations.
Before I begin, I would like to specifically thank my
colleagues, Representative Stauber and Representative Molinaro,
for co-sponsoring this legislation with me. I really appreciate
your support, especially in pushing Alaskans' interests, and I
am grateful for your continued advocacy of bills like this
which advanced Don Young's legacy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I reserve my time.
Ms. Hageman. I will now introduce our witnesses from our
panel. The Honorable Melanie Egorin, Assistant Secretary for
legislation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Washington, DC; the Honorable Frank White Clay, Chairman, Crow
Tribe of Indians, Crow Agency, Montana; and the Honorable
Jarred-Michael Erickson, Chairman, Confederated Tribes of the
Colville Reservation, Nespelem, Washington.
I now recognize Mrs. Peltola for 1 minute to introduce the
witness from her state.
Mrs. Peltola. OK, this is always a treat. We have a lot of
Alaskans in town this week, which makes it really special, but
I thank you, Chair Hageman.
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak briefly and
introduce Sheri Buretta, who has come from Alaska today to
speak in favor of H.R. 2687.
Sheri has served as the Chairman of the Board for Chugach
Alaska Corporation since 1998. In that role, Sheri oversees the
Board's strategic initiatives to deliver financial results and
advance the economic and social well-being of Chugach
shareholders, as mandated by the Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act.
Sheri has also served on the Board of the Alaska Federation
of Natives for over 25 years and on the University of Alaska
Board of Regents from 2015 to 2023. Sheri knows the positive
power of ANCSA benefits as the person responsible for
settlement trust distributions to over 2,900 Chugach
shareholders.
She also knows how ANCSA shareholders rely on Federal
programs like Medicare, SNAP, and disability assistance.
Sheri, thank you so much for coming to Washington, DC and
for testifying on this bill today.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Johnson for 1
minute to introduce the witness from his state.
Mr. Johnson. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Three years ago, Chair Alkire was elected by her people to
be the Chair of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe. Shortly
thereafter, she came to my office. I had not met the Chairwoman
before, and I will tell you, I was blown away.
One of the most fun parts of this job is getting to meet
leaders with unusual degree of drive, commitment, charm, and
effectiveness. And the Chairwoman takes over a room. She is an
effective leader who knows how to tell a story and knows how to
work with her people to make good things happen.
She is a veteran of the Air Force, 15-year veteran. She is
making things happen in Indian Country on both the North Dakota
and South Dakota side of the border, and I thank her very much
for making this trip.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you so much.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statements will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the
light will turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light
will turn yellow. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify
before Member questioning. The Chair now recognizes the
Honorable Melanie Egorin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MELANIE EGORIN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
LEGISLATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Egorin. Good afternoon Chair Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this
important legislative proposal and for your continued support
for the efforts of the Department of Health and Human Services
to improve the health and well-being of American Indians and
Alaska Natives.
Your consideration today of the Purchased and Referred Care
Improvement Act underscores this commitment to improving the
quality of life in Indian Country. I am Melanie Anne Egorin,
the Assistant Secretary for legislation at HHS.
My office serves as the primary link between the Department
and Congress, providing technical assistance on legislation and
supporting the implementation of legislation.
Last year, I was honored to visit the Lakotan lands in
South Dakota as part of the Secretary's Tribal Advisory
Committee and had an opportunity to speak with patients and
providers on the Pine Ridge Reservation.
I heard firsthand accounts of the challenges that both
patients on the ground and the Indian Health Service have faced
with the Purchased and Referred Care Program. These are the
same concerns that have been echoed to the Secretary and
Director Tso by a number of tribes during their travels across
the country.
The Biden-Harris administration and the Department have
worked hard to lower healthcare costs and improve health
outcomes for American families while protecting patients from
medical debt.
Unfortunately, too many families across the country,
including many families in Indian Country, are still saddled
with crushing medical debt. This debt often forces families
into making unattainable decisions between paying off the debt,
purchasing lifesaving medications, or putting food on the
table.
With this in mind, President Biden issued an Executive
Order to strengthen Americans access to affordable, quality
health care. The Department continues to work in that spirit to
reduce the burden of medical debt for working families and
individuals across the country, including Indian Country.
As has been referred to, patients are not liable for PRC
costs under the Indian Healthcare Improvement Act. Patients
should not be forced into collections because of unpaid medical
bills.
American Indians and Alaska Natives who already suffer
disproportionate morbidity and mortality rates should not be
put at financial risk for seeking medical treatment.
PRC funds are used to supplement and complement other
healthcare resources available to eligible tribal members.
Because IHS appropriations cannot fully fund the healthcare
needs of this population, the IHS is designated as the payer of
last resort.
Recent implementation of PRC rates and Medicaid expansion
have increased the PRC program's purchasing power to provide
more care for our beneficiaries. The Department and the IHS
have worked hard to prioritize improvements to the PRC program
and ensure that patients have access to accessible and
affordable quality care.
In fact, strengthening the authorization and payment
process and effectively managing PRC carry forward balances are
some of the top goals of the IHS work plan.
The IHS has also updated the medical priority levels and
issued funding guidance, replacing an approach that placed a
higher emphasis on acute disease complications versus chronic
disease and prevention strategies.
The Secretary and Director Tso have also directed the IHS
to update the Indian Health Manual to include and authorize
more services. The IHS also plans to change the rule regarding
the accessibility to an IHS facility, reduce the drive time
requirements, and change the definition of elderly to provide
greater flexibility for patients.
The IHS acknowledges that there is still more to do. As
with other programs within IHS, staffing vacancies, space
limitations, and proper training of staff at some sites has
negatively impacted the ability to carry out the PRC goals.
The IHS continues to support new strategies to develop the
workforce and leverage advanced practice providers and
professionals to improve access to quality care and tribal
communities.
The Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act would
clarify patient liability for payment costs from PRC services.
The Department is concerned that the bill, as currently
drafted, may have unintended consequences on patients,
potentially making the reimbursement process more confusing and
difficult.
Specifically, we are concerned that patients might make
payments to a provider when it is not necessary or in amounts
greater than would be required. This could quickly undermine
the purpose of the statute and expose these patients to
financial harm rather than protecting them from liability.
While the statute presently prohibits a provider from
seeking payment from a patient, IHS consistently witnesses this
not being followed by bad actors. There are no consequences or
enforcement included in the proposed bill for a provider, debt
collector, or other entity who violates this provision.
The Department certainly shares the same goals as the
drafters to improve the PRC Program, protect patients from
medical debt, and ensure tribal members have access to high
quality and affordable care.
We look forward to continuing to work with Congress on this
bill, and as always, welcome the opportunity to provide
technical assistance as requested by Congress.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. And
thanks again to Congressman Johnson, who has led this and many
other legislative efforts to fix systematic challenges in
Indian Country.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Egorin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Melanie Anne Egorin, PhD, Assistant Secretary for
Legislation, Department of Health and Human Services
on H.R. 7516

Good afternoon Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to provide
testimony on an important legislative proposal before your Committee,
and for your continued support for the efforts of the Department of
Health and Human Services (HHS or Department) to improve the health and
well-being of American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/AN). Your
consideration today of Congressman Johnson's Purchased and Referred
Care Improvement Act of 2024 underscores that commitment to improving
the quality of life in Indian Country.
I am Melanie Anne Egorin, the Assistant Secretary for Legislation
(ASL) at HHS. My office serves as the primary link between the
Department and Congress. The Office of the ASL provides technical
assistance on legislation to members of Congress and their staff,
facilitates informational briefings from Department programs that
support policy development by Congress, and supports implementation of
legislation passed by Congress.
Last year, I was honored to visit the Lakotan lands in South Dakota
as part of the Secretary's Tribal Advisory Committee and had an
opportunity to speak to patients and providers at the Pine Ridge
Hospital on the Pine Ridge reservation and the Oyate Health Center in
Rapid City, South Dakota. I heard firsthand accounts about the
challenges that both patients on the ground and the Indian Health
Service (IHS) have faced with the Purchased/Referred Care (PRC)
program. These same concerns have been echoed to the Secretary and
Director Tso by a number of tribes during their travels across the
country.
The Biden-Harris Administration and the Department have worked hard
to lower health care costs and improve health outcomes for American
families and protect patients from medical debt. Unfortunately, too
many families across the country--including many families in Indian
Country--are still saddled with crushing medical debt. This debt often
forces families into making untenable decisions, between paying off the
debt and purchasing lifesaving medications or putting food on the
table. Medical debt is a barrier to economic mobility for working
families across the country and exacerbates and contributes to existing
disparities in health care by race, health, status, and income. With
this in mind, President Biden issued Executive Order 14070 to
Strengthen Americans' Access to Affordable, Quality Health Coverage.
The Executive Order directs the Department to examine policies and
practices that help reduce the burden of medical debt on households,
including efforts to explore how medical debts are collected from
beneficiaries in our federal programs. This endeavor is meant to
provide transparency on practices nationwide and will help inform
policy options and approaches for reducing the burden of medical debt
on working families and individuals across the country.
As you know, patients are not liable for PRC costs under section
222 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act. Patients should not be
forced into collections because of unpaid medical bills. American
Indians and Alaska Natives--who already suffer disproportionately low
life expectancies and disproportionate disease burden--should not be
put at financial risk for seeking medical treatment.
Purchased/Referred Care Program

As you know, the IHS operates its mission in partnership with AI/AN
tribal communities through a network of over 600 federal and tribal
health facilities and 41 Urban Indian Organizations that are located
across 37 states and provide health care services to approximately 2.87
million AI/AN people annually.
In 1921, Congress enacted the Snyder Act, authorizing the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA) to provide health services to Indian tribes
throughout the United States, and also contract out these health
services to health care providers as needed. In 1955, the Transfer Act
moved health care from BIA to the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, the predecessor of HHS. Subsequently, those authorities have
been carried out by IHS, which also operates under the authority of the
Indian Health Care Improvement Act (IHCIA). The IHS receives annual
lump-sum appropriations to carry out its authorities, including those
under the Snyder Act and IHCIA. In January 2014, the Consolidated
Appropriations Act, 2014, renamed the Contract Health Services program
as the PRC program. IHS uses the PRC program to purchase health
services that are not reasonably accessible or available through the
IHS network.
PRC funds are used to supplement and complement other healthcare
resources available to IHS-eligible American Indian/Alaska Natives--the
IHS' defined service population. Because IHS appropriations do not
fully fund the healthcare needs of the AI/AN population, the PRC
program must rely on specific regulations relating to eligibility,
notification, residency, and a medical priority rating system. The IHS
is designated as the payor of last resort, meaning that all other
available alternate resources, including Medicare, Medicaid, private
insurance, state or other health programs, etc., must first be used
before the IHS will pay for healthcare services. These mechanisms
enhance the IHS's ability to stretch the limited PRC dollars and are
designed to extend services to more in the AI/AN community.
The Department and the IHS have worked hard to prioritize
improvements to the PRC program and ensure that patients have access to
accessible--and affordable--quality care. In fact, strengthening the
Purchased/Referred Care Authorization and Payment Process and
effectively managing PRC carryover balances is one of the top three
goals of the IHS 2024 Work Plan. In June 2022, the HHS Office of
Inspector General closed the seven open recommendations to improve the
PRC program from the April 2020 Report \1\ after the IHS implemented a
multitude of corrective actions and staff trainings. Recent
implementation of PRC rates and Medicaid expansion have also increased
the PRC Program's purchasing power to provide more care for our
beneficiaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A-03-16-03002
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As of January 1, 2024, the IHS has updated the medical priority
levels and issued funding guidance to support a holistic, balanced,
outcome-oriented, and consistent referral priority system. This change
maximizes the efficiency of resource allocation and promotes evidence-
based strategies that balance the preventive, mental health, chronic,
and acute care needs in our service population with the goal of
improved patient satisfaction and health outcomes. This balanced
approach replaced a hierarchical concept that placed a higher emphasis
on acute disease complications versus providing care for chronic and
disease prevention strategies. As a result, the IHS has moved to re-
assign and reclassify some preventative care services to a higher
priority level within the IHS medical priority levels.
The Secretary and Director Tso have also directed the IHS to
implement updates to the Indian Health Manual Chapter 3, Part 2
Purchased/Referred Care that will include and authorize more services,
and added a ``reasonable person'' standard for determinations related
to emergency notifications. This change will allow greater
understanding if the need for emergent care is outside of the IHS
system. The IHS also plans to change the general rule regarding
accessibility of an IHS facility, reducing the drive time requirements
from 90 minutes to 60 minutes, and change the definition of ``elderly''
from 65 years to 55 years--providing greater flexibility for patients.
The revised policy of the Indian Heath Manual Chapter 3, Part 2
Purchased/Referred care will be completed by the summer of 2024.
The IHS has also implemented an Incident Command-Like Structure to
address some of the more common and difficult issues facing PRC
programs from paying timely and appropriately for authorized care. This
includes provider billing issues, Fiscal Intermediary pended claims,
and alternate resource issues. These efforts will go a long way to
improve the PRC program and benefit to our PRC-eligible population.
The IHS acknowledges that there is still more to be done. As with
other programs within the IHS, staff vacancies, space limitations, and
proper training of staff at some sites has negatively impacted the
ability to carry out PRC goals. The IHS continues to support new
strategies to develop the workforce and leverage advanced practice
providers and paraprofessionals to improve the access to quality care
in AI/AN communities.
Ultimately, the IHS needs additional authorities and resources to
build out their workforce pipeline. That is why the President's budget
has included a number of proposals, dating back to fiscal year 2019,
that have sought to make the IHS more competitive with other federal
agencies in their hiring process and reduce systemic barriers to
recruitment and retention. HHS looks forward to working with Congress
on policy solutions to this effect.
H.R. 7516, Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act of 2024

The Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act of 2024 would amend
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act to address liability for payment
of charges or costs associated with the provision of purchased/referred
care services.
HHS strongly recommends that the drafters of H.R. 7516 consider the
suggested edits and comments provided as technical assistance to the
bill's sponsor. Much of the suggested edits are intended to clarify the
application of provisions in H.R. 7516 and ensure that the statute
continues to apply to all PRC programs, regardless of whether the PRC
program is operated by the IHS or a Tribal Health Program. This ensures
protections for patients of all PRC programs.
This bill also proposes adding a new subsection (d) to section 222
of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, and the Department's edits
here account for other applicable authorities, such as the payer of
last resort statute. Simply put, a patient should not be expected to
pay out-of-pocket for PRC-authorized services, due to the existing
patient protections in section 222, but if patients choose to do so in
anticipation of reimbursement under this new subsection (d), they will
need to be careful not to pay before alternate resources or in excess
of PRC rates. Thus as drafted, the bill may cause additional
uncertainty for patients seeking care. Additionally, the Department has
suggested a change to the timeline specified in subsection (d). While
the IHS believes 30-day timeline may be challenging to implement and
impractical on an administrative level, PRC program should be able to
accomplish this within 45 days.
In the overwhelming majority of cases, the PRC payment should occur
between the PRC program and the PRC provider. As noted, the Department
is concerned that there may be unintended effects of this statutory
change on patients--that the bill may make the reimbursement process
more confusing and difficult. Specifically, we are concerned that
patients might make payments to a provider when it is not necessary, or
in amounts greater than would be required. This could quickly undermine
the purpose of the statute and expose these patients to financial harm,
rather than protecting them from liability. The IHS would seek to
educate patients on this issue, but suggests that the drafters consider
potential adverse consequences in this regard.
For the Committee's situational awareness, the Department also
notes while the statute presently prohibits a provider from seeking
payment from a patient, the IHS consistently witnesses that this not
being followed by bad actors. IHS notes that there are no consequences
included in the proposed bill for a provider, debt collector, or any
other person who violates this provision. Additionally, when a
violation occurs, there can be impacts to the patient's credit that are
not easy for the patient or the IHS to resolve.
All things considered, the Department shares the same goal as the
drafters--to improve the PRC program, protect patients from medical
debt, and ensure that American Indians and Alaska Natives throughout
Indian Country have access to high quality and affordable care. We look
forward to continuing our work with Congress on this bill, and as
always, welcome the opportunity to provide technical assistance as
requested by the Committee or its members.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and thanks
again to Congressman Johnson, who has led this and many other
legislative efforts to fix systemic challenges in Indian Country. HHS
is committed to working closely with tribal communities and other
external partners and understands the importance of working together to
address the needs of American Indians and Alaska Natives.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Melanie Egorin,
Assistant Secretary for Legislation, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services

The Honorable Melanie Egorin did not submit responses to the Committee
by the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Your written statement indicated that H.R. 7516 should
apply to both direct service and tribal run PRC programs. Are you aware
of any complaints regarding how PRC programs operate under a tribally
operated health program?

1a) Please provide further clarification on how H.R. 7516 may
impact IHS and Tribal Health Programs differently.

Question 2. Most of the issues regarding the PRC program revolve
around the lack of response from the IHS and the IHS's lack of
transparency on the process by which PRC bills are paid to providers.
Your written statement indicated that in June 2022, the HHS Office of
Inspector General closed the seven open recommendations to improve the
PRC program from their April 2020 report.

2a) What metrics can IHS provide to the committee that show what,
if any, improvements have happened since those recommendations were
closed?

2b) Can IHS or HHS provide information regarding the ``corrective
actions and staff training'' that have been implemented?

Question 3. What process does HHS and/or IHS use to ensure that
providers who participate in the PRC program are educated on how the
IHS and tribal health system works and on who is responsible to pay for
what services?

3a) Is there a continuing education process for privat providers on
the PRC program?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Miss Egorin, for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Frank White Clay for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. FRANK WHITE CLAY, CHAIRMAN, CROW TRIBE OF
INDIANS, CROW AGENCY, MONTANA

Mr. Clay. Good afternoon. Thank you, Chair Hageman, Ranking
Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you, Mr. Johnson, for bringing this bill forward. My
name is Frank White Clay. I am the Chairman of the Crow Tribe
of Indians. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss H.R. 7516,
the Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act of 2024, and
how the Purchased and Referred Care Program negatively affects
my people.
I have a lot here, but I will forward in case of time. My
tribe is 14,358 people on 2.2 million acres in southeastern
Montana.
When the tribe first came about, we had 50 million acres
that we negotiated away down to 2.2 million acres in favor of
tribal healthcare, education, and all the trust responsibility
promises through our treaties with the United States.
And currently as it sits, a lot of those trust
responsibilities aren't being upheld by the United States. And
one of these instances with the Purchased and Referred Care
Program, the Crow Tribe, like many other Native American
tribes, participates in the health service Purchase Referred
Care program.
The program is essential for providing healthcare services
that are beyond the scope of what our tribal health facilities
can offer. And then through the local healthcare services, the
Crow Tribe has access to healthcare service through the Crow
and Northern Cheyenne Hospital and other smaller health centers
on and near the Crow Reservation.
My reservation is the size of Delaware and Rhode Island
combined, so the very small community centers that are there
provide services and refer to the external providers when
specialized care is needed that cannot be provided within the
tribal health facilities.
The IHS PRC program still steps up to fund the healthcare
service provided by external non-IHS healthcare providers. Like
many times, the Crow Tribe faces challenges regarding the
adequacy and efficiency of PRC funding.
Delays in reimbursement through the PRC Program have caused
severe hardships for many of my people. The economic reality is
that most of my people cannot absorb the cost of paying
healthcare services out of pocket, especially when it is
unknown when they will be reimbursed by PRC.
When these costs are attached to their names as a debt and
credit, which is collectors and sent to bills of collection, my
people, along with elderly veterans, some of the most
vulnerable people are being harassed daily by debt collectors.
We have veterans that have applied for VA home loans that
were denied for these VA home loans because of the debt
collections attached through the PRC program. We have even had
Social Security benefits taxed based on these debt collections
from the PRC program.
And we have various other examples of that directly. Tribal
members, in the beginning stages of college, have been denied
credit loans, college loans, Pell Grant loans, homes based on
adverse credit from bills of collection from IHS programs that
they have not been aware of or assumed the PRC program has
taken care of these debts directly.
So, on both sides of the spectrum we have tribal members
starting out in their life, in their college careers, being
affected, and on the other side of the spectrum, elderly folk,
veterans that have been denied on veteran loans and other
benefits from PRC debt collections.
So, I want to say thank you to the Subcommittee for giving
us the opportunity to speak on these. Thank you for being able
to take these into consideration that even though it is a small
amendment, it will have big ramifications and ripple effects
across Indian Country.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Clay follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Frank White Clay, Chairman,
Crow Tribe of Indians
on H.R. 7516

Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
members of the Subcommittee. My name is Frank White Clay, and I am the
Chairman of the Crow Tribe of Indians. Thank you for the opportunity to
discuss H.R. 7516--the Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act of
2024 and how delays with the Purchased and Referred Care Program
negatively affect my people.
Background on Crow Tribe of Indian

I want to begin by telling the committee who the Crow Tribe of
Indians are. The Crow Nation is a federally recognized tribe located in
southeastern Montana. My people are proud of our heritage and culture.
Most of our 14,000 enrolled members live on the Crow Reservation,
approximately 2.2 million acres, or roughly the size of Rhode Island
and Delaware combined. We are blessed with land that provides a mixture
of rivers, mountains, and grasslands, which allow for traditional
activities and are a basis for modern economic activities such as
agriculture and energy development. Many of our people speak the
Apsaalooke language (Crow Language) and remain active in tribal events
including our annual Crow Fair, where generations of families come
together to celebrate and preserve our culture.
The Crow People are also proud Americans. This is best highlighted
by our long history of service in the military. From the late 1800s to
today, our people have served through both World Wars, The Korean War,
the Vietnam War, and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. This service is
deeply woven into our cultural identity and reflects our long-standing
courage, loyalty, and leadership values.
As Chairman of the Crow Tribe of Indians, it is my responsibility
to protect our culture and way of life while ensuring my people have
access to modern services. The topic of today's hearing touches upon
two of the most critical services my people--and all communities depend
on--quality healthcare and access to means to better themselves.
Purchased/Referred Care Program

The Crow Tribe, like many other Native American tribes,
participates in the Indian Health Service (IHS) Purchased/Referred Care
(PRC) Program. This program is essential for providing healthcare
services that are beyond the scope of what our tribal health facilities
can offer. Here are some specific ways in which the Crow Tribe engages
with the IHS PRC program:

1.  Local Healthcare Services: The Crow Tribe has access to
healthcare services through the Crow/Northern Cheyenne
Hospital and other smaller health centers on and near the
Crow Reservation. These facilities provide primary care
services but may not always have the capability to offer
specialized medical care needed by some patients.

2.  Referral to External Providers: When specialized care is needed
that cannot be provided within the tribal health
facilities, the IHS PRC program steps in to fund healthcare
services provided by external, non-IHS healthcare
providers. This is crucial for accessing high-cost medical
procedures and specialized treatments that are not
available locally.

3.  Management and Coordination: The program requires careful
coordination and management to ensure that services are
authorized and funded. The Crow Health Department likely
has a specific department or staff dedicated to managing
PRC referrals to ensure that eligible tribal members
receive the healthcare they need while also adhering to the
program's guidelines and funding constraints.

4.  Community Health Improvement: By participating in the PRC
program, the Crow Tribe can address more complex health
issues that are prevalent in their community, such as
diabetes, heart disease, and other chronic conditions that
require ongoing specialist care not available within the
tribal health system.

Like many tribes, the Crow face challenges regarding the adequacy
and efficiency of PRC funding. Delays in reimbursement through the PRC
program have caused severe hardship for many of my people. The economic
reality is that most of my people cannot absorb the cost of paying for
health services out of pocket, especially when it is unknown when they
will be reimbursed by PRC. When these costs are attached to their names
as debt and their credit suffers due to late payment by PRC, a one-time
problem snowballs into a cascade of issues that limit educational and
job opportunities my people need to better themselves and the Crow
Tribe. To highlight how prevalent this problem is I'll give you two
examples from our tribe of individuals in different stages of life.
In one instance, a young lady who had dealt with medical issues was
denied access to funding which would have allowed her to pursue a
college education. This was caused directly by a negative impact on her
credit due to delays in reimbursement for approved medical services. I
think we can all agree, no one should have to begin their adult life
being saddled with debt liability that prevents them from furthering
their education due to inefficiencies in a program intended to help.
In a second example a tribal elder and military veteran used PRC to
receive hearing aids, which were preapproved. The following year when
he returned to the provider to have those hearing aids serviced and
calibrated, he was required to pay out of pocket due to the fact that
PRC had not yet reimbursed the provider for the original purchase. This
created a huge financial burden for someone who is living solely from
social security benefits.
Benefits of H.R. 7516 Purchased Care Improvement Act

H.R. 7516 the Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act of 2024,
would alleviate many of the issues currently associated with the PRC
program by ensuring it functions as intended.

By ensuring a member of my tribe will be reimbursed within 30 days
of submitting documentation, paying out of pocket for medical expenses
becomes possible for more Crow.

By ensuring that IHS--and not a tribal member--is liable for
authorized PRC health services, guarantees Native Americans are not
unfairly saddled with debt, debt collections, lower credit scores and
all the negative consequences associated with them.
Should these clarifications become law and implemented correctly,
more Crow will have access to quality healthcare by not having to
decide between going to the doctor or facing an uncertain reimbursement
process. This will also ensure my people aren't denied access to
capital they use for education, vehicle and home loans, or business
loans--all of which better their lives and the Crow Tribe as a whole.
Conclusion

As Chairman of the Crow Tribe of Indians, I am committed to working
with Indian Health Services and Congress to resolve problems associated
with providing tribal members with access to healthcare.
I thank Representative Johnson and the sponsors of this legislation
for addressing this problem by introducing the Purchased and Referred
Care Improvement Act of 2024. I also thank the committee for holding
this hearing and giving me the opportunity to represent my people
regarding this matter.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Frank White Clay,
Chairman, Crow Tribe of Indians

The Honorable Frank White Clay did not submit responses to the
Committee by the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed
record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. What benefits would H.R. 7516 provide for the Crow
Tribe and do you see any potential downsides to this legislation
becoming law?

Question 2. Is a 30-day timeline for PRC service reimbursement a
good timeline, or should it be extended to 45 days as the testimony
from HHS supported?

Question 3. Are you aware of any PRC program carryover funds in
your region, and if so, can you provide the committee with numbers and/
or documentation showing this?

Question 4. What other information and/or examples of how the PRC
program has affected Crow tribal members would you like to provide to
the Committee?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. White Clay, for your very, very
important testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Jarred-Michael
Erickson for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARRED-MICHAEL ERICKSON, CHAIRMAN,
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE COLVILLE RESERVATION, NESPELEM,
WASHINGTON

Mr. Erickson. [Speaking Native language.] Hello. Good day,
Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members
of the Committee.
My name is Jarred-Michael Erickson. I am the Chairman for
the Colville Business Council, which is the governing body of
the Colville Tribes.
Thank you for inviting me to testify on the Purchased and
Referred Improvement Act. The Colville Tribes is a direct
service tribe, which means all the health care associated with
the billing, administrative, and support are provided by the
Federal IHS employment employees, which means the healthcare
and associated billing administrative support is provided by
Federal IHS employees.
We have begun the process to contract all IHS functions
under the Indian Self Determination Act, but this process will
take time. In the meantime, we are trying to manage the best we
can with IHS overseeing healthcare delivery on the Colville
Reservation.
As discussed in more detail in my written statement, for
years, IHS has mismanaged the Purchased and Referred Care
Program at the Colville service unit. This is one of the main
reasons that we are working to contract all IHS functions.
Purchased and Referred Care, or PRC, is a program where IHS
beneficiaries receive care for private, non-IHS health
providers when IHS is unable to provide the care at its own
facilities.
From 2017 to 2022, the IHS Portland Area office
administered the PRC program at the Colville service unit. IHS
never explained to the Colville Tribes why it took the PRC
program away from our local IHS employees and administered it
350 miles away in Portland.
During this time, the PRC program was administered so
poorly that we can trace it to deaths in our community. IHS
required, on an annual basis, our members to produce utility
bills, certificates of Indian blood, and other proof of tribal
enrollment, and other information not required by the IHS
regulations or the IHS handbook to get PRC services.
Those who are unable to produce this information either
went without care or obtained care on their own and
sequentially faced third-party collection agencies when IHS
refused to pay the services.
If a referral for PRC is secured, there is no way to
predict if IHS will pay the provider. When IHS does not pay PRC
providers, the providers send the medical bills to our trial
members directly.
IHS mismanagement of the PRC program of the Colville
service unit has created a domino effect of negative outcomes.
When IHS does not pay the PRC providers, the providers will
assign the debt to third-party debt collectors, even though
Section 222 of the Indian Healthcare Improvement Act generally
states that individuals are not liable for bills associated
with authorized PRC services. PRC providers rely on the
boilerplate consent forms that they require all patients to
sign as an alternative basis to pursue the debt.
Being referred to collection agencies negatively impacts
tribal members' credit scores, which results in higher interest
rates for mortgages and consumer loans and in some cases, the
inability to obtain credit for financing altogether.
Many tribal members on the Colville Reservation have had
their credit negatively impacted through no fault of their own.
For tribal members who choose to pay medical bills for PRC
services out of fear of having their credit impacted by
collections activity, IHS does not have an accessible system to
reimburse them.
IHS mismanagement of the PRC program resulted in many
Colville tribal members avoiding IHS care altogether out of
fear of being saddled with medical bills and having their
credit negatively affected.
The Colville Tribes is aware of the PRC health providers
that have refused to schedule appointments to tribal members
who have unpaid balances from previous PRC purchase orders that
IHS has not paid.
We are also aware of the providers that have dropped out of
the PRC program because IHS has not paid them for the services
they provide.
While there are many issues with IHS management of the PRC
program, the Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act would
address the critical issue of tribal members being sent to
collection agencies.
The bill would amend Section 222 of the Indian Healthcare
Improvement Act to clarify that individuals that receive PRC
care, as authorized by IHS, shall not be liable to any provider
or debt collector.
The bill will also pre-empt the use of boilerplate consent
forms that providers require patients to sign from being used
to target tribal members through collection agencies.
Finally, the PRC Improvement Act will require IHS to
reimburse tribal members who paid medical bills for IHS
authorized PRC services within 30 days.
This is only fair because PRC bills are IHS obligations and
tribal members should be made whole when they pay out of their
own pockets to avoid collection activities that are a result of
IHS mismanagement.
The Colville Tribe urges the Committee to take whatever
steps are necessary to secure enactment of H.R. 7516 into law.
I would be happy to answer any questions the Committee may
have.
[Speaking Native language.] Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Erickson follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Jarred-Michael Erickson, Chairman,
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation
on H.R. 7516

The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation (``Colville
Tribes'' or the ``CCT'') appreciates the Subcommittee holding today's
hearing on H.R. 7516, the ``Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act
of 2024.'' The CCT developed the bill in response to a litany of issues
it has endured with the Indian Health Service's (``IHS's'')
mismanagement of the Purchased-Referred Care (``PRC'') program on the
Colville Reservation.
The CCT is a direct service tribe, which means that health care and
associated billing and administrative support is provided by IHS
employees. For direct service tribes, H.R. 7516 would clarify and
strengthen IHS's duties to inform providers that tribal members are not
liable for PRC bills. The bill would also require IHS to reimburse
tribal members who have paid medical bills out-of-pocket for PRC
services when IHS failed to pay the PRC providers for those services.
Although now considered a single Indian tribe, the Colville Tribes
is a confederation of 12 aboriginal tribes and bands from across
eastern Washington state, northeastern Oregon, Idaho, and British
Columbia. The present-day Colville Reservation is in north-central
Washington state and was established by an Executive Order in 1872. The
Colville Reservation covers more than 1.4 million acres, and its
boundaries include portions of both Okanogan and Ferry counties, two of
the lowest median income counties in the state. Geographically, the
Colville Reservation is larger than the state of Delaware and is the
largest Indian reservation in the pacific Northwest.
The CCT is in the beginning stages of contracting all IHS functions
under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of
1975. This process will take time, however. In the meantime, we must
rely on IHS to provide health care to our tribal citizens.
A. Mismanagement of the PRC Program on the Colville Reservation

IHS has a trust responsibility to provide health care to Indian
beneficiaries through direct care at IHS or tribally operated health
facilities and through the PRC program. The PRC program provides IHS
beneficiaries with specialty or other care from private, non-IHS health
providers when such care is unavailable at IHS facilities. The Colville
Tribes, like other Indian tribes in the Portland IHS Area, is
particularly reliant on the PRC program because of the lack of
inpatient IHS hospital facilities in the Portland Area. Without full-
service hospital facilities, many health care services must be referred
to private providers through the PRC program because those services are
not available in outpatient clinics.
Private health providers voluntarily participate in the PRC program
by executing an agreement with IHS. For tribal members to receive
health care services through the PRC program, IHS must approve a
purchase order for the services, which is essentially a voucher that
the PRC provider relies on to get paid by IHS for providing the
services. Even with an IHS authorized purchase order, private providers
will require tribal members to sign boilerplate forms that state that
the patient will be financially responsible for any medical bills that
private insurance or IHS does not pay.
When Congress reauthorized the Indian Health Care Improvement Act
(IHCIA) in 2010, it amended section 222 \1\ of that Act, which relates
to liability for payment. Section 222 states that for PRC care
authorized by IHS, the patient is not liable for payment associated
with the care. It also requires IHS to communicate this to both the PRC
provider and the patient within five business days after receiving
notice of a claim by the PRC provider.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Section 222 is codified at 25 U.S.C. Sec. 1621u.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IHS has never uniformly or effectively implemented section 222 at
federally managed service units, including on the Colville Reservation.
Beginning in 2017, IHS moved the PRC program from the local Colville
Service Unit to the Portland Area Office for reasons that were never
fully explained to the Colville Tribes. This change, which continued
until October 2022, meant that federal employees 350 miles away from
the Colville Reservation were now responsible for approving and
processing purchase orders, communicating with local PRC providers,
ensuring that providers were paid in a timely manner, and otherwise
administering the PRC program. Our local IHS personnel at the Colville
Service Unit, most of whom are Colville tribal members, had no control
over how the PRC program was administered during this five-year period.
During the time the Portland Area administered the PRC program for
the Colville Service Unit, IHS did not provide the notice required by
section 222 to providers and tribal member patients on a timely or
consistent basis, if at all. Payment for purchase orders to PRC
providers consistently went unpaid, which prompted the providers to
pursue tribal members for payment of the bills when the providers did
not receive payment from IHS. Our local IHS personnel went to great
lengths to try to get PRC services for our tribal members and otherwise
make the PRC program workable as best they could. The IHS Portland Area
Office, however, would impose new obstacles at every turn.
The IHS Portland Area office returned the PRC program back to the
Colville Service Unit in the fall of 2022. Our local IHS staff found
that a large backlog of unreconciled purchase orders--referred to as
``undelivered orders''--had accumulated during the time the Portland
Area Office administered the program. Undelivered orders include
purchase orders that have not been paid, have been partially paid, were
issued but not used, or any number of other circumstances that
prevented the purchase orders from being reconciled and closed out.
For every year since 2018 that the IHS Portland Area administered
the PRC program, a backlog accumulated annually of between 1500 to 2000
undelivered orders. The Colville Tribes estimates that of the
approximately $33 million in PRC carryover funds that the IHS Portland
Area currently has on its books, as much as $24 million of that amount
is attributable to the undelivered orders at the Colville Service Unit
dating back to 2018.
B. IHS Mismanagement has Inflicted Hardships on Tribal Members and
Eroded Health Care Delivery on the Colville Reservation

IHS's mismanagement of the PRC program--specifically its failure to
pay PRC providers--has created a domino effect of negative outcomes.
Since most tribal members cannot afford to pay medical bills, when IHS
does not pay PRC providers and the providers do not receive payment
from tribal members, the providers will usually assign the debt to
third party debt collectors. Even though section 222 of the IHCIA
generally states that individuals are not liable for bills associated
with authorized PRC services, the PRC providers rely on the boilerplate
consent forms that they require all patients to sign as an alternative
basis to pursue the debt.
Being referred to collection agencies negatively impacts tribal
members' credit scores, which results in higher interest rates for
mortgages and consumer loans and, in some cases, the inability to
obtain credit or financing altogether. Because of IHS's mismanagement
of the PRC program, many tribal members on the Colville Reservation
have had their credit negatively impacted through no fault of their
own. For those tribal members who are able and choose to pay medical
bills from PRC services out of fear of having their credit impacted by
collections activity, IHS does not have a readily accessible process to
reimburse those payments.
IHS's mismanagement of the PRC program has resulted in many
Colville tribal members avoiding IHS care altogether out of fear of
being saddled with medical bills and having their credit negatively
affected. For some individuals who do not have other insurance or
healthcare options, they simply go without care. Also, when tribal
members shun IHS facilities, the user population for a given IHS
service unit will decrease, which will reduce the service unit's
allocation of PRC funds under the PRC distribution formula. This has
been happening at the Colville Service Unit for years and our
allocation of PRC funds has decreased because of it.
Yet another consequence of IHS's mismanagement is a dwindling
number of local health providers that are willing to participate in the
PRC program. Like most rural communities, north central and
northeastern Washington has a limited number of private health
providers. When these providers cannot predict if or when IHS will pay
them for PRC services, they have little reason to continue
participating in the PRC program.
The Colville Tribes is aware of PRC providers that have refused to
schedule appointments with tribal members that have balances from
previous PRC purchase orders that have not been paid by IHS. We are
also aware of providers that have dropped out of the PRC program
because of IHS's administration of the program. The limited and
shrinking number of PRC providers is aggravated by the high vacancy
rate of IHS employed health providers. There is a 64 percent vacancy
rate at the Colville IHS Service Unit, and many of these vacancies have
been unfilled for months, or even years. The Colville Service Unit's
one full-time doctor is leaving on May 1, 2024.
C. The PRC Improvement Act would Provide Overdue Clarity to the PRC
Program

H.R. 7516 would amend section 222 of the IHCIA to clarify that
individuals that receive PRC care that is authorized by IHS shall not
be liable to any ``provider, debt collector, or any other person.'' The
current section 222 does not mention debt collectors, so the inclusion
of these references will provide needed clarity.
The inclusion of ``[n]otwithstanding any other provision of law''
at the beginning of section 222(a) is intended to preempt, by operation
of federal law, the boilerplate consent forms that providers require
patients to sign before receiving care from establishing an independent
right for the provider to assign medical bills generated by the visit
(that IHS does not pay) to collection agencies. federally preempting
the use of these forms to prevent providers from pursuing tribal
members for IHS-authorized PRC medical bills through collection
agencies will keep the focus and responsibility for paying those
medical bills on IHS, where it belongs.
Finally, H.R. 7516 would add new subsection to section 222 that
requires IHS to reimburse individuals who paid medical bills out-of-
pocket for IHS authorized PRC services. The new subsection would
require IHS to implement reimbursement procedures by allowing
individuals to submit evidence of payment electronically or in-person
at IHS facilities. On the Colville Reservation, many elders who have
been sent to collections for unpaid IHS PRC bills require the option to
provide documents in-person instead of online. This provision is
intended to accommodate those circumstances. Upon receipt of evidence
of payment, IHS would have 30 days to provide the reimbursement.
While there are many issues with IHS's management of the PRC
program, the Purchased and Referred Care Improvement Act would address
the critical issue of tribal members being sent to collections
agencies. The Colville Tribes urges the Committee to take whatever
steps are necessary to secure enactment of H.R. 7516 into law.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Jarred-Michael Erickson,
Chairman, Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your written testimony, you stated how detrimental
the dysfunction in the PRC system has been for the Colville tribe and
subsequently Colville tribal members.

Control of the PRC program was returned to the Colville Service
Unit in 2022. Since then:

1a) Has the PRC program improved since control was returned to the
Colville Service Unit?

Answer. The PRC program is worse following the Portland Area
Office's transfer of the program back to the Colville Service Unit
because the Area Office allowed thousands of open purchase orders to
accumulate while it had the program. This has created a significant
additional workload for our local IHS employees, who are trying to
clear the backlog of open purchase orders while processing new PRC
requests from tribal members.

1b) Has IHS improved the timeliness of their payments to providers
since 2022?

Answer. Our local IHS staff is trying to improve the timeliness of
payments to providers, but this effort has been hampered by the legacy
of the Portland Area Office's administration of the PRC program. Much
of the local IHS staff's time has been spent trying to pay PRC
providers for unpaid purchase orders that accumulated during the
Portland Area Office's administration of the program. Local IHS staff
are also trying to renew PRC provider agreements with local providers
that left the PRC program during that same time because of unpaid
bills.
Also, one of the chokepoints in the PRC process is the fiscal
intermediary (FI). The FI's role is to evaluate the bills that
providers generate for a PRC patient visit and adjust them (if needed)
downward if the provider is billing for services or amounts that IHS
will not pay under the PRC provider agreement. IHS has contracted with
Blue Cross/Blue Shield (BCBS) in Albuquerque, NM, to serve at the FI
for the PRC program. Tribes have no control over the FI or its
workload, so often the delay in providers being paid is due to delays
on the part of the FI. IHS manages the FI contract and presumably could
prod BCBS to perform better through penalties in its agreement with the
FI.

1c) Are there any further improvements the Colville Service Unit
needs to implement?

Answer. Several. The lack of staff and high vacancy rate for
provider and administrative positions must be addressed by IHS. We
understand that IHS is in the process of increasing the salaries of PRC
personnel to make them less likely to leave for other IHS positions,
which would be a helpful step if implemented.
IHS must also update its hiring practices. On May 1, 2024, the
Colville Service Unit lost its only full-time doctor. This departure
was long planned, but because of IHS personnel policies, IHS cannot
advertise a position until the position is vacant. This means that the
Colville Service Unit will be without a full-time doctor for some time
as IHS must start the advertising process from the beginning. This is
not a Colville Service Unit issue as much as it is a IHS headquarters
issue.
Finally, IHS must improve its custody of paper records and its
transition from paper records to electronic health records. During the
time that the Portland Area Office administered the PRC program, paper
documents were lost, destroyed, and otherwise not inputted into IHS's
electronic health records system. This has resulted in tribal members
being ineligible to receive PRC care through no fault of their own
because their eligibility records were not in the system. For those
tribal members whose records were not transitioned into the system,
they must produce written eligibility documentation anew to receive
future PRC care--even those that have lived their entire lives on the
Colville Reservation.

Question 2. Please expand on your written statement about how IHS's
inability to pay PRC claims can discourage tribal members from seeking
health care.

2a) How does poor health care impact a tribal member's willingness
to seek out health care?

Answer. IHS's mismanagement of the PRC affects tribal members in
multiple ways. There is a fear that if they get PRC care authorized by
IHS that they will inevitably end up getting sent to collections
agencies because of IHS's history of not being able to pay providers on
time. Fearing this outcome, tribal members will avoid seeking care for
minor medical conditions that may evolve into serious, or even life-
threatening, conditions months or years later. Tribal members have lost
faith in IHS and have, unfortunately, become apathetic to receiving
health care until it is too late.

Question 3. Are you aware of any PRC program carryover funds in
your region, and if so, can you provide the committee with numbers and/
or documentation showing this?

Answer. The most recent numbers that we are aware of are numbers
that IHS provided in February 2024 to IHS's PRC Workgroup. Those
numbers are in the graphic below and show that the Portland IHS area
with $35,105,721.03 in PRC carryover as of January 15, 2024. The
Phoenix IHS Area had $80,364,423.67 in carryover as of that same date.
The amount of carryover reflected in this chart is generally consistent
with the carryover balances that these IHS area offices had in 2023.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5585.001

.epsQuestion 4. What other information and/or examples of how the
PRC program has affected Colville tribal members would you like to
provide to the Committee?

Answer. Apart from the issues with IHS paying PRC providers, when
the Portland Area IHS administered the PRC program for the Colville
Service Unit, it imposed onerous documentation requirements not
required by the IHS handbook or any other IHS authority on Colville
tribal members. These requirements included requiring tribal members--
including elders--on an annual basis, to produce utility bills, blood
quantum and other proof of tribal enrollment, and other information not
required by the IHS regulations or handbook to PRC care. Those who were
unable to produce this information either went without care or obtained
care on their own and subsequently faced collection agencies when IHS
refused to pay. The Portland IHS Area Director, Marcus Martinez,
informed the CCT in late 2022 that the additional eligibility
requirements should never have been imposed, but the damage had already
been done.

There are also scores of examples of how IHS's mismanagement of the
PRC program has affected Colville tribal members. Here are a few:

One individual received a $54,000 bill after his wife, a
tribal member, passed away following injuries sustained in
a car accident. For unknown reasons, IHS refused to pay for
the wife's emergency care. Because IHS refused to pay, the
husband used money out of the insurance proceeds for the
vehicle to pay the medical bills. Even though the widower
used insurance funds for the totaled vehicle--and not
insurance proceeds for his wife's medical care--IHS refused
to reimburse the widower for the out-of-pocket payment for
what should have been IHS covered emergency services.

A tribal member was deemed ineligible for services mid-
cancer treatment due to the gratuitous eligibility
documentation requirements that the Portland Area Office
imposed during its direct administration of the PRC program
for the Colville Service Unit.

A tribal elder receiving dental care experienced extreme
weight loss while waiting for dental implants and dentures
after a tooth extraction, services that were delayed
because of PRC administrative issues.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Erickson, for your important
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Sheri Buretta for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHERI BURETTA, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, CHUGACH
ALASKA CORPORATION, ANCHORAGE, ALASKA

Ms. Buretta. [Speaking Native language.] Hello. Good
afternoon, Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez,
and members of the Committee. Thank you for the kind
introduction, Representative Peltola, I am honored to present
to you, along with my fellow panelists, and express my support
for H.R. 2687.
As mentioned, I am the Chairman of the Board for Chugach
Alaska Corporation, one of the 12 regional corporations created
from the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, ANCSA of 1971.
The Chugach region is in beautiful Prince William Sound and
Lower Cook Inlet, often referred to as God's country. Chugach
and many other Alaska corporations and organizations have
supported this legislation since the late beloved
Representative Don Young introduced the original version over 5
years ago.
We are happy and proud that Representative Mary Peltola,
with Representative Pete Stauber, our original co-sponsor,
joined together to continue this essential and long overdue
bipartisan effort to reform ANCSA and H.R. 2687.
As an Alaska Native Corporation, ANC, we serve the
interests of our Alaska Native people of the Chugach region and
represent more than 2,900 shareholders. Many still live off the
resources of the land, subsisting on their catch in rural and
remote villages with harsh living conditions, and many have no
stores.
This is the case for the village that my family is from,
the Native village of Tatitlek, where you can only access the
village by air or boat with increasing costs for goods,
services, and medical care.
That is why many official organizations and agencies,
including the U.S. Congress, Census Bureau, Indian Health
Service, and the state of Alaska recognize these Alaska Native
residents as a vulnerable and disadvantaged population.
Many of our people are considered below poverty because of
their minimal income. Supporting community in the group is our
culture and way of our people, and this is how we have endured
for thousands of years in the harsh Alaska climate.
This is especially true when it comes to taking care of our
elders who express the challenges they face to pay for
healthcare and basic necessities such as glasses, dentures, or
food.
Most do not have pensions or retirement accounts. Village
and regional corporations in Alaska provide benefits to our
Native elders through cash dividend distributions and
disbursements from settlement trusts.
Often the amount we give is just enough to push up against
the threshold amount these elders and disabled shareholders
receive through Federal assistance programs for housing,
nutrition assistance, Medicare, and Medicaid to support them
and their communities.
Since 1976, ANCSA allowed for an exclusion of the first
$2,000 in dividends when determining eligibility for these
programs, and this $2,000 exclusion has not been increased or
adjusted for inflation since 1988.
Congress first authorized ANCs to establish settlement
trusts in 1988, and many trusts provide long-term multi-
generational protection and growth. However, Congress has never
amended ANCSA to create an exclusion for benefits received by
Alaska Natives from the Settlement Trust authorized by this
very Act.
Settlement trusts are one of the most powerful tools ANCs
have to help Alaska Natives combat poverty. H.R. 2687 helps for
a much-needed improvement of distributions from the trust to
our most vulnerable people, our elders, our disabled, and our
blind.
Under H.R. 2687, distributions of trust benefits to Alaska
Native elders 65 and older or disabled individuals will not
count against them for purposes of determining eligibility for
governmental assistance program.
My hope is our elders and disabled shareholders should not
have to choose between healthcare benefits, housing assistance,
or food stamps and receiving a dividend distribution that
allowed them to pay for their bills each month.
The number of Alaska Natives H.R. 2687 will provide relief
to is small and represents a low percentage of the overall
Alaska Native population.
This results from the CBO analysis in a score for the bill
that is very low, but the bill is extremely important to those
who lose the benefits from their settlement trusts in order to
maintain Federal assistance benefits.
For this reason, I respectfully urge the Committee and
Congress to enact H.R. 2687 in the 118th Congress. Thank you
for the opportunity to talk to you about this important
legislation.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Buretta follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sheri Buretta, Chairman of the Board,
Chugach Alaska Corporation
on H.R. 2687

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of the
Committee:
As Chairman of the Board of Chugach Alaska Corporation (Chugach),
the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Regional Corporation
for the Prince William Sound and Lower Cook Inlet, I would like to
express my support for H.R. 2687. Chugach, along with many other ANCSA
corporations and organizations, have supported this legislation since
the late Rep. Don Young introduced the original version over four years
ago. We are pleased and proud that Rep. Mary Peltola, with Rep. Pete
Stauber as original co-sponsor, have united to continue this essential
and long overdue bipartisan effort to reform ANCSA in the manner
prescribed by H.R. 2687.
As an Alaska Native Corporation (ANC), we serve the interests of
the Alaska Native people of the Chugach region and represent more than
2,900 shareholders. Many of these shareholders continue to live a
subsistence lifestyle in rural and remote villages in our region, where
they endure harsh living conditions. Villages have limited access to
the road system, while many are only accessible by air or boat,
increasing costs for goods, services, and medical care. That's why many
authoritative organizations and official agencies, including the U.S.
Congress, U.S. Census Bureau, Indian Health Services, and the State of
Alaska, recognize these Alaska Native residents as a vulnerable and
disadvantaged population. Many of our people are among the poorest of
the poor.
Building community is a core behavior engrained in our Alaska
Native culture in order to survive these harsh conditions in rural
Alaska, and this is especially true when it comes to taking care of our
Elders and those who are disabled. Elders who live in these areas
express the challenges they face in making decisions to pay for
healthcare and basic necessities, such as glasses, dentures, or food.
We have also heard from Elders asking to give their shares away and
Settlement Trust benefits back in order to protect their Medicaid and
Medicare benefits. Many do not have pensions or retirement accounts.
Village and Regional Corporations provide benefits and
opportunities including dividend distributions, educational
scholarships, cultural programs, internships, and Elder's benefits and
distributions from Settlement Trusts, but Elders and our disabled
population also rely on federal assistance programs for housing,
nutrition assistance, Medicare, and Medicaid to support their
communities. Since 1976, Section 29 of ANCSA (43 USC 1626) has excluded
the first $2,000 in ANC dividends when making determinations of
eligibility for these programs. That $2,000 exclusion has not been
increased or even indexed for inflation since 1988.
Congress first authorized ANCs to establish settlement trusts in
1988 and since that time, many such Trusts have been established to
provide for the long-term, multigenerational protection and growth of
our Alaska Native Settlement Trusts for the benefit of our
shareholders. However, Congress has never amended ANCSA to create an
exclusion for benefits received by Alaska Natives from the settlement
trusts authorized by ANCSA. This is ironic, because settlement trusts
are one of the most powerful tools ANCs have to help Alaska Natives
combat poverty, and the many ills that accompany it.
H.R. 2687 provides for a narrow but much-needed and important
improvement in the treatment of distributions from the Trusts to the
most vulnerable of our people, our Elders (and our blind and disabled
Alaska Natives as well). Under H.R. 2687, distributions of Trust
benefits to Alaska Native Elders (65 years or older) or to disabled
Alaska Natives, will not count against those individuals for purposes
of determining eligibility for governmental assistance programs. The
legislation is critical because it prevents Elders and those who are
disabled from losing eligibility for important, life-sustaining
benefits such as housing assistance and food stamps, by virtue of a
distribution of benefits to them from their Alaska Native Settlement
Trust.
Our Elders and our disabled shareholders should not have to choose
between healthcare and receiving a distribution that will allow them to
pay their bills each month.
H.R. 2687 is very targeted to Alaska Natives who are Elders or
disabled, and the bill does not provide a broad comprehensive exclusion
of income from Settlement Trusts, for eligibility determination
purposes, across the total population of Alaska Natives. While Chugach
believes such an exclusion should ultimately be enacted, because ANCSA
benefits should not compromise other benefits to which Alaska Natives
are entitled by virtue of their being U.S. citizens or by virtue of
being Native Americans, Chugach also recognizes it is critical to
prioritize the needs of our Elders and disabled in the narrower manner
prescribed by H.R. 2687. While the number of Elders and disabled
individuals for whom H.R. 2687 will provide relief is small, and
represents a low percentage of the overall Alaska Native population,
thereby resulting, as we understand from CBO's analysis, in the budget
``score'' for the bill being very low, it is nevertheless extremely
important to those Elders and disabled Natives who should not have to
forgo their benefits from ANCSA in order to maintain federal assistance
benefits to which they are otherwise entitled.
For these reasons, I respectfully urge the Committee and the
Congress enact this bill as soon as possible.
Please let me know if I can provide any additional information or
materials for the Committee as it considers this important piece of
legislation.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Ms. Buretta, for that enlightening
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Janet Alkire for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JANET ALKIRE, GREAT PLAINS AREA REPRESENTATIVE,
NATIONAL INDIAN HEALTH BOARD, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Alkire. [Speaking Native language.] I greet you with a
good heart, Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez,
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. On behalf of the
National Indian Health Board and the 574 Sovereign American
Indian and Alaska Native Tribal Nations we serve, thank you for
this opportunity to provide testimony on the Purchased and
Referred Care Improvement Act.
My name is Janet Alkire. I serve as the Tribal Chairwoman
of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and the Great Plains Area
Representative for the National Indian Health Board, and I want
thank Congressman Johnson for that introduction, also.
The PRC program is an important part of how healthcare is
delivered in Indian Country. Unfortunately, the IHS's
administration of the program has had significant challenges in
staffing, management, provider education, and payment, which
has impacted individual tribal citizens and whole tribal
communities.
When the PRC Program is not functioning properly, it not
only fails to uphold the trust responsibility, but it also
personally damages the lives of tribal citizens caught in the
middle.
PRC is rationed based on the IHS medical priority levels.
To access the PRC Program, tribal citizens are required to have
been approved before utilizing a referral to outside care.
The process is already incredibly cumbersome and difficult
to navigate for tribal citizens who are trying to seek care. It
can become even more difficult when IHS facilities and area
offices are understaffed, leading to significant delays in the
approvals for the care.
Delays in care worsened chronic medical conditions for
tribal citizens waiting to assess a referral through PRC, but
even after a patient has received care, those health visits can
continue to follow them.
Once a tribal citizen has gotten their approval and gone to
an outside provider, the bill should be sent to the IHS
facility for payment, but the process, currently at many IHS
facilities amounts to an administrative black hole for outside
providers and tribal citizens.
Once bills are submitted to be paid, tribal citizens do not
know if the IHS is completing its part of the process and will
not know until the bill arrives. The PRC program also struggles
from misunderstanding and poor education in the provider
community.
Providers and billing contractors often lack an even basic
understanding of the Indian Health System. It is illegal for
providers to bill tribal citizens who have an approved PRC
referral.
Unfortunately, this does not keep these providers from
sending bills to tribal citizens for care they received under
their PRC referral. Some PRC providers also frequently lump all
services for a patient together, whether they have a PRC
approval or they bill tribal citizens healthcare coverage.
When providers do this, it contributes to administrative
burden for Indian health providers to work through claims in a
timely manner. IHS is a payer of last resort, and this is an
administrative burden on IHS when they already struggle enough
with staffing to process PRC claims.
The Indian Healthcare Improvement Act does not provide
recourse for the IHS against these provider practices, nor
penalty for PRC vendors engaging in these practices. When PRC
claims go unpaid, tribal citizens suffer.
They often receive bills from providers and debt collectors
for unpaid PRC claims. Tribal citizens who receive these bills
are frequently faced with threatening language regarding these
bills.
Some citizens will pay the claims out of pocket to avoid
adverse impacts to their credit scores. Others are not so
lucky, often lacking the resources to respond to the provider's
demands.
In these cases, these bills are turned over to collections.
Once a bill is in collections, it damages the tribal citizen's
personal credit, and they are chased by creditors and debt
collectors for bills that should have rightfully been paid by
the Indian Health Service.
Because our tribal citizens use the Indian Health System
for their health care, many are not familiar with health care
billing and third-party coverage. Some citizens suffer so
greatly from the stress of PRC billing errors, they do not seek
follow-up care.
The PRC Improvement Act seeks to clarify existing statute
to ensure tribal citizens do not bear the burden of these
administrative issues and to make some tribal citizens whole
who have paid approved PRC claims out of pocket.
To appropriately implement this legislation's purpose,
Congress should provide the IHS funding to make tribal citizens
whole under the reimbursement program.
Ms. Hageman. Ms. Alkire, I am going to need you to wrap up
so that we can move on, but we will have an opportunity to
question you. So, just a few more seconds.
Ms. Alkire. OK. Yes. In conclusion, I want to thank
Representative Johnson for introducing this legislation.
It is a small step to repairing the damage to individual
tribal citizens and tribal communities for the difficulties and
management of the PRC program. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Alkire follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Janet Alkire, Tribal Council
Chairwoman of Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and
Great Plains Area Representative, National Indian Health Board
on H.R. 7516

Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee, on behalf of the National
Indian Health Board (NIHB) and the 574 sovereign federally recognized
American Indian and Alaska Native Tribal nations we serve, thank you
for this opportunity to provide testimony on H.R. 7516, the Purchased
and Referred Care Improvement Act of 2024. My name is Janet Alkire. I
serve as the Tribal Council Chairwoman for the Standing Rock Sioux
Tribe and the Great Plains Area Representative for the National Indian
Health Board (NIHB).
The Purchased and Referred Care (PRC) Program is an important part
of how healthcare is delivered for American Indian and Alaska Native
(AI/AN) Tribal citizens across Indian Country. Unfortunately, the
Indian Health Service's (IHS) administration of the program has had
significant challenges in staffing, management, and payment which have
impacted individual Tribal citizens and whole Tribal communities. H.R.
7516, the PRC Improvement Act, seeks to clarify existing statute to
ensure Tribal citizens do not bear the burden of these administrative
issues and to make Tribal citizens whole who have paid approved PRC
claims out-of-pocket to protect their credit from debts which belong to
the federal government as part of its trust responsibility to Indian
tribes and their citizens for healthcare.
IHS Purchased and Referred Care Program

The PRC Program is a critical piece of the IHS's care delivery
model. When the IHS does not have a specialist working on site or a
higher level of care is needed, Tribal citizens are referred to outside
providers for the care they need which IHS cannot directly provide. The
PRC program is supposed to fill gaps in the service delivery model.
When there is a lack of providers at facilities, this can become even
more acute. Reliance on the PRC program varies region to region but is
particularly important for Direct Service Tribes which receive their
care directly from the IHS. This is also true of IHS Areas not served
by a dedicated IHS hospital or where the Area hospital is understaffed.
The PRC Program exists in a vicious cycle. Insufficient facilities or
large provider shortages in an IHS Service Unit or Area can drive the
need for PRC referrals because there are no doctors to treat patients;
conversely, a lack of providers can also delay or completely bar access
to adequate PRC referrals for necessary specialist care.
PRC care is rationed based on the IHS Medical Priority Levels.\1\
To access the PRC program, a Tribal citizen is required to have
approval before utilizing a referral to outside care. This is designed
to ensure that care meets the necessary priority level requirements for
their Area health facility. The process is already incredibly
cumbersome and difficult to navigate for Tribal citizens who are trying
to seek care that was referred by a provider. This already arduous
process can become even more difficult when IHS facilities or Area
offices are understaffed, leading to significant delays in the review
of applications and communication of approval of referred care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Indian Health Service, ``Purchased/Referred Care Requirements:
Priorities of Care,'' accessed on: April 25, 2024 at https://
www.ihs.gov/prc/eligibility/requirements-priorities-of-care/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Extended delays of care for acute conditions such as cardiac or
renal disease can make conditions significantly worse for Tribal
citizens living with those diagnoses. When acute chronic conditions do
not receive the appropriate levels of care, they can decrease the
standard and quality of life for the patient and can worsen other
comorbidities that patients have or may develop. In some cases, these
delays for acute chronic conditions can lead to death if not treated
timely.
Understaffing and administrative difficulties also impact Tribal
citizens who have successfully navigated the PRC approval process. Once
a Tribal citizen has gotten their approval and gone to an outside
provider, the bill is sent to the IHS facility for processing of the
claim for payment. But the process currently at many IHS facilities
amounts to an administrative black hole for outside providers and
Tribal citizens. Once bills are submitted to be paid, Tribal citizens
do not know if the IHS is completing its part of the process and will
not know until a bill arrives.
Outside Provider Administrative Failures

The PRC program also struggles from misunderstanding and poor
education in the provider community who is used to provide services
through PRC referrals. NIHB has heard reports that certain providers
and their billing contractors often lack even a basic education in the
Indian health system which leads to a series of issues for Tribal
citizens and the IHS. Under current statute, it is illegal for
providers to bill Tribal citizens who have an approved PRC referral for
care. This, however, does not deter these providers from sending bills
to Tribal citizens for care they received under their PRC referral. In
fact, we have heard reports of instances where both the IHS and a
Tribal citizen receive bills from the provider for the same services.
Some PRC vendors also frequently lump all services for a patient
together, whether they have an approved PRC referral or not, and submit
those for payment to IHS. When providers do this, it contributes to
administrative burden for Indian health providers to work through
claims in a timely manner. They also do not appropriately bill Tribal
citizens' third party health care coverages, frequently pushing all
claims to PRC payment first. IHS is the payor of last resort, and
sorting through those claims and needing to coordinate for initial
billing to other health care coverages slows down the process and
places undue administrative burden on IHS, when the agency already
struggles to have enough staff to process PRC claims. This is also true
when balance billing happens. When the remainder of the claim needs to
be billed to the PRC program, those bills can come months and months
late or again be sent directly to the Tribal citizen instead of to PRC
offices.
The lack of education and understanding on the part of PRC vendors
can really make the management of PRC difficult. In some instances, PRC
offices never receive the claims from the outside provider, and bills
go directly to the Tribal citizen. This can cause significant distress
for Tribal citizens requiring them to contact IHS to provide the bill,
which does not always happen. In some cases, Tribal citizens pay those
bills in error.
Section 222 of Indian Healthcare Improvement Act (25 U.S.C.
Sec. 1601 et seq.) (IHCIA) does not provide recourse for the IHS
against these provider practices nor penalty for PRC vendors engaging
in these practices. These practices cause distress to Tribal citizens
as well as administrative delays and confusion for operating the PRC
program efficiently and effectively.
Impacts of A Poorly Administer PRC Program

We know that our communities already suffer from the impacts of
disparities. American Indians and Alaska Natives have from the lowest
life expectancy in the nation, declining to 65 years--10.9 years less
than the national average and equivalent to the nationwide average in
1944.
2,3
Our People suffer from significant disparities for
a majority of diseases which lead to mortality,\4\ and the impacts of
social determinants of health, especially economic outcomes, have a
statistically significant impact on diagnosis of chronic disease in
American Indians and Alaska Natives.\5\ These can be exacerbated when
the programs meant to provide care, such as the PRC program, do not
operate as intended.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Prevention and Control, Provisional Life Expectancy Estimates
for 2021, Report No. 23, August 2022, accessed on: March 20, 2023 at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/vsrr/vsrr023.pdf, (total for All races
and origins minus non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Native).
\3\ Id.
\4\ Indian Health Service, ``Indian Health Disparities'', October
2019, accessed on April 26, 2024 at: https://www.ihs.gov/sites/
newsroom/themes/responsive2017/display_objects/documents/factsheets/
Disparities.pdf.
\5\ Adamsen C, Schroeder S, LeMire S, Carter P. Education, Income,
and Employment and Prevalence of Chronic Disease Among American Indian/
Alaska Native Elders. Prev Chronic Dis. 2018 Mar 22;15:E37. doi:
10.5888/pcd15.170387. PMID: 29565785; PMCID: PMC5871354.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When PRC claims go unpaid, Tribal citizens suffer immensely.
Unfortunately, Tribal citizens often receive bills from providers and
debt collection agencies for unpaid PRC claims, sometimes because of
mistakes or lack of knowledge on the providers' part, and sometimes
because of delays by IHS in paying the providers for the services.
Tribal citizens who receive these bills are frequently faced with
intimidating and threatening language regarding bills. Some Tribal
citizens who have the means will pay the claims out-of-pocket to avoid
adverse impacts to their credit scores. Others are not so lucky, often
lacking the resources to respond to the providers' demands. In these
cases, those bills are then turned over to collections. Once a bill
goes to collections, it damages the Tribal citizen's personal credit,
and they are chased by creditors and debt collectors for bills which
should have rightfully been paid by the IHS. Because American Indians
and Alaska Natives use the Indian health system for their healthcare,
many are not familiar with health care billing and third party health
care coverage. When a Tribal citizen gets a bill or a threatening
notice from a debt collector, this can cause significant distress. Some
Tribal citizens suffer so greatly from the stress caused be billing
errors related to PRC care that it discourages them from returning to
seek follow up care entirely.
PRC is part of the federal government's trust responsibility to
Indian tribes and their citizens to provide for healthcare. When the
IHS fails to adequately and timely respond to and pay PRC approved
claims, it not only fails to uphold the trust responsibility, but it
also personally damages the lives of Tribal citizens caught in the
middle between outside providers and the IHS. For Tribal citizens
living in Service Units and Areas where PRC is a lifeline to access
care, but those claims go unpaid, Tribal citizens can see repeated
credit damage through no fault of their own. Lower credit scores can
prevent Tribal citizens from accessing lines of credit and loans that
allow them to build stability and improve their and their family's
quality of life. Rates to finance for vehicles, homes, and credit cards
can become unaffordable or completely inaccessible.
When whole communities are impacted by a PRC program which does not
adequately and timely pay claims, they carry the burdens of those
disparities. Financially, communities can experience economic
stagnation due to poor credit, limiting access to the tools and
resources to build vibrant and healthy communities. In health, PRC
vendors stop taking referrals from Tribal citizens due to systemically
unpaid claims. In highly rural areas where there is already a limited
number of providers to access, this can prevent access to care for
whole communities, increase driving distances to access care still
available, and in dire cases can force remaining providers to leave
communities entirely in search of more stable economic opportunities.
When Tribal citizens cannot get appropriate treatment for preventive or
newly diagnosed conditions, instances of chronic disease increase in
those communities and for those living with chronic conditions, it can
lead to increased comorbidities and in the worst scenarios untimely
death. Without early access to these critical and life-saving services,
it costs IHS more to pay for the higher levels of care Tribal citizens
need when they must present for emergent and urgent care.
Ensuring that the PRC program works effectively and efficiently to
provide the necessary care outside IHS facilities for Direct Service
Tribes is critical to maintaining the health of our People and
communities. The PRC Improvement Act of 2024 would do this by
clarifying existing statute on liability for PRC claims.
PRC Improvement Act Provisions for Improved Outcomes

The PRC Improvement Act of 2024 (H.R. 7516) would amend section 222
of the Indian Healthcare Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. Sec. 1601 et seq.)
to clarify that Tribal citizens with approved PRC referrals are not
liable for such claims, provide technical edits to update references to
the program, and add an additional section to support Tribal citizens
who have paid for approved PRC claims out of pocket.

Current statute provides that no Tribal citizen with an approved
PRC referral should be liable for payment of those claims, but the
statute does not currently clearly supersede the rights of providers to
pursue those claims. The legislation adds to subsection (a)
``[n]otwithstanding any other provision of law'', which is important to
ensure that other provisions of law, such as provider consent forms,
cannot be used to assign the federal government's debts to individual
Tribal citizens. This language preserves the federal government's trust
responsibility to provide for healthcare to Tribal citizens.

Further, the legislation makes additions under subsections (b) and
(c) that the individual is not liable to any ``provider, debt
collector, or any other person'' identifying the individuals who can
claim and clearly limiting the liability of individual Tribal citizens
to those claimants.

The PRC Improvement Act also introduces a new subsection (d) which
would require the IHS to develop and implement a procedure for
reimbursing Tribal citizens who paid out of pocket for approved PRC
claims. The IHS's new reimbursement procedure would allow impacted
Tribal citizens to submit electronic or hard copy proof of payment
documentation to receive appropriate reimbursement for their out-of-
pocket expenses which IHS should have rightfully paid to providers. The
inclusion of this provision demonstrates the government's commitment to
continue to recognize and honor its trust responsibility to Tribal
citizens for their healthcare.

To appropriately implement this legislation's purpose, Congress
should also provide the IHS funding to make Tribal citizens whole under
the reimbursement program. This legislation can be successful, and I
urge Congress to take the steps necessary to ensure that success.
Congress should consider how to address provider violations of the PRC
terms when they send bills to Tribal citizens. The IHS could provide
additional training or a manual for PRC vendors, but this work would
require development and roll out of such a product as well as education
for PRC vendors.
Conclusion

The PRC Improvement Act of 2024 is one small step to repairing the
damage done to individual Tribal citizens and Tribal communities for
the mismanagement of the PRC program. The federal government made
promises in its Tribal treaties to provide for, among other things, the
healthcare of Tribal citizens. This legislation will help repair this
one portion of the broken promises of the federal government and will
support a step towards healthier Tribal communities.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Honorable Janet Alkire,
Chairwoman, Standing Rock Sioux Tribe and
the Great Plains Representative, National Indian Health Board

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Please expand on your written statement about how IHS's
inability to pay PRC claims can discourage tribal members from seeking
health care.

1a) How does poor health care impact a tribal member's willingness
to seek out health care?

Answer. When Tribal citizens receive medical bills for claims which
should have been paid by the PRC Program, it can create a lot of
distress for Tribal citizens and their families. If that medical bill
ends up in collections, it can exponentially increase the stress and
distress that Tribal citizens feel. When they turn to the bureaucratic
process created by IHS to administer the program, it can leave many
Tribal citizens feeling hopeless for a solution to their specific
concerns.
The distress and the lack of resolution in the bureaucratic process
can be a deterrent to Tribal citizens re-using the PRC Program to
access necessary care again. When Tribal citizens have chronic or acute
diseases which require specialist care unavailable from the IHS, the
PRC Program is a necessary lifeline to receiving the life saving and
critical care they need to manage those conditions. If there is a
strong disincentive to go receive that care, such as the real
possibility of medical bills and debt collection, Tribal citizens will
avoid seeking the care they need. What is worse, is this can have a
deterrent effect even beyond the specific Tribal citizen. Because our
communities are small and tight-knit, when this happens to one citizen,
word can spread of the impacts creating a larger community-wide
deterrent effect. This can contribute to lower community-wide health
outcomes if the deterrence is felt broadly.

Question 2. Your written statement mentioned the lack of education
that PRC vendors have regarding the Indian Health Care system.

2a) What kind of education do you think IHS should be providing to
vendors about the PRC program and the Indian Health System?

Answer. PRC vendors need to have a better understanding of the
Indian health system generally, but they must have an improved
understanding of how the PRC process works. The IHS has spent a lot of
administrative and regulatory effort on spelling out how beneficiaries
interact with the PRC Program, including beneficiary training, but
there is little public information for participating providers. The
Indian Health Manual, Chapter 3 which addresses the PRC Program offers
little to no information for participating PRC vendors.
Education to providers who choose to participate in the PRC Program
should start at the enrollment and contracting process by providing
some type of training and manual on how the PRC program operates and
the rules and regulations governing the program. We also recommend that
IHS work with Area Offices and Tribes to best determine what training
should address to education PRC vendors since the program is largely
operated at the Service Unit and Area Office level.

2b) How often should this education be renewed?

Answer. The IHS should set a regular cadence, annually at a
minimum, on updating the educational information for providers to keep
pace with regular regulatory and policy changes to the PRC Program.

Question 3. Are you aware of any PRC program carryover funds in
your region, and if so, can you provide the committee with numbers and/
or documentation showing this?

Answer. The IHS shared with Tribes in January 2024 that the Great
Plains Area had a PRC prior year balance of $27.7 million.
Unfortunately, due to the nature of how PRC is operated for Direct
Service Tribes, this information is not regularly available to the
Tribes served. The IHS would be best placed to answer the
Subcommittee's questions on current balances, rates of spend down, and
documentation.

Question 4. What other information and/or examples of how the PRC
program has affected tribal members would you like to provide to the
Committee?

Answer. I do not have any additional information to provide at this
time.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Ms. Alkire, for providing us with
that troubling testimony. And I also would like to thank Mr.
Johnson for bringing what I think is an important bill forward.
I am now going to recognize the members of the Committee
for questioning, and I am going to start with myself.
Ms. Egorin, since I have been Chairman of this
Subcommittee, this has been one of the primary issues that has
been brought to my attention. And we have had several hearings
involving the IHS, and we have brought folks from around the
country. And this is something that is, I will use the word
again, terribly troubling.
We made some commitments to these folks, and it is time
that we meet those commitments and that we fix this system. One
of the ways to do that, I think, is to address the fact that we
understand that there are some IHS area offices that have
significant PRC carryover funds.
In other words, they are holding the cash instead of
spending it and doing what they are supposed to be doing with
it. So, with some regions having carryover in the tens of
millions of dollars, I obviously find that terribly
unacceptable.
How much of this carryover is due to PRC purchase orders
that have not been reconciled or otherwise closed out by the
IHS? And does the IHS have an action plan to address this
backlog of open purchase orders so that the individual tribal
members are not contacted by providers to pay these bills?
Ms. Egorin. Congresswoman, thank you very much for that
question and actually for your commitment to bringing this
forward.
This is something that is shared by Director Tso, and it
was reflected in PRC being one of the top three issues on her
work plan for IHS, as well as clearing the OIG recommendations
from the OIG report that highlighted the challenges.
In terms of unobligated funds, one of the steps that she
has taken is really setting a target of only 10 percent to
making sure that dollars are flowing out. In terms of your
specific question, I would like to be able to get back to you
with that on the data of how much are unobligated funds from
claims that have not been processed.
Ms. Hageman. And I would also like to have a timeline as to
when that will be addressed, that these funds are actually
spent on the people that are entitled to that money to make
sure that this does not continue to happen.
Another follow-up question is that H.R. 7516 establishes a
mechanism for PRC service reimbursements to be completed within
30 days by the IHS. And in your testimony, you mentioned that
this timeline would be impractical, even though the IHS
handbook requires the service to pay PRC claims on a 30-day
timeline.
What is the practical difference between 30 and 45 days?
Ms. Egorin. Congresswoman, I think I actually want to start
with a place of we should never have dollars going from tribal
members out. Pay and chase is not a goal. So, to be able to
say, what can we do to stop even having that should be the
place of emphasis and there are parts of the bill that get to
this.
In terms of that 30-day reconciling, it is a matter of the
staffing which has been referencing, making sure that we are
meeting our statutory obligations, but in constrained staffing
and constrained budgetary times, giving us the ability to have
a goal, but also to have that the flexibility to make sure that
we are following the law.
Ms. Hageman. Well, what is the medical industry standard
for reimbursement when a patient pays a medical bill that
insurance should be reimbursing them for?
Ms. Egorin. Congresswoman, there is not actually a
standard, and it is part of the reason that Congress has passed
several pieces of legislation to keep, I am going to put this
in quotes, ``patients out of the middle when there is a
conflict between providers and insurers.''
Reminder that IHS is a direct-care organization and not an
insurer. So, a lot of the mechanisms that are in place for
billing do not exist within IHS for reimbursing patients
directly.
Ms. Hageman. I know that this is an important issue to you.
But after 15 months of hearing about this from our tribal
members, it is an incredibly important issue for this Committee
as well.
And I really encourage the IHS to do everything that you
can to fix this.
I am going to go to Mr. Frank White Clay. In your
statement, you provided details of situations where individual
tribal members have been impacted by IHS not paying the PRC
bills.
I would invite you to expand on your statement and ask if
there were any further examples you would like to provide to
the Committee, because I think it is extremely important that
we document the problems and the challenges that your members
are facing.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Chair Hageman.
Yes, we would be here all day if I got to all the issues
that came out with IHS on PRC issues alone. We would be here
for another week if it was all the IHS issues compounded.
But just in one instance that I gave out earlier on the
young woman that was denied for her college loans. We have
issues of an elderly gentlemen, an elder of my tribe that is a
veteran, actually paid out of pocket.
He had hearing aids through the PRC program, and he went to
get them recalibrated through that and actually was authorized
through PRC. And the service provider denied him that care
specifically because IHS hasn't paid that bill for that patient
directly and he had to pay out of pocket.
And I asked him when he was going to get his reimbursement.
He said, ``I don't know. It has been a few months now, and I
don't think it is ever going to come.''
Ms. Hageman. Has it been resolved yet?
Mr. Clay. No.
Ms. Hageman. OK. We may follow up with additional written
questions so that we can have other examples for all of you on
the challenges and these problems.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much for the testimony
and for laying out what it looks like for individuals who
should be receiving the care.
And I do appreciate Dr. Egorin and the idea that there
should never be a need for reimbursement, right? But what this
legislation does is sometimes that happens, so we need to get
it done quickly.
But I am wondering if, based on the testimony I have heard
today, if we need to actually go a little bit further to
provide that 30 days so that claims, when they do get paid, for
whatever reason, but also to make sure that there should never
be any referral to a credit agency of monies that are due when
you should be receiving referred care so that it could not be
used for your credit score.
And quickly, I am going to go on down the line and ask,
Chairman, do you think that that would be useful?
Mr. Clay. Yes, it would be very useful. It should never
have happened where the tribal member does receive the bills of
collection. And in the case that it should never even happen if
PRC was doing its job.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Yes. And Chairman Erickson, I think
some of the things you pointed out in your testimony actually
dealt with the failure of when things got sent away. That
always happens, right? When things got sent away, they would
not process.
That was actually another big problem. But, Chairman
Erickson, how would you consider an amendment which would say
you cannot use these bills and these debts in a credit rating?
Because they are not the debts of the individual, they are the
debts of IHS? That is how I see this.
Mr. Erickson. Yes, that is accurate. And I would also say,
I don't know if it was Congressman Johnson that mentioned it,
but you know, it is like, it is a joke. But those 32,000 unpaid
PRC bills, I wonder if those were all Colville's, because, I
mean, that is a joke, but it is not. Because it is like, we
have $20 to $24 million, roughly, of that PRC money in the
region that isn't being used for our unpaid bills.
So, that is incredible. And it is not our job to staff IHS,
right? Currently, we are a direct service tribe, so we haven't
contracted that service. That is their job, to staff those, to
make sure they have the staff to process those bills in time.
Thirty days seems like a sufficient amount of time to get
those reimbursed for people. We have elders on fixed income. We
have people going to college who are on fixed income. They
don't have the means to even pay that bill, but they are doing
that so their credit isn't impacted, so they can get their
loans wherever they may need to further education, to just pay
their electric bill if they are an elder.
So, I think that if there is an appropriations issue there,
that is their job to make sure that they go and talk to you all
to get appropriations required to fully staff and fund their
programs. That is not our job.
We have, as of tomorrow, we have zero primary care
physicians at our IHS clinic. Zero. We will not have any staff
at our local Nespelem clinic. So, there is a bigger issue here
too, with that. But yes, to your question.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And that is a bigger issue.
Ms. Alkire, both you and Dr. Egorin mentioned in your
testimony that there is a need to make sure that we address bad
actors, right?
That the providers who violate these provisions, some of it
is educating them. But then there was another part that there
were no consequences. Could you sort of speak to that really
quickly? Because I also want to get feedback from Dr. Egorin on
it as well.
Ms. Alkire. I think when I talk about that, I meant that
there were no penalties for the providers when they send those
bills to the tribal members.
So, even the folks, in talking to our CEO on this issue in
regards to the PRC and her saying that it is all about
education with the providers, because as Chairman said, we are
direct service tribes and most of us have clinics, we don't
have hospitals.
All these higher levels of care go away from the tribe, and
they get sent out. So, we are really relying on folks like the
big hospitals, like Sanford and Avera and all these other ones.
And every time they, at those big ones, there are all these
levels of care for our people.
You can have orthopedics, neurology, and then they have to
be educated about the purchase order and the PRC. And then that
is where the confusion lies. As far as we get the bills back to
the tribes or back to IHS, they don't realize that that is
really hurting our people. They just send the bills back to our
people, sometimes because they are not educated in regards to
the IHS system.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. My time has expired, so I won't be
able to hear the response of Dr. Egorin, but part of it is an
issue of education. But another part of it that both of you
touched on was an issue of consequences. And I would love to
have you submit written response to that, doctor, so that we
can understand a little bit more what you would be looking for
in terms of suggestions, because I think it is great to hear
suggestions when we have a legislative hearing so we can
improve the legislation before us.
Thank you very much. And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair.
For Assistant Secretary Egorin. Following up on that
previous thought right here, with basically the HHS program
being just flat ignored, it seems. What examples are there of
other forms of disincentive or basically consequences when the
rules aren't followed in other areas of the HHS, other programs
that we can look to as examples of beefing up enforcement in
this particular area?
Ms. Egorin. Thank you very much for that question. And I am
going to give a short answer, recognizing time, and then offer
for you or any other member of the Committee, I am happy to
bring our subject matter experts across HHS----
Mr. LaMalfa. I will toss it to Ms. Alkire right after you,
thank you.
Ms. Egorin. Yes. I was going to say, and you can look to
examples like civil monetary penalties or conditions of
participation that are used in CMS, and there are some places
we can leverage that, but there are examples of how to hold
providers accountable for following statute and for giving
teeth behind what their obligations already are.
So, as I said, we are happy to provide technical assistance
and briefings on what is done. I want to make sure I give you
the full spectrum, because as you know, HHS has Medicaid,
Medicare, our HRSA programs, our SAMHSA programs, and
partnerships with other direct care providers.
Mr. LaMalfa. But are there any actual consequences, any
punishments that you are----
Ms. Egorin. For example, civil monetary penalties are a
dollar amount that providers have to pay. And the best example
that people know about is sort of HIPAA violations. Covered
entities have an obligation for when your information goes out,
how much per day they have to do.
There are similar obligations for balance billing
provisions. I don't have the specifics of the Medicaid program
in front of me, but I know there are consequences there as
well. And I am happy to provide that in writing.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, if that amount of teeth that apply to
those programs were shifted, can be applied here, do you think
that would be strong enough?
Ms. Egorin. I think, that what I have heard from my IHS
colleagues is the lack of teeth, the lack of enforcement is
definitely a challenge for PRC. It is not the only solution but
it stops that bill going out.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK.
Ms. Alkire, do you want to touch on that?
Ms. Hageman. Mr. Erickson signals to him.
Mr. LaMalfa. I saw him shaking his head. I saw Ms. Alkire
is going to have first shot at that. And I will come to
Erickson.
Ms. Alkire. Could you rephrase the question or ask the
question again?
Mr. LaMalfa. Basically, as we have seen in other HHS
programs, there are consequences that when they aren't getting
the job done and other forms of punishment, we will call it
that, if they were applied to this area here for the PRC and
for the people involved in that, would that be something you
would suggest or do you think would be effective in that, from
your experience?
Ms. Alkire. Yes, I think it would be very effective if we
had some type of penalties for this, because I think when you
talk about most of our people, a lot of them are on Medicaid,
that is their insurance. They do Medicaid, then they go, IHS.
But a lot of our people, when you have providers, the only
penalty that comes for folks that are providers is that it
comes to their license.
Mr. LaMalfa. No fines or no rules?
Ms. Alkire. Yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, we are hearing a trend here.
OK, Chairman Erickson, it is your turn at the plate.
Mr. Erickson. I just wanted to elaborate on that. A lot of
us tribes that are here are very rural tribes. So, our services
we get referred out to are usually 2 hours away each direction.
Chairman White Clay, they may be 4 hours. So, I am not
opposed, if there are repeat offenders, to some sort of
penalty, whatever that might be, but it is IHS's job to educate
these providers because they may deny services to us that we
may not get anywhere if we start penalizing them too much.
I think we ought to be cautious about how that looks and
what we need to do. Maybe for the repeat offenders, there is
something like she mentioned, but I just want to make sure we
are cautious about that because some of us have a limited
amount of providers that we have.
So, if they are penalized, they may not want to work with
IHS or tribes at all.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, thank you.
Chairman White Clay?
Mr. Clay. Yes, thank you. I want to reiterate that because
of what we have seen right now, and the biggest city near us is
Billings, Montana, an hour away from us, but we have seen, with
our elderly patients that are going there, that they have been
denied service because of PRC payments being late.
And then for an elderly cataract client, now they are going
from 1 hour away to 5 hours away into Ms. Alkire's state of
South Dakota to Rapid City, 5\1/2\ hours. They are referred out
to there, and the travel, the rooms, et cetera is all on the
elderly tribal members.
So, like we said, we would like to be cautious about some
of the penalties and everything else that goes out with that
because of the limited number of providers for our tribal
members.
So, it is a Catch-22 for us also.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, don't scare them off then, really?
But doesn't this kind of bum out your members from even
trying at all when they get to that point? Yes or no?
Mr. Clay. Yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madame Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
And the Chair now recognizes Ms. Peltola for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Madam Chair.
It feels kind of out of place having a totally different
conversation now about my bill. But, I do want to say this bill
that has been discussed and four of you are here to testify,
this is important to Alaska Natives as well.
We are also Indian Health Service beneficiaries. And I
think it is worth noting that if you look at the services and
the quality of care that Indian Health Service provides, under
the circumstances they provide them in terms of being
underfunded so chronically year, after year, after year. If
agencies across the board were as underfunded as Bureau of
Indian Affairs and Indian Health Service, I think we could show
that we actually are over performing for the amount of
resources provided to these agencies.
So, I just kind of want to stick up for Indian Health
Service a little bit here because I know that you are short
funded every year, but in regard to the Alaska bill regarding
ANCSA and providing relief to disabled people and blind and
elders for their trust settlement, Sheri, I was wondering if
you could share and tell us a little bit about how settlement
trust benefits are created and distributed and how they follow
the broader intentions of ANCSA?
Ms. Buretta. Thank you for the question. I fought hard to
get our settlement trusts in a place where they could benefit
our shareholders in a meaningful way, to have non-taxable
distributions.
So, many of our programs for our elders, 62 to 65 and then
65 and older, are extremely beneficial to them. So, I just
wanted to speak to that, that we have done a demographic and
historically, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Native
Hawaiians, their rate of their life expectancy is lower.
So, getting these benefits to them while they are still
alive is extremely important. And we use these settlement
trusts as a vehicle and a mechanism to be able to benefit their
tax position and maximize their benefit that they are receiving
for the limited amount of goods and services they are able to
buy with them.
Mrs. Peltola. Mr. Chairman, if I could follow up?
Mr. Stauber [presiding]. Yes, go ahead.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you.
Could you elaborate on some of these difficult choices that
your shareholders face and maybe give some examples?
Ms. Buretta. Yes, thank you. I had several elders call and
say that their Social Security benefits had been adjusted when
they had received settlement trust distributions that were
calculated.
They are on fixed incomes. And when their Social Security
benefits are adjusted months out after a distribution, it
really affects their ability to count on being able to buy
groceries or get their family to them.
There are a lot that really use these for glasses,
dentures, and just basic human needs that they depend upon.
Mrs. Peltola. And most blind people, or disabled, or very
elderly, they don't have an option to have a side hustle. They
don't have other options to help subsidize things when they are
off track with their benefits.
Ms. Buretta. Yes, that is right. Especially in these remote
villages that are small populations so their families end up
caring for them beyond what they can afford to care for.
Mrs. Peltola. How many people would you guess this will
affect?
Ms. Buretta. For Chugach? We estimate we have, of our
2,900, 700 are over 65, but not all of them are in that poverty
level that the threshold affects, but it is about 24 percent of
our population.
Mrs. Peltola. OK, thank you.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stauber. Representative Peltola, thank you very much
for your questions.
I just leaned and spoke to the Ranking Member. I said, you
are asking all my questions, and they are very good.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I appreciate being waved on to this Committee and to talk
about a very important piece of legislation, including H.R.
2687, which I am very proud to co-sponsor with my good friend
and colleague from Alaska, Representative Peltola.
Ms. Buretta, these might seem the same or similar because
they are, but in your role within the Chugach Alaska
Corporation, you certainly see this issue affecting the Alaska
Native elders and disabled Natives who are from the Chugach
region.
Is this issue equally affecting other Alaskans from
different parts of Alaska?
Ms. Buretta. Yes, definitely throughout the state.
Mr. Stauber. It is throughout the state? And how many did
you say from the Chugach region?
Ms. Buretta. Approximately 700, which is 24 percent of our
total.
Mr. Stauber. So, my understanding of the Alaska Native
Settlement Trust is they are meant to help provide much needed
income to Alaska Natives. Wouldn't it be counter to the purpose
of these trusts if Alaska Native elders had to turn down or
return the benefits out of fear of losing Federal housing and
nutritional assistance?
Ms. Buretta. Yes. And it is devastating to them to have to
think about either turning their shares in or trying to figure
something out so that their other benefits are not affected.
Mr. Stauber. It would be devastating for the families,
right?
Ms. Buretta. Yes.
Mr. Stauber. Individuals and the families.
I know you and other Alaska Native leaders have been
working on this issue and different forms of this legislation
for quite some time now. Can you expand upon that, from your
perspective, including your work with the late Representative
Don Young?
Ms. Buretta. Yes. Congressman Young cared deeply about our
people, our elders especially. And I know that this was a very
important piece of legislation for him. They are our precious
elders. They carry our wisdom, and for us to not honor them by
protecting them in every way we can is irresponsible.
Mr. Stauber. I look at the situation, Representative
Peltola, and this seems so beyond reasonable that this should
have been done a long time ago. I am happy to co-lead this with
you.
It is very similar to those Americans that have public
pensions that also qualify for Social Security. They don't get
their full Social Security. It is called the windfall
exemption, and it just doesn't seem to be right.
They should not have a reduction in their benefits that
they have earned for fear of losing their housing or
nutritional assistance. And again, Representative Peltola,
thanks for leading this Congress, and I am just thrilled to get
this over the finish line out of the House, and we will get it
to the Senate and hopefully pass it to law.
To all the witnesses here, thank you for your time and your
expertise and your leadership. It is greatly appreciated, and I
will yield.
Ms. Schrier, you are up for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Ranking Member.
Thank you to all of our witnesses today, and really thank
you to the members of this Subcommittee for allowing me to
participate in today's hearing to speak about the Purchased and
Referred Care Improvement Act.
I am so proud to lead this bill with my colleague from
South Dakota, Congressman Johnson. Over the years, leaders of
the Colville Tribe have shared stories with me about the
hardships that tribal members have faced to obtain healthcare
from the Indian Health Service.
And this particular bill addresses what I have come to
learn is an all-too-common occurrence at the federally managed
IHS service units, where tribal members find themselves
referred to collection agencies because IHS did not pay the
healthcare provider.
So, let me be super clear about how this goes. A primary
doctor in the IHS refers the patient for care from a specialist
or another provider not available in the IHS system. They go
outside of the IHS community for community care at their
provider's recommendation, and then, rather than IHS paying, as
they should in a timely manner, the patient ends up getting
stuck with the bill, and then if they can't pay, it goes to
collections, and then it can affect their credit rating.
This is a really big deal. The Colville Tribe's story is
particularly unfortunate because it appears that these issues
worsened when the IHS Portland area assumed direct management
of the PRC program.
And I understand that the tribe is working to contract all
IHS programs to ensure that tribal employees carry out these
important programs.
Chairman Erickson, it is so nice to see you again, and
thank you for taking the time to meet with me earlier in the
year and recently, and for being here today and raising this
issue so that I could join forces with Representative Johnson
to address it.
Your written testimony discusses how some providers who
have taken referrals from the IHS program are considering
abandoning the PRC program altogether because they are not
getting paid and then they can't stay afloat.
I was wondering if you could elaborate on this and maybe
discuss any other impacts that the purchased and referred care
issues you describe in your testimony have had specifically on
the Colville Tribe and the surrounding communities?
Mr. Erickson. Yes, thank you for that question. There are
really two directions. Our members can go west to Wenatchee or
east to Spokane to get these specialty services.
If those aren't available, the next closest is more than
likely Seattle or Portland, which is 6 hours to Portland, 4
hours to Seattle.
So, it is similar to Chairman White Clay. That is not
really feasible. And then if the members aren't covering that
on their own, out of their pockets, then the tribe helps with
some emergency services they have.
But then again, it is still IHS's obligation to pay those
bills. And then the tribe is either paying money to help those
elders or people that have specialty care needs or that member
themselves is covering it.
Some impacts that have happened from this is people just
don't seek the care anymore, so they let things linger, and
they become bigger issues that don't get addressed. I have had
a lot of people, even in my family, that had cancer, stuff
doesn't get addressed, and then they end up getting worse.
I have had my own instances where I have had to pay bills
myself, have bills of collection. I am on Council, and I have
the means to, but it is like I am trying to get hold of the IHS
on their Federal trust responsibility, and they still end up
paying those bills. So, I end up covering some of those myself,
which I shouldn't have to either, especially our members on
fixed income, our elders, and low-income individuals.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you for painting that picture. And, of
course, the tribe's resources are not unlimited either. I am
sorry that you have gone through that and that so many of your
members have gone through that.
I hope that this bill remedies the situation. So, thank you
again for informing me, and thank you for being here today. And
I am eager to get this over the finish line. I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Friday, May 3, 2024.
The hearing record will be held open for 10 business days
for the responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:51 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
Office of the Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs
United States Department of the Interior
on H.R. 2687

Thank you for the opportunity to provide the Department of the
Interior's (Department) views on H.R. 2687, a bill to amend the Alaska
Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) to exclude certain payments to
aged, blind, or disabled Alaska Natives or descendants of Alaska
Natives from being used to determine eligibility for certain need-based
Federal programs.

H.R. 2687

Section 29 of the ANCSA (43 U.S.C. Sec. 1626) articulates how
payments and grants made under ANCSA relate to other programs. Section
29(a) characterizes those payments and grants to be compensation for
the extinguishment of claims to land which shall not be deemed to
substitute for any governmental programs otherwise available to Native
people of Alaska as citizens of the United States and the State of
Alaska.

Grants and payments, in the context of Section 29, mean
compensation received from a Native Corporation, which may include
cash, stock, partnership interests, land or interests in land, or
interest in a settlement trust. The ANCSA excludes such compensation
from eligibility determination for programs such as the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program, needs-based assistance programs
authorized in the Social Security Act, and needs-based financial
assistance or benefits from any other Federal program or Federally
assisted program. H.R. 2687 would expand ANCSA's exemption for
interests in settlement trusts to also exempt amounts distributed from,
or benefits provided by, a settlement trust to a Native or descendant
of a Native who is an aged, blind, or disabled individual.

H.R. 2687 represents a commonsense approach to ensure Alaska Native
citizens in need of assistance resources are not foreclosed from the
Federal programs that are designed to help them. Nor, are they
foreclosed from utilizing resources available at the Alaska Native
community level--resources to which they are rightfully entitled as
compensation for the extinguishment of Alaska Native land claims
throughout the entire state of Alaska.

Conclusion

The Department supports H.R. 2687. This bill would increase ground-
level support for individuals in need in Alaska Native communities
while also improving cohesion between Federal, state, and local
resources that are critical to supporting Alaska Natives in need.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Peltola

Statement for the Record
Kim Reitmeier, Executive Director
ANCSA Regional Association

The ANCSA Regional Association expresses its sincere appreciation
to Chairwoman Hageman and Ranking Member Leger Fernandez for allowing
us this opportunity to submit written testimony on the record for the
hearing on H.R. 2687.

About the ANCSA Regional Association

The ANCSA Regional Association (ARA) was founded in 1998 to
represent Alaska Native regional corporations created pursuant to the
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971 (ANCSA). ARA's membership
is comprised of the twelve-land based Alaska Native regional
corporations; representing over 160,000 Alaska Native shareholders. Our
board is composed of the presidents and chief executive officers of our
regional corporations. ARA's purpose is to promote and foster the
continued growth and economic strength of the Alaska Native regional
corporations on behalf of their Alaska Native shareholders and
communities.

Testimony in Support of H.R. 2687 Legislation to Assist Alaska Native
Elders, Blind and Disabled

Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of
the Committee, On behalf of the ANCSA Regional Association (ARA) Board
of Directors, I am writing to you to express our strong support for
H.R. 2687, legislation introduced by Rep. Mary Peltola, and co-
sponsored by Rep. Peter Stauber, that would have immediate and in some
cases life-saving impacts for Alaska Native elders and disabled
individuals. We have supported enactment of this legislation since the
late Rep. Don Young introduced the first version of it more than four
years ago. This legislation was a priority about which Mr. Young felt
passionately and ARA is pleased that Rep. Peltola and her colleagues
have carried forward this effort.

You have received testimony from the Old Harbor Corporation, Shee
Atika, Incorporated, and others detailing the fact that many elders and
disabled Alaska Natives depend on both existing federal programs for
housing, supplemental income, and nutritional assistance, as well as
dividends from their Native Corporations and Elder Settlement Trusts.
Counting these dividends and distributions as income for the purpose of
federal benefits eligibility is an inaccurate reflection of how these
funds are generated, and it harms a highly vulnerable population by
artificially raising their income, potentially excluding them from
essential services and programs such as housing assistance or food
stamps. In some cases, elders have reported that they have had to stop
receiving settlement trust distributions in order to maintain their
eligibility for health care services at major Alaska hospitals.

H.R. 2687 would allow Alaska Natives who are Elders, blind, or
disabled to exclude distributions received from an Alaska Native
Settlement Trust from counting as income, for purposes of eligibility
for federal assistance programs, and in doing so would immediately
improve access to care and quality of life for thousands of our most
vulnerable population. It is narrowly targeted and would be immediately
effective in helping thousands of elder and disabled Alaska Natives
meet their care, housing, and sustenance needs.

H.R. 2687 is also in keeping with the spirit of the law that
Congress passed in 1988 authorizing Alaska Native corporations to
establish settlement trusts, for the purpose of providing long-term
benefits for our shareholders. The existing law, Section 29 of ANCSA
(43 USC 1626) sets a clear precedent by allowing the first $2,000 in
Alaska Native corporate dividends to be excluded when considering
eligibility for federal programs. Now, it's time to adapt this
provision to the current times by extending the same principle from
dividends to distributions from settlement trusts, which are an
increasingly common way for Native Corporations to provide for their
shareholders.
ANCSA created a new system for administering Native American lands,
programs, and services in Alaska, but many of our elders and disabled
people are still in need of assistance, and there are no moral or legal
grounds for blocking them from the benefits that they are entitled to
as American citizens. These elders and disabled shareholders largely
cannot work, and many have chronic or pre-existing health conditions
that make for not only expensive medical bills, but higher average
costs of living due to prescriptions, specialized diets, home
accommodations, and more.

No elder or disabled Alaska Native person should be forced to make
the choice between accepting the distributions to which they are
entitled, and still retaining access to medical care. They are the
hearts and memories of our communities, and it is incumbent upon all of
us to make sure they receive the care and benefits they deserve.

For these reasons, I respectfully urge the Committee to move H.R.
2687 forward to enactment, and I offer ARA's support if there are any
questions we can answer or materials we can provide to support this
bill's passage.

Quyaana (Thank you)!

______

Bering Straits Native Corporation

Anchorage, Alaska

April 26, 2024

Hon. Harriet Hageman, Chair
Hon. Teresa Leger Fernandez, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Support of H.R. 2687, A Bill to Assist Alaska Native Elders, and
Alaska Native people who are Blind or Disabled

Dear Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Committee:

On behalf of Bering Straits Native Corporation (``BSNC''), the
corporation organized under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
(``ANCSA''), for the Bering Straits region, which encompasses the
majority of Alaska's Seward Peninsula and the coastal lands of eastern
Norton Sound, I am writing to express support for the enactment of H.R.
2687 into law to protect Alaska Native Elders, as well as blind or
disabled Alaska Native people.

As an Alaska Native Corporation (``ANC''), we serve more than 8,200
shareholders of which over 1,700 are Elders aged 65 or older. Many of
our shareholders continue to live a subsistence lifestyle in rural and
remote villages in our region, where they endure harsh living
conditions. Villages have limited access to the road system, while many
are only seasonally accessible by boat or air which increases the costs
for goods, services, and medical care. That is why many agencies,
including the U.S. Congress, U.S. Census Bureau, Indian Health Services
and State of Alaska recognize these Alaska Native residents as a
vulnerable and disadvantaged population.

BSNC has always supported shareholders and descendants through
providing benefits and opportunities that include dividend
distributions, educational scholarships, cultural programs, internships
and benefits to Elders and Alaska Native people who are blind or
disabled. However, many Elders and blind or disabled Alaska Native
people also rely on federal assistance programs for housing,
nutritional assistance, Medicare, and Medicaid. Since 1976, Section 29
of ANCSA (43 U.S.C. Sec. 1626) has excluded the first $2,000 in ANC
dividends when making determinations of eligibility for governmental
assistance programs. This $2,000 amount has remained unchanged for
several decades.

Congress first authorized ANCs to establish Settlement Trusts in
1988 to enable ANCs to better provide benefits to their shareholders.
Settlement Trusts are one of the most powerful tools ANCs possess to
help Alaska Native people combat poverty and the many ills that
accompany it. However, Congress has never amended ANCSA to create an
exclusion for benefits received by Alaska Native people from the
Settlement Trusts. The result has generally been that Settlement Trust
distributions have been included by governmental agencies in
determining whether a recipient has too much income to be eligible to
receive benefits under governmental assistance programs. In many cases,
the Settlement Trust distributions are in an amount (either alone or in
conjunction with other income) that causes loss of eligibility for the
government programs. So, the governmental benefits will end.

H.R. 2687 provides a much-needed improvement in the treatment of
distributions from the Trusts to the most vulnerable of Our People, our
Elders and blind and disabled. As you know, under H.R. 2687,
distributions of Trust benefits to Alaska Native Elders (age 65 years
or older) and blind or disabled Alaska Native people will not count
against those individuals for purposes of determining eligibility for
governmental assistance programs. The legislation is critical because
it prevents Elders and blind and disabled Alaska Native people from
losing eligibility for important, life-sustaining governmental benefits
such as housing assistance and food stamps, by virtue of a distribution
of benefits to them from their Alaska Native Settlement Trusts.

Our Elders, blind, and disabled should not have to choose between
healthcare and receiving a Trust distribution that will allow them to
pay their bills each month.

H.R. 2687 is very targeted to Alaska Native Elders and blind and
disabled Alaska Native people and does not provide a broad
comprehensive exclusion of income for eligibility determination
purposes across the total population of Alaska Native people. While
BSNC believes such an exclusion should ultimately be enacted, because
ANCSA benefits should not cause the loss of other benefits to which
Alaska Native people are otherwise entitled because they are U.S.
citizens, BSNC also believes it very important to prioritize the needs
of our Elders and blind and disabled population.

For these reasons, I respectfully urge the Committee and the
Congress to move this bill to enactment as soon as possible. Please let
me know if I can provide any additional information or materials for
the Committee as it considers this important piece of legislation.

Sincerely,

Cindy Massie,
President

______

Chugach Alaska Corporation

Anchorage, Alaska

April 30, 2024

Hon. Harriet Hageman, Chair
Hon. Teresa Leger Fernandez, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Testimony in Support of H.R. 2687

Dear Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Committee:

As Chairman of the Board of Chugach Alaska Corporation (Chugach),
the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Regional Corporation
for the Prince William Sound and Lower Cook Inlet, I would like to
express my support for H.R. 2687. Chugach, along with many other ANCSA
corporations and organizations, have supported this legislation since
the late Rep. Don Young introduced the original version over four years
ago. We are pleased and proud that Rep. Mary Peltola, with Rep. Pete
Stauber as original co-sponsor, have united to continue this essential
and long overdue bipartisan effort to reform ANCSA in the manner
prescribed by H.R. 2687.
As an Alaska Native Corporation (ANC), we serve the interests of
the Alaska Native people of the Chugach region and represent more than
2,900 shareholders. Many of these shareholders continue to live a
subsistence lifestyle in rural and remote villages in our region, where
they endure harsh living conditions. Villages have limited access to
the road system, while many are only accessible by air or boat,
increasing costs for goods, services, and medical care. That's why many
authoritative organizations and official agencies, including the U.S.
Congress, U.S. Census Bureau, Indian Health Services, and the State of
Alaska, recognize these Alaska Native residents as a vulnerable and
disadvantaged population. Many of our people are among the poorest of
the poor.
Building community is a core behavior engrained in our Alaska
Native culture in order to survive these harsh conditions in rural
Alaska, and this is especially true when it comes to taking care of our
Elders and those who are disabled. Elders who live in these areas
express the challenges they face in making decisions to pay for
healthcare and basic necessities, such as glasses, dentures, or food.
We have also heard from Elders asking to give their shares away and
Settlement Trust benefits back in order to protect their Medicaid and
Medicare benefits. Many do not have pensions or retirement accounts.
Village and Regional Corporations provide benefits and
opportunities including dividend distributions, educational
scholarships, cultural programs, internships, and Elder's benefits and
distributions from Settlement Trusts, but Elders and our disabled
population also rely on federal assistance programs for housing,
nutrition assistance, Medicare, and Medicaid to support their
communities. Since 1976, Section 29 of ANCSA (43 USC 1626) has excluded
the first $2,000 in ANC dividends when making determinations of
eligibility for these programs. That $2,000 exclusion has not been
increased or even indexed for inflation since 1988.
Congress first authorized ANCs to establish settlement trusts in
1988 and since that time, many such Trusts have been established to
provide for the long-term, multigenerational protection and growth of
our Alaska Native Settlement Trusts for the benefit of our
shareholders. However, Congress has never amended ANCSA to create an
exclusion for benefits received by Alaska Natives from the settlement
trusts authorized by ANCSA. This is ironic, because settlement trusts
are one of the most powerful tools ANCs have to help Alaska Natives
combat poverty, and the many ills that accompany it.
H.R. 2687 provides for a narrow but much-needed and important
improvement in the treatment of distributions from the Trusts to the
most vulnerable of our people, our Elders (and our blind and disabled
Alaska Natives as well). Under H.R. 2687, distributions of Trust
benefits to Alaska Native Elders (65 years or older) or to disabled
Alaska Natives, will not count against those individuals for purposes
of determining eligibility for governmental assistance programs. The
legislation is critical because it prevents Elders and those who are
disabled from losing eligibility for important, life-sustaining
benefits such as housing assistance and food stamps, by virtue of a
distribution of benefits to them from their Alaska Native Settlement
Trust.
Our Elders and our disabled shareholders should not have to choose
between healthcare and receiving a distribution that will allow them to
pay their bills each month.
H.R. 2687 is very targeted to Alaska Natives who are Elders or
disabled, and the bill does not provide a broad comprehensive exclusion
of income from Settlement Trusts, for eligibility determination
purposes, across the total population of Alaska Natives. While Chugach
believes such an exclusion should ultimately be enacted, because ANCSA
benefits should not compromise other benefits to which Alaska Natives
are entitled by virtue of their being U.S. citizens or by virtue of
being Native Americans, Chugach also recognizes it is critical to
prioritize the needs of our Elders and disabled in the narrower manner
prescribed by H.R. 2687. While the number of Elders and disabled
individuals for whom H.R. 2687 will provide relief is small, and
represents a low percentage of the overall Alaska Native population,
thereby resulting, as we understand from CBO's analysis, in the budget
``score'' for the bill being very low, it is nevertheless extremely
important to those Elders and disabled Natives who should not have to
forgo their benefits from ANCSA in order to maintain federal assistance
benefits to which they are otherwise entitled.
For these reasons, I respectfully urge the Committee and the
Congress enact this bill as soon as possible.
Please let me know if I can provide any additional information or
materials for the Committee as it considers this important piece of
legislation.

Respectfully yours,

Sheri Buretta,
Chairman of the Board

______

Old Harbor Native Corporation

April 30, 2024

Hon. Harriet Hageman, Chair
Hon. Teresa Leger Fernandez, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.R. 2687, A BILL TO ASSIST ALASKA NATIVE
ELDERS, AND ALASKA NATIVES WHO ARE BLIND OR DISABLED

Dear Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Committee:

As Chief Executive Officer of the Old Harbor Native Corporation,
the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act Village Corporation for Old
Harbor, and on behalf of our shareholders and our Native Community, I
wish to express the strongest possible support for H.R. 2687. Alaska
Natives residing in rural and remote Villages are recognized by many
authoritative organizations and official agencies, including the U.S.
Congress, U.S. Census Bureau, Indian Health Service, and the State of
Alaska, as among the poorest of the poor.

Many Alaska Natives living in rural, and indeed many living in
urban areas, are dependent not only on their Village and Regional
Corporations for financial assistance such as distributions,
educational scholarships, cultural programs, internships, and elder
benefits, but they also rely on federal programs such as housing,
nutrition assistance, Medicare and Medicaid. For almost four decades,
Section 29(c) of ANCSA (43 U.S.C. Sec. 1626) has excluded the first
$2,000 in Alaska Native corporate dividends in making determinations of
eligibility for these programs.

Congress first authorized Alaska Native corporations to establish
settlement trusts in 1988 and since that time, many such Trusts have
been established to provide for the long-term, multigenerational
benefits for our Alaska Native shareholders. However, Congress has
never amended ANCSA to create an exclusion for benefits received by
Alaska Natives from the settlement trusts authorized by ANCSA. This is
ironic, because settlement trusts are one of the most powerful tools
Alaska Native Corporations have to help Alaska Natives combat poverty,
and the many ills that accompany it.

H.R. 2687 provides for a narrow but much-needed and important
improvement in the treatment of distributions from the Trusts to the
most vulnerable of our people, our Elders and our disabled, especially
during the COVID-19 Pandemic and post-Pandemic recovery. Under H.R.
2687, distributions of Trust benefits to Alaska Natives Elders (65
years or older), or to blind or disabled shareholders, will not count
against those individuals for purposes of determining eligibility for
governmental assistance programs. The legislation is very beneficial
because it prevents Elders and blind or disabled Natives from losing
eligibility for important, life-sustaining benefits such as housing
ssistance and food stamps, by virtue of a distribution of benefits to
them from their Alaska Native Settlement Trust.

By way of example, an OHNC Elder had to decline receiving his
monthly Elder distributions because it would make him ineligible for
Medicare and Medicaid. He would talk to our staff members on a regular
basis, extremely distressed, because he was having trouble paying his
monthly bills without his distribution from our Elder Settlement Trust.
These heart-wrenching calls and pleas for help are what initiated our
request for this very important bill. Thus, for this hearing record, I
would like to quote one of our Elders, James Chokwak (74), who stated:

``My Medicaid and Medicare was impacted by my OHNC elder
distributions. For a while, I had to stop receiving Old Harbor
Native Corporation Elder Settlement Trust monthly distribution
so that my wife and I could keep our health benefits and have
the option to go to Providence and Regional hospital. My wife
and I have many health problems. I use the Elder's benefit to
pay our monthly bills. We are struggling to get by every month.
After paying bills, we have nothing. We need Medicaid, Medicare
and the Elders distributions from Old Harbor to cover our
bills. This legislation will help us and many Elders in the
native community. Quyanaa''

Our Elders and our blind or disabled people should not have to
choose between health care and receiving a distribution from their
Native Trust that will allow them to pay their bills each month.

H.R. 2687 is very targeted to Alaska Native Elders and blind or
disabled Natives, and it does not provide a broad comprehensive
exclusion for eligibility determination purposes across the total
population of Alaska Natives. While Old Harbor believes such an
exclusion should ultimately be enacted, because ANCSA benefits should
not cause the loss of other benefits to which Alaska Natives are
otherwise entitled as Natives and U.S. citizens, Old Harbor also
believes it very important to prioritize the needs of Alaska Native
Elders as well as blind or disabled Alaska Natives.

For these reasons, I respectfully urge the Committee and the
Congress to move this bill to enactment as soon as possible. Please let
me know if I can provide any additional information or materials for
the Committee as it considers this important piece of legislation.

Quyanaa--Thank you!

Respectfully yours,

Carl Marrs,
Chief Executive Officer

______

Shee Atika

Sitka, Alaska

April 30, 2024

Hon. Harriet Hageman, Chair
Hon. Teresa Leger Fernandez, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF H.R. 2687, A BILL TO ASSIST ALASKA NATIVE
ELDERS, AND ALASKA NATIVES WHO ARE BLIND OR DISABLED

Dear Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Committee:

On behalf of Shee Atika, Incorporated (``Shee Atika''), the
corporation organized under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act
(``ANCSA'') for the Alaska Natives historically residing in and around
Sitka, Alaska, we are writing you to express the unanimous support by
Shee Atika's Board of Directors for the enactment of H.R. 2687 into law
to protect Alaska Native Elders, as well as blind or disabled Natives.
We ask that you accept this letter as Shee Atika's written testimony in
support of the enactment of H.R. 2687 into law and make Shee Atika's
testimony a part of the Committee's Official Record.

Shee Atika presently has approximately 3500 shareholders, of which
550 are presently 65 or older. Shee Atika has established two
``settlement trusts'' under ANCSA, one to provide pro rata
distributions to Shee Atika shareholders (the Shee Atika Fund
Endowment, or ``SAFE'') and the other (the Shee Atika Benefits Trust,
or ``SABT'') to provide educational and funeral benefits to Shee
Atika's shareholders. SAFE was established in 1992 as one of the very
first ANCSA settlement trusts, and today is one of the largest such
settlement trusts in terms of trust assets. SAFE pays out annual
distributions to its beneficiaries, typically several hundred dollars
to each. As these distributions are based upon the number of Shee Atika
shares each beneficiary owns, the actual amount that a specific
beneficiary receives may be more (or less).

As you know, H.R. 2687 would allow Alaska Native Elders and blind
or disabled Natives to exclude from their income the distributions they
receive from an Alaska Native Settlement Trust when determining
eligibility for various governmental programs such as for housing,
supplemental income and nutritional assistance. These governmental
programs are critical to the survival of our Native Elders and blind or
disabled Natives, and for many, eligibility for these programs is of
life-or-death importance.

Congress enacted ANCSA in 1971, which originally required Alaska
Natives to form state-chartered corporations to participate in the
ANCSA settlement. Section 2(c) of the original ANCSA (43 U.S.C.
Sec. 1601(c)) expressly declared that

(c) no provision of this chapter shall replace or diminish any
right, privilege, or obligation of Natives as citizens of the
United States or of Alaska, or relieve, replace, or diminish
any obligation of the United States or of the State or Alaska

to protect and promote the rights or welfare of Natives as
citizens of the United States or of Alaska; * * *

In implementation of this intent, section 29(c) was added to ANCSA
(43 U.S.C. Sec. 1626(c)) to exclude the first $2,000 that an Alaska
Native individual receives from a Native corporation in determining
eligibility of the recipient for supplemental nutritional assistance,
financial assistance under the social security, and financial
assistance or benefits, based on need, under any other Federal program
or federally-assisted program. This $2,000 amount has remained
unchanged for several decades.

When Congress added section 39 to ANCSA (43 U.S.C. Sec. 1629e) to
authorize Alaska Native corporations to establish settlement trusts to
provide benefits to their shareholders, it did so in recognition that
the corporate form the original ANCSA had required was not always the
best manner to address the real economic and social needs of Alaska
Natives. Per section 39(c) of ANCSA (43 U.S.C. Sec. 1629e(c)), ``[t]he
purpose of a Settlement Trust shall be to promote the health,
education, and welfare of its beneficiaries and preserve the heritage
and culture of Natives.'' Under the authority of ANCSA section 39, over
40 settlement trusts have been established to benefit the Alaska Native
community, with several of these trusts expressly providing benefits to
Alaska Native Elders. As noted above, Shee Atika's main settlement
trust, SAFE, provides benefits to all of Shee Atika's shareholders,
including our 550 Elders and blind and disabled Natives.

However, Congress has to date not amended ANCSA section 29 to
provide any form of an exclusion of settlement trust benefits in
determining eligibility for the described governmental programs.

The result has generally been that settlement trust distributions
have been included by governmental agencies in determining whether a
recipient has too much income to be eligible to receive benefits under
these governmental programs. In many cases, the settlement trust
distributions are in an amount (either alone or in conjunction with
other income of the recipient) that causes loss of eligibility for the
governmental programs. So, the governmental benefits will end.

This in turn has produced a situation in which the recipient of
these settlement trust distributions must choose between receiving and
reporting these settlement trust distributions resulting in a loss of
governmental benefits, on the one hand, with not receiving and/or
reporting the settlement trust benefits so that the governmental
benefits may continue.

This situation causes an extreme hardship on many Alaska Native
Elders and blind or disabled Natives, because they live on very limited
financial means and are so dependent on governmental programs. Forcing
them to choose between benefits from an Alaska Native settlement trust
and benefits under governmental programs is fundamentally wrong and,
indeed, contrary to the express Congressional intent that ANCSA
benefits are to be in addition to and not in lieu of governmental
benefits to which Alaska Natives are otherwise entitled.

This situation causes an extreme hardship on many Alaska Native
Elders and blind or disabled Natives, because they live on very limited
financial means and are so dependent on governmental programs. Forcing
them to choose on the one hand between receiving benefits from an
Alaska Native settlement trust that was expressly established by their
Native Corporation to provide them with benefits, or, on the other
hand, receiving benefits under governmental programs that is their
right as Alaska Natives and United States Citizens, is fundamentally
wrong and, indeed, contrary to the express Congressional intent that
ANCSA benefits are to be in addition to and not in lieu of governmental
benefits to which Alaska Natives and United States Citizens are
otherwise entitled.

Shee Atika's Board unanimously supports H.R. 2687 to remedy the
wrong that has persisted for almost four decades, i.e., by ensuring
that the distributions and other benefits each Elder and blind or
disabled Native receives from Alaska Native Settlement Trusts are
excluded when determining that individual's eligibility for these
governmental programs.

While Shee Atika's Board also believes that all distributions and
benefits provided by Alaska Native settlement trusts should be excluded
when determining the eligibility of any recipient for these
governmental programs, we endorse H.R. 2687 as a very important step
forward for the protection and dignity it provides to our Alaska Native
Elders and blind and disabled Natives as the most vulnerable within our
Alaska Native communities.

Please let us know if Shee Atika can provide any additional
information or materials for the Committee as it considers this
important piece of legislation.

Sincerely,

Steven Karpstein,             Timothy Castro,
Chairman of the Board         President/CEO

[all]
