- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ADVANCING TRIBAL SELF-DETERMINATION: EXAMINING. BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS' 638 CONTRACTING

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING TRIBAL SELF-
DETERMINATION:
EXAMINING BUREAU OF INDIAN
AFFAIRS' 638 CONTRACTING

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, March 6, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-100

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-061 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, March 6, 2024.........................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1

Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Newland, Hon. Bryan, Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC............     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Questions submitted for the record.......................    11

Dotson, Hon. Deborah, President, Delaware Nation, Anadarko,
Oklahoma...................................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16

Harvier, Hon. Martin, President, Salt River Pima Maricopa
Indian Community, Scottsdale, Arizona......................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    22
Andrews-Maltais, Hon. Cheryl, Chairwoman, Wampanoag Tribe of
Gay Head Aquinnah, Aquinnah, Massachusetts.................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    27
Questions submitted for the record.......................    32

Spaan, Jay, Executive Director, Self-Governance Communication
& Education Tribal Consortium, Tulsa, Oklahoma.............    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Questions submitted for the record.......................    41

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ADVANCING TRIBAL SELF-DETERMINATION: EXAMINING.
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS' 638 CONTRACTING

----------

Wednesday, March 6, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:25 p.m., in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, Radewagen; and Leger
Fernandez.
Also present: Representative Schweikert.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order.
I want to apologize that I am late. I was testifying just
down the hall on another bill that we have introduced, so thank
you for your patience.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time. The Subcommittee is
meeting today to hear testimony on Advancing Tribal Self-
Determination, Examining Bureau of Indian Affairs' 638
Contracting.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.
I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members'
opening statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Schweikert, be allowed to sit and participate in
today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Since the 1970s, the United States has pursued
a policy of self-determination for tribes, allowing tribal
governments to self-direct services provided to their people.
Tribes know how best to serve their members and it is
important that Congress continues to bring tribal voices to the
table.
President Nixon laid out the beginning of the Self-
Determination Policy, particularly stating, ``We must make it
clear that Indians can become independent of Federal control
without being cut off from Federal concern and Federal
support.'' I agree with that sentiment.
In response, Congress enacted the Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act or ISDEAA in 1995. Public Law in 93-
638, often referred to by the shorthand of just 638,
established the statutory basis for Self-Determination
Contracts and later Self-Governance Compacts.
As a result, tribes can seek contracts or compacts for
various programs, functions, services, and activities,
otherwise run by the Federal Government.
Tribes have used the 638 mechanisms to take over a variety
of programs at the BIA, such as those related to public safety,
functions of the Indian Health Services, and have even
negotiated agreements with other agencies, housed within the
Department of the Interior, like the Bureau of Land Management
and Bureau of Reclamation.
These Self-Determination Contracts and Self-Governance
Compacts reaffirm a tribe's sovereignty. By running a program,
tribes increase their institutional knowledge and find more
flexibility in molding a program to fit the needs of their
tribal members and their communities.
Again, it is the tribes that know the needs of their
members, not the Federal Government.
In Fiscal Year 2022, an estimated 275 tribes participated
in Self-Determination Contracts, and 292 tribes participated in
Self-Governance Compacts.
Tribes have continued to advocate for the expansion of 638
contracts and compacts to other Federal departments and
agencies. This is a popular solution to the persistent concern
of out-of-touch bureaucrats running a program.
Self-Determination Contracts and Self-Governance Compacts
have seen changes over the years, as Congress has worked to
improve these programs. The most recent change occurred in
2020, with the Progress Act being signed into law.
I have heard from tribes across the country that issues
with 638 programming remains, such as the response rate to 638
proposals by BIA, the continued inherent Federal functions
question, the audit process, and through funding.
I look forward to talking with our witnesses, as each has a
unique perspective on the 638 Programs and where improvements
can be made, and we can learn from you.
Each tribe is uniquely situated, within their communities,
their culture, and their history. Tribal governments already
seek to make the best decisions for their members, for their
social, cultural, and economic security.
The Subcommittee's role is to continue to give tribal
leaders a platform for advocating for changes that will best
support the tribes and their members.
Thank you to our witnesses for being with us today. I look
forward to our discussion and I look forward to continuing this
conversation around what other programs and services tribes
would like to see in a 638 Contract or Compact capability in
the near future.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for
her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank
you to each of you for coming today to share your stories,
because it is only through your testimony and sharing your
stories of both the successes you have had and the frustrations
that we will know how best to think about legislation.
So, I am very grateful for you being here today. Each of
you knows too well how important compacting a 638 is, right?
93-638, is it compacting? Is it contracting? What can we do?
We also know, that since passage in 1975, with President,
you know we have to give it to him, he did wonderful things,
President Nixon, we got Blue Lake for Taos Pueblo, we got Self-
Determination, we got the EPA, but now we need to build on it
and get better at what we know works, because tribes have been
utilizing the program and you are going to tell us about the
successes today.
Three thousand contracts and compacts currently have been
authorized by the 638 at the Department of the Interior, and we
know, and I have worked on many compacts and contracts with the
Indian Health Service, which are also very important.
And we need to recognize that the ISDEAA, together with
legislation like the Infrastructure Law and the American Rescue
Plan provided that direct funding to tribes that is so
essential, because you know better than anybody else how
programs should be administered in your communities.
So, while we continue to support tribes assuming control of
certain BIA programs, we need to recognize that if the funding
isn't there, then you are going to be taking over a program
that doesn't have the resources it needs.
And resources are always key. So, we don't want to set up
tribes to fail by asking them to take on responsibilities where
we have not adequately funded those needs.
As an example, we know there aren't enough BIA Law
Enforcement Officers. Recently, while visiting the Mescalero
Apache Tribe, they noted how there simply are not enough
officers and they are always being pulled to other reservations
in the huge, beautiful state of New Mexico.
When I asked about have you thought about compacting or
contracting, they said, we can't afford to because we would not
have enough officers to basically cover every shift at the
level that would be needed.
This is an example of where tribes might have the legal
ability to compact, but because resources are not there, there
isn't the realistic ability to compact.
So, we have seen increases in the BIA budget, especially
over the last two Congresses that might make this a little bit
easier, but we also know that we need to assist with the actual
contracting itself and with those kinds of costs that come
along with the compacting and contracting.
Providing mandatory funding for critical functions like the
105 leases and contract support costs is something we should
consider, because when you compact and contract, you need to
make sure that money is coming in, right? And when we have
things like has happened now where we have such a delay in
actually funding our government, that creates insecurity for
you when you, I see all these heads nodding, because you know
what it is like of now these are your employees saying, we
don't know if we can fund you because Congress hasn't done its
job.
I am pleased to report that you are here on a really
important day here at the House, because we will be voting at
about 3:30 on the Appropriations Bill that will fund the agency
that you compact or contract with.
And the good news is that we are going to be providing $4
billion for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Indian Education
Bureau of Trust Fund Management. We are going to fully fund the
contract support costs and payments for tribal leases.
This is great news, that we are basically going to have
flat funding. I also am very pleased, and we fought really hard
to make sure that the Appropriations Bill looks like it does,
that we didn't have any severe cuts. I am really pleased and
since we are at this table, I want to give a shoutout to Don
Young, who, when I was Chair of this Committee, was the Ranking
Member, because this appropriations also includes advanced
appropriations for the IHS, which is essential.
And we know the IHS has many of its programs compacted and
contracted, and with that advance funding our tribal members
can get the healthcare they need. So, I want to sort of honor
Don Young as I close and yield back.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
Now, I will introduce our witnesses from the panel.
The Honorable Bryan Newland, Assistant Secretary Indian
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC, thank
you for being with us today.
The Honorable Deborah Dotson, President Delaware Nation in
Anadarko, Oklahoma, thank you for joining us as well.
And I will now recognize Mr. Schweikert, from Arizona, for
1 minute to introduce the witness from his district.
Mr. Schweikert. A whole minute, Madam Chair, Ranking
Member.
This is actually sort of fun for me because President
Harvier is not only a friend, but when I am at home, I am on
the community's land every day of my life. I have lived my
entire life alongside the community.
What is unique about President Harvier and his leadership
is the Salt River Pima Maricopa is actually very sophisticated.
It is an urban-suburban tribe and in many ways, they have
been one of the pioneers of developing contracts. Remember, I
believe they were the very first tribe in America that actually
had the right to go to contracts with arbitration clauses.
They were the pioneers in many of these things. So, as you
are listening to witness testimonies and for those of you who
have much expertise in this, please turn to the President,
because they have a unique history of doing it quite
successfully.
Madam Chairwoman, my last self-serving comment is what you
are doing is very important because those of us on Ways and
Means are trying to find a way to do a tax hearing in Indian
Country to start to see could we actually start to have a much
more unified vision of tax equity, of contracting equity of
these things so we could actually sort of make it all work
together much more seamlessly.
With that, thank you for being here. And now I run to the
next meeting. With that, I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Congressman, and thank you for
joining us today.
Welcome to the Committee today. It is wonderful to see you.
Moving on to the Honorable Cheryl Andrews-Maltais,
Chairwoman Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah, Aquinnah,
Massachusetts. Thank you for being here, Madam.
And Mr. Jay Spaan, Executive Director Self-Governance
Communication & Education Tribal Consortium from Tulsa,
Oklahoma. Welcome to you as well.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the top button on the
microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the light
will turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will
turn yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify
before Member questioning begins.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Bryan Newland for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRYAN NEWLAND, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
INDIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair. Aanii Boozhoo. Good
afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Bryan Newland. I have the privilege of serving
as the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs at the Department
of the Interior and I want to thank the Subcommittee for the
opportunity today to discuss tribal self-determination and
self-governance under the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act.
That Act, often referred to as Public Law 638, is one of
the most significant pieces of Indian legislation enacted into
law in the last half century. And, as we have seen, over the
past half century, this policy has been an unqualified success.
Through Public Law 638, tribes have increased their tribal
government capacity, strengthened tribal sovereignty, and
created economic opportunities in their communities.
At the Department, we have successfully used 638 funding to
fulfill and advance our treaty and trust obligations regarding
self-determination and self-governance.
For example, the BIA has used funding provided by the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act
to help relocate or protect tribes threatened by climate
change.
The Department expects to use 638 funding agreements in
future IRA funding opportunities for climate resilience, fish
hatcheries, and the Tribal Electrification Program in which we
recently announced funding awards this week.
I want to highlight two areas in particular where we have
seen growth, success, and also challenges in advancing the
policies of self-determination.
Public Law 638 requires the Department to provide
additional payments to tribes for the cost of infrastructure
used to carry out government programs under a Self-
Determination Contract or Compact.
These payments are called Self-Determination Leases or
105(l) Leases, named for the section of the law governing this
process. We recognize the importance of 105(l) Leases as an
important tool to develop infrastructure in Indian Country.
The Self-Determination Leasing Program allows tribes to
build or improve critical infrastructure more quickly than
would be possible under the Department's direct services.
Our Self-Determination Leasing Program has grown
significantly, from two tribes with three leases, back in 2019,
now to 93 tribes proposing nearly 500 leases and lease renewals
just last year.
This Fiscal Year, the Department expects to have more than
90 tribes with over 600 leases and lease renewals worth nearly
$100 million under this program.
This growth presents challenges, as the Department is
processing all of these lease requests with almost the same
staffing levels that existed in 2019, when we only had three
leases.
The second area I want to highlight is Public Law 477
Workforce Development Program. While this law is distinct from
Public Law 638, it is related and advances long-standing
policies of tribal self-determination.
This law allows tribes and tribal organizations to
consolidate Federal funding from 12 different agencies for
employment, training, or related services. It reduces
administrative burdens and streamlines reporting requirements
for tribes.
A tribe or tribal organization that integrates funding from
other agencies into a 477 Plan receives those funds from DOI
through an existing self-determination contract or self-
governance compact.
From a practical standpoint, this allows a tribe to include
funding from outside the Department in its contract or compact.
When this program works, as Congress designed, it allows tribes
and tribal organizations to reduce joblessness in tribal
communities, promote economic development, and strengthen self-
determination in the delivery of services.
One of the challenging constraints in this program is
working across agencies to determine whether a tribe's grant is
connected to Workforce Development and eligible for the program
under Public Law 477.
And Madam Chair, finally, before I close, I want to thank
the Committee for its work to enact the Progress Act and let
you know that the Department is close to completing our
negotiated rulemaking under that law.
We expect tribal consultations to occur in the late spring
and early summer, along with completion of a final rule by
December 21 of this year.
We acknowledge, at the Department, that there is room for
improvement in our implementation of Public Law 638 and we will
continue to work with the Committee, the Subcommittee, tribes,
and Congress to meet the underlying goals of tribal self-
determination.
Madam Chair, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
and I look forward to answering any questions members of the
Subcommittee have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Newland follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bryan Newland, Assistant Secretary for Indian
Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

Aanii (Hello)! Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Bryan Newland,
and I am the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs at the U.S.
Department of the Interior (Department or DOI). Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss Tribal self-determination and self-governance
under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
Indian Self-Determination Education and Assistance Act (ISDEAA)
Overview

The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA)
authorizes Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations to contract for the
administration and operation of certain Federal programs which provide
services to Indian Tribes and their members. Enacted in 1975, the
ISDEAA is one of the most significant pieces of Indian legislation
enacted into law and the foundation of Federal Indian policy for the
last 50 years of. Under the Act, federally recognized Tribes may choose
to have the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) provide direct services or
operate BIA programs under an ISDEAA agreement. The ISDEAA established
a new methodology for Indian Tribes and the Federal Government to work
together to accomplish the intent of the President and the Congress in
establishing and funding the various Indian programs administered
through DOI and, specifically, the BIA.
The ISDEAA allows federally recognized Indian Tribes, Tribal
organizations, and Tribal consortia to assume and operate programs
administered by the Department. This includes bureaus and offices other
than the BIA, such as the National Park Service and the Fish and
Wildlife Service, subject to negotiations, when the programs are
available to Indian Tribes or Indians because of their status as
Indians. The ISDEAA also provides the Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Health and Human Services discretion to include other
programs they administer by the Secretary that are of special
geographic, historical, or cultural significance to the participating
self-governance Tribe requesting a funding agreement.
Under Title I of the ISDEAA, a Tribe (or Tribal organization) may
enter a self-determination contract with the appropriate Secretary to
plan, conduct, and administer programs or services that Interior or the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) otherwise provide to
Indian Tribes and their members. The term of such a contract may be up
to three years, unless the Tribe and the Secretary agree to a longer
term, subject to renegotiation for changed circumstances.
Generally, under a Title I contract, DOI must approve any
substantial changes to a contract. Under Title IV of the ISDEAA, a
Tribe may enter a self-governance compact, comprised of a funding
agreement and any addenda, for the Tribe to assume funding of, and
control over, some federal programs, services, functions, or activities
(PSFAs). The term of such a compact may be annual or multiyear.
Generally, under a Title IV compact, a Tribe may redesign or
consolidate PSFAs and reallocate funding without DOI's approval. There
are currently 526 Tribes taking advantage of contracts under Title I
and 295 Tribes taking advantage of self-governance compacts under Title
IV. Across the Department, there are nearly 3,200 contracts and/or
compacts as authorized by ISDEAA.
The ISDEAA was intended to strengthen the ability of Tribes to
determine how government services are delivered to people in their
communities. The enactment of this law also transformed how the United
States approached its trust obligations toward Tribes, American
Indians, and Alaska Natives. Namely, rather than the Federal Government
making decisions about what is in the best interest of Indian people,
the ISDEAA put that power squarely in the hands of Indian people. As we
have seen over the past half-century, this policy has been an
unqualified success.
Notable Successes Using ISDEAA

In the last 18 months, the BIA has taken multiple actions to
fulfill its treaty and trust obligations regarding self-determination
and self-governance. For example, the BIA has used funding provided by
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) and Inflation Reduction Act
(IRA) to enable the relocation of critical infrastructure, and in some
cases entire villages, threatened by rising sea levels and other
impacts of climate change. Tribal communities, which often reside in
those areas most at risk, are closely working with the BIA to ensure
the safety of their people and to preserve their way of life.
American Rescue Plan Act of 2021

The BIA received approximately $892 million through the American
Rescue Plan Act of 2021. Those funds were directed to delivery of
potable water, housing improvement, and Tribal Government, Social
Services, Public Safety and Justice, Indian Child Welfare, and other
related expenses. Of those funds, the BIA distributed $887 million to
Tribes through mechanisms under the ISDEAA.
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) (Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act)

The BIA received approximately $466 million for infrastructure
projects and climate resilience initiatives through the BIL. That Act
also made Tribal communities eligible for additional DOI programs to
support building resilience to wildland fires and droughts, restoring
ecosystems, enabling fish passage, and addressing legacy pollution from
abandoned mine lands and orphan oil and gas wells. From those funding
opportunities, the BIA has distributed $46.9 million to Tribes through
mechanisms under ISDEAA.
Inflation Reduction Act (IRA)

The Department received approximately $6.6 billion through P.L.
117-169, commonly known as the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) to invest
in a clean energy economy, key habitat restoration and land resilience
projects, and environmental justice for historically disadvantaged
communities. The total funding includes a $385 million investment for
the BIA to pursue climate resilience and adaptation work and fish
hatchery needs, as well as a new Tribal Electrification program. From
initial IRA funding opportunities, since FY 2023, the BIA has
distributed $8.2 million to Tribes through mechanisms under ISDEAA. The
Department anticipates significant use of the ISDEAA funding agreements
in additional funding opportunities for climate resilience, fish
hatcheries, and the Tribal Electrification program.
Section 105(l) of ISDEAA

Section 105(l) of the ISDEAA requires the Secretary upon the
request of a Tribe or Tribal organization, to enter into a lease with
the Tribe or Tribal organization for the facility used by the Tribe to
carry out a self-determination contract, self-governance funding
agreement, or grant under the Tribally Controlled Schools Act (25
U.S.C. Sec. 5324(l)(1)). The Department recognizes the importance of
105(l) leases as a mechanism for infrastructure development in Indian
Country, as the leases ensure that Tribes and Tribal organizations have
the proper facilities in place to carry out Federal functions under a
self-determination contract or self-governance compact with the
Department for functions such as education, general administration,
public safety, and others. The section 105(l) program allows
improvement of infrastructure and facilities in Indian Country more
quickly than would be possible under DOI's direct provision of
services.
The section 105(l) program has grown significantly from two Tribes
proposing and executing three leases in 2019 to 93 Tribes proposing 259
initial leases and proposing 238 leases for renewal in 2023. In FY
2024, the Department expects to have more than 90 Tribes with over 600
lease renewals and new requests at a value of roughly $100 million. The
Department notes that we have a significant backlog of 1,351 leases
pending.
In 2024 alone, the Department has already provided technical
assistance to 37 Tribes and received proposals for an additional 76
initial leases and 609 proposed renewals. It is challenging for staff
to keep pace with the significant growth in this hugely successful
program.
Self-Governance Under the ISDEAA and the PROGRESS for Indian Tribes Act

At present, there are 295 Tribes participating in self-governance
through 141 funding agreements with the Office of Self-Governance--
Indian Affairs (OSG). Self-governance Tribes file audits pursuant to
the Single Audit Act but, unlike self-determination Tribes, self-
governance Tribes are not required to file the Financial and
Accomplishments (SF-425 form) quarterly reports, which often positively
impacts a Tribe's decision to join self-governance. Self-governance
Tribes may opt to enter into multiyear funding agreements that span
several years.
PROGRESS for Indian Tribes Act and updates to process

The PROGESS for Indian Tribes Act (Pub. L. 116-180) amended the
ISDEAA to conform it with the self-governance statute applicable to
HHS. The PROGESS Act creates administrative efficiencies by enabling
Tribes to carry out compacts with both DOI and HHS under a similar
statutory framework. The PROGESS Act prohibits the Secretary from
reducing the amount of funding under Title IV of the ISDEAA from year
to year except as required by, among other things, ``a congressional
directive in legislation or an accompanying report.'' This language is
consistent with the language applicable to HHS. The PROGESS Act applies
a rule of interpretation in favor of Tribes in the administration of
the ISDEAA. It also provides Tribes the option to determine if the
application of any ``law or regulation pertaining to Federal
procurement (including Executive orders)'' will apply to construction
programs carried out under Title IV. This follows the process
applicable to HHS by providing a Tribe an option to file a final offer
after negotiations between the agency and the Tribe fail to reach
agreement.
As the Committee is aware, the PROGRESS Act requires negotiated
rulemaking process. The Department is very close to completing the
PROGESS Act Federal and Tribal Committee drafting of the proposed rule.
The PROGESS Act requires consultation with Tribes once the proposed
rule is published in the Federal Register and prior to the final rule.
The Department expects consultation sessions will take place during the
late spring and summer months. We anticipate completing a final rule in
the negotiated rulemaking process by December 21, 2024.
Areas for Improvement within the ISDEAA
Bureau of Indian Affairs Tribal Grant Schools

The ISDEAA granted authority to federally recognized Tribes to
contract with the Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) to operate Bureau-
funded schools and to determine education programs suitable for their
children. The Education Amendments Act of 1978 (P.L. 95-561) and
further technical amendments (P.L. 98-511, P.L. 99-99, and P.L. 100-
297) provide funds directly to Tribally-operated schools, empower
Indian school boards, permit local hiring of teachers and staff, and
establish a direct line of authority between the BIE Director and the
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs. School programs
operated under the Education Amendments Act of 1978, as amended, which
we refer to as ``297'' for shorthand, are best thought of as federal
grantees, in contrast to the contract or compact arrangement with
ISDEAA Tribes under Title I.
In FY 2023, BIE School Operations established an Office of Indian
Self-Determination to promote tribal participation in, and access to,
educational programs and services. The BIE Self-Determination Office is
working to increase BIE's Title I contracting capacity by providing
responsive and consistent high-quality service to Tribes receiving both
Title I contract and 297 grant funding. Under 297, Tribes or Tribal
school boards are authorized to manage day-to-day operations of schools
through grant funding specifically for educational programs. This
contrasts with the ISDEAA, under which a Tribe generally assumes
operation of federal functions for a wide range of programs, outside of
educational programs. Additionally, the BIE School Operations Office of
Self-Determination will expand outreach, advisory services, technical
assistance and training to Tribes for alignment of 297 resourcing
options while seamlessly combining Title I contracting options, with
the goal of assisting tribes to achieve educational goals and outcomes
that are both culturally informed and effectively matched to the
academic and socio-cultural needs of their students.
The BIA is also working with the BIE to further increase its
contract oversight and grant awarding capacity by establishing and
developing a self-determination program. The BIE hired a program
manager to further lead and develop that program and is now working
with the BIA to plan and implement a responsible transition of
responsibility for its sites.
Closeout Processes for Title I Contracts

On June 12, 2023, DOI's Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
issued Report 2020-CDG-060, ``The Bureau of Indian Affairs Can Improve
the Closeout Process for Public Law 93-638 Agreements.'' In that
report, the OIG offered three recommendations that the BIA agreed to
address. The OIG stated that the BIA is not actively managing the
closeout process for Pub. L. 93-638 agreements and cited a small number
of contract closeout actions they found within their contract test
sample.
The BIA has placed its priority on timely issuance of funds to
Tribal governments. This prioritization has meant fewer resources are
available to complete the administrative actions to close out completed
contracts. The BIA is addressing DOI OIG's recommendations by directing
BIA Regional Offices to immediately coordinate with Tribes to identify
unspent funds and complete any required documents, reports, or tasks
preventing closure of the agreements in accordance with the applicable
laws, regulations, guidance, or other contract terms and conditions.
The BIA will also engage with DOI's Office of Information Management
Technology subcontractors to develop a cloud-based replacement for the
current PL-638 application for ISDEAA agreements, which will include a
module to track and close ISDEAA agreements. The BIA aims to launch
this system by the end of FY 2024. Finally, the BIA is researching a
process that would enable administrative contract closures to improve
efficiencies for fully complete contracts.
Separate from closeout of Title I agreements, the Department notes
that any decision to begin to apply closeout procedures to self-
governance Tribes with agreements under Title IV of ISDEAA would first
require a consultation with those Tribes. Self-governance Tribes and
OSG have not yet closed out funding agreements during the lifetime of
the program. With the passage of the PROGRESS Act, a self-governance
Tribe is allowed to maintain its same funding agreement for many years.
This new provision would mean that the closeout of a funding agreement
could be difficult to achieve.
Public Law 102-477 and the ISDEAA

Public Law 102-477, as amended, allows Tribes and Tribal
organizations to consolidate certain federal funding streams from 12
different agencies that a Tribe or Tribal organization has implemented
for employment, training, or related services. Public Law 102-477
greatly reduced administrative burden by streamlining program,
statistical, and financial reporting requirements. The law provides
that Tribes and Tribal organizations operating a plan under Public Law
102-477 (477 Plan) complete a single narrative, statistical, and
financial report based on their approved 477 Plan rather than
completing multiple reports for individual programs. Most critically, a
Tribe or Tribal organization that integrates eligible funding from
other agencies into a 477 Plan commits to receive those funds from DOI
(after the other agency transfers funds) through an existing ISDEAA
self-determination contract (Title I) or self-governance compact (Title
IV).
Practically, this creates a mechanism for a Tribe or Tribal
organization that has an approved 477 Plan to include funding from
outside of the Department into that Tribe's ISDEAA contract or compact.
When this process works as Congress designed, it allows Tribes and
Tribal organizations to integrate the employment, training, and related
services they provide from diverse Federal sources to improve the
effectiveness of those services, reduce joblessness in Indian
communities, and serve Tribally determined goals consistent with the
policy of self-determination, while reducing administrative, reporting,
and accounting costs.
Conclusion

The policy of self-determination and self-governance is one of, if
not the most, successful tool the Federal Government has to fulfill its
treaty and trust responsibilities to Tribes. ISDEAA is widely supported
by Tribes. It allows the Federal Government to better allocate funding
resources to Tribes and Tribal organizations that are often better able
to leverage resources to meet their unique needs. Chair Hageman,
Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee, the
Department appreciates the opportunity to discuss Tribal self-
determination and self-governance, and I thank you for the opportunity
to provide the Department's views.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Hon. Bryan Newland, Assistant
Secretary for Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior

The Honorable Bryan Newland did not submit responses to the Committee
by the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Several witness statements raised concerns about how
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Office of Self Governance
(OSG) has communicated with the entities and how this resulted in
delays and challenges for tribes to implement 638 contracts and/or
compacts.

1a) What changes need to be made by BIA and OSG to improve
communication between these entities?

1b) Are there statutory barriers to information sharing that
Congress should address?

Question 2. President Harvier's written statement mentioned BIA
inefficiencies during the COVID-19 pandemic that have impacted their
ability to provide services covered by their self-governance compact.

2a) How is BIA improving these types of inefficiencies and what is
the process for making sure tribal staff have the training and access
needed to run programs?

Question 3. The Committee has heard that there is a clear
differentiation between what one BIA region classifies as an inherently
federal function to another BIA region.

3a) What is the process for communication between BIA regions on
the issue of inherently federal functions?

3b) Where can improvements be made to eliminate confusion?

Question 4. Tribal governments and people have sought to
proactively use fire to protect their communities from wildfire risks
and for other purposes, but the BIA position on tribal fire use and
tribal management of their own fire and fuels programs, including on
trust lands, is unclear, particularly when tribal governments seek to
engage in fire use, such as prescribed fire, on their lands without
explicit approval from BIA. The Committee has heard that BIA is
claiming that burn plan approval for prescribed fire is an inherent
federal function, and thus cannot be part of a compact agreement with
Tribes, and therefore Tribes are not able to include burn plans in
their self-governance compacts or access recurring program funding for
carrying out federal programs to implement prescribed burning.

4a) Does BIA have a written policy regarding what constitutes
inherent federal function with respect to approving prescribed fire
burn plans on trust lands?

4b) Is there any other reason beyond claims of inherent federal
function that a tribe would not be able to compact related fire and
fuels programs?

4c) In developing any policy, did BIA engage in tribal consultation
or otherwise seek tribal input?

4d) To the extent that the BIA asserts that it must approve such
tribal fire use, is BIA's position based on statute, regulation, or
some other authority?

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for their testimony and
the Chair now recognizes the Honorable Deborah Dotson for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DEBORAH DOTSON, PRESIDENT, DELAWARE
NATION, ANADARKO, OKLAHOMA

Ms. Dotson. Kulamalsi hach. Nteluwensi Deborah Dotson. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and members of the
Committee. My name is Deborah Dotson. I have had the honor of
serving as President of Delaware Nation for 7 years.
Delaware Nation's existence on this continent predates the
concept of written history. We memorialized our relationship
with the United States by signing the very first Indian treaty
in 1778, the Treaty of Fort Pitt, which provided us the right
to a Congressional Delegate.
I am pleased to be with you today to discuss Delaware
Nation's experience operating programs under our self-
governance compact.
We have seen great success with self-governance, but there
are areas where improvement is needed to fully realize the
potential power of the Act. We could suggest improvements in
program efficiency and flexibility, but we will focus today on
five specific issues that we have noted over the years.
The first issue involves the transfer of funds. The Act
requires Self-Governance staff to transfer funds to tribes
within 10 days and yet, it is often, many months before funds
are received.
Chronic delay in the distribution of funding for an
Interior program undermines the program's objectives and can
leave tribes in dire straits. Delaware Nation is fortunate to
have other resources available to float program operations
until Federal dollars arrive, but as you know, too many other
tribes cannot do so and Interior's delay often results in a
horrible choice between keeping the lights on or serving their
people.
The second issue involves contract support costs.
Currently, the Self-Governance Office provides contract support
cost funding at a rate of 80 percent of the prior year and
withholds the remaining 20 percent until year-end.
There is no legal authority for that withholding. Again,
this puts tribes in a position to rely on other resources, if
they even exist, to cover Federal costs until Interior gets
around to paying contract support costs.
Congress should consider amending the Act to provide
monetary penalties for non-compliance. Monetary penalties
should be automatic and based on any amount that is transferred
later than the 10-day statutory window. It is wrong to force
tribes to foot the bill of government inefficiency.
The third issue involves model agreements. It helps that
the Act provides a model contract for tribes to use in
formulating their 638 proposals, however, tribes encounter
instances where BIA staff require more than the provisions of
the model agreement. We assume good intentions by the BIA, but
such add-ons only confuse participating tribes who work hard to
follow the Act.
To address this, the Act should either include all required
provisions in the model agreement, or clarify that the
provisions contained in the model are all that may be required.
In short, tribes would benefit from the certainty that such a
change in the law would bring.
The fourth issue involves staffing levels. Each of the
areas we have identified could be helped by the recruitment and
retention of competent, trained staff within the Office of
Self-Determination and Self-Governance.
Staff turnover prevents BIA and tribes from forming
collaborative relationships and makes it challenging for tribes
to accomplish their priorities. When tribes ask the Office of
Self-Governance, we are often told that the office is short
staffed and is moving as fast as they can.
None of this is a criticism of good and dedicated BIA
staff, but a clear-eyed and honest focus on this chronic
staffing issue is worthy of our collective attention.
The final issue involves reporting years. The Act
authorizes tribes to initiate self-determination contracts and
self-governance compacts when the tribes decide to do so.
Nothing requires a tribe to operate its contracts or
compacts on the Federal Fiscal Year, yet BIA requires reporting
on fixed dates that do not always sync to the tribe's program
year.
An example would be a report, which captures activities for
the Federal Fiscal Year of October to September being used
where a tribe's program year is April to March.
Standard reporting would capture activities occurring
across multiple program years. An amendment which syncs the
reporting periods to the tribe's period of performance would
improve accuracy in tribal reporting.
I thank you for your time and the opportunity to testify on
these important subjects and look forward to any questions you
may have. Wanishi.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Dotson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Delaware Nation President, Deborah Dotson

Madam Chair, Ranking Member and members of the Committee, my name
is Deborah Dotson and I am the President of Delaware Nation. I have
served as President of Delaware Nation for six years. My Peoples'
existence on this continent predates the concept of written history. My
Nation memorialized our relationship with the United States by signing
the very first Indian treaty with the United States in 1778, the Treaty
of Fort Pitt,\1\ while the country was still in its infancy and while
this legislative body existed as the Continental Congress. Our
cooperation with the Continental Congress and our 1778 treaty providing
material support and allowing troops to pass through our territory
played a critical role in America's success in the Revolutionary War.
Today, Delaware Nation has its governmental seat in Anadarko, Oklahoma
and shares its jurisdictional area with two other tribes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 7 Stat., 13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am pleased to be with you today to discuss Delaware Nation's
experience in working with the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) through
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act \2\ (ISDEAA
or Act). Delaware Nation operates numerous programs under our Title IV
self-governance compact with the BIA. We entered the self-governance
program many years ago and transferred all the programs we previously
operated under self-determination contracts into our self-governance
funding agreement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 5301 et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While we have seen great success with the self-governance program,
we have also encountered areas where improvement is needed to fully
realize the power of the Act as originally envisioned by Congress. We
could suggest many statutory changes that would benefit Indian Tribes
across the United States by improving program efficiency and
flexibility, but we will focus on specific issues Delaware Nation has
noted over the years.
Some of the areas where improvement is needed include, in no
particular order, timely distribution of program funding, upfront
distribution of one hundred percent of contract support cost funding,
good faith negotiation between the BIA and Indian Tribes resulting in
timely review and execution of contracts, compacts, funding agreements,
and leases under Section 105(l), adequate staffing within the office of
self-determination and the office of self-governance, and creating
flexibility to synchronize performance reporting forms with the
contracting or compacting Tribe's program year.
Timely Distribution of Program Funding

ISDEAA requires the Office of Self-Governance to transfer funds to
Tribes no later than ten days after the apportionment of such funds by
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to the Department of the
Interior (Interior or Secretary), the Department within which the BIA
resides. Notwithstanding the requirement of the timely transfer of
funds to Tribes, in practice it is rarely accomplished on anything
approaching a timely basis.
Indeed, it is often months and sometimes even into subsequent
fiscal years before funds are fully distributed. In Interior's defense,
for non-Interior funds that are incorporated into the funding
agreements, there are often delays in the transfer of funds from the
other departments to Interior such that it cannot distribute those
funds in a timely manner. However, in the year 2024, with all the
conveniences of advanced technology and accounting capacity, that
should not remain a perennial problem. It could surely be overcome by
concerted action across the federal government.
That all being said, chronic delay in the distribution of funding
for Interior programs undermines the program's objectives, is
unacceptable, and can leave Tribes in particularly dire circumstances.
Delaware Nation is fortunate to have other Tribal resources available
to float program operations until federal dollars arrive. Many other
Tribes across the country are not so situated and Interior's delay in
transferring funds means a Hobson's choice between keeping the lights
on or serving their people.
Timely Payment of Contract Support Funds

Under the Act, Tribes are entitled to recover certain contract
support costs for costs incurred in administering the contracts or
compacts but which the Secretary otherwise would not incur in
administration of the programs or which the Secretary does incur but
pays from other sources. Again, ISDEAA requires that funds be
transferred to Tribes within ten days of apportionment of funds from
OMB to Interior. Nothing in ISDEAA allows Interior to withhold program
or contract support cost funding and it is required to address those
funding shortfalls whenever the shortfall becomes apparent. Interior is
prohibited from funding less than the full contract support cost need.
Currently, the Office of Self-Governance provides contract support
cost funding at a rate of 80% of the prior year and withholds the
remaining 20% until year-end. There is no authority within the Act or
other federal law for such withholding of funds and it again puts
Tribes in a position to rely on non-federal resources--if they even
exist--to cover federal costs until Interior gets around to providing
contract support cost funding.
The Act requires full upfront payment of contract support costs due
to Tribes, but the reality is much different. The Act should be amended
to provide monetary penalties for non-compliance. Tribes should not
bear the administrative and financial burden of pursuing relief under
statutes such as the Prompt Payment Act where Interior clearly runs
afoul of statutory mandates. Those monetary penalties should be
automatic and include any amount that is transferred outside of the
ten-day statutory window. Tribes must be made whole for being forced to
foot the bill of governmental inefficiency.
Good Faith Negotiation and Timely Review and Execution of Contracts,
Compacts, Funding Agreements, and Section 105(l) Leases

The Act requires that Interior negotiate in good faith all
contracts, compacts, funding agreements, and section 105(l) leases. In
fact, ISDEAA provides a model contract that purports to contain all
provisions that are required for contracting. However, Tribes often
encounter instances where BIA staff require more than the provisions of
the model agreement. We assume that this is because the BIA has
identified some legitimate purpose for doing so, but that does not mean
that their actions are lawful, and administrative add-ons only confuse
participating Tribes who work hard to comply with the letter of the
Act. To address this, the Act should either be amended to include all
required provisions in the model agreement or a statement that the
provisions contained in the model agreement are all that are required.
This is one of those places where Tribes would benefit from the
certainty that such a change to the law would ensure.
In addition, courts have held that Section 105(l) leases are
incorporated into funding agreements under both self-determination and
self-governance. Delaware Nation has been in Interior's 105(l) lease
queue since December 2022. We sit here in March 2024 and Interior
recently informed the Nation that it would likely be August 2024 before
the Nation's request is even reviewed. This is one more glaring example
of Delaware Nation having to endure delay, forcing it to continue to
foot the bill for federal expenses through no fault if its own, all the
while hoping that it will be made whole one day.
Adequate Staffing for Self-Determination and Self-Governance Offices

Each of the areas we have already identified can be attributed in
part to the lack of trained and experienced staff within the Offices of
Self-Determination and Self-Governance. The Office of Self-
Determination is notorious for its revolving door for self-
determination officers within the regional and agency offices. This
continuous changing of staff prevents Interior and Tribes from forming
meaningful relationships and makes it nearly impossible for Tribes to
make meaningful progress on initiatives that require focus and
commitment from the regional and agency offices. The Office of Self-
Governance has never been adequately staffed. When Tribes reach out to
the Office of Self-Governance to inquire about the status of funding or
agreements, we are often told that the Office is short staffed and is
moving as fast as it can. Interior also points to staffing shortages as
the primary reason for being nearly three years behind in reviewing and
negotiating its Section 105(l) leases. ISDEAA and its programs are too
critical to Tribal governments and the people we serve to allow our
federal partners to be chronically understaffed.
Please understand, this is not a criticism of the good and
dedicated staff that work hard every day within the BIA, but a clear-
eyed and honest focus on this chronic staffing issue worthy of our
collective attention.
Syncing Fiscal and Programmatic Reporting with the Tribe's Program Year

ISDEAA authorizes Tribes to initiate self-determination contracts
and self-governance compacts when the Tribe determines it wishes to do
so. Nothing in the Act requires a Tribe to operate its contracts or
compacts on the federal fiscal year. However, fiscal and programmatic
reporting forms require reporting based on fixed dates that do not
always sync to the Tribe's program year. An example would be a
reporting form which captures activities for the federal fiscal year
(October 1-September 30) being used with a Tribe whose program year is
April 1 to March 31.
Using the standard form, the activities reported would be for six
(6) months of one funding year and six (6) months of the subsequent
funding year. Delaware Nation operates its government on an October-
September fiscal year but operates its self-governance compacted
programs on a January 1-December 31 program year. As such, reporting
forms do not always capture the correct data. A statutory amendment
which syncs the reporting periods to the Tribe's period of performance
rather than relying on standardized OMB forms would improve clarity and
accuracy in tribal reporting under the Act.
Appropriate and Meaningful Consultation

Finally, we want to be clear that we thank you for the opportunity
to testify today and welcome the fact that you are holding this hearing
to gain an understanding of potential improvements in the Act. Even
though you have heard many thoughts regarding potential improvements in
the Act, we think that you would probably agree that appropriate
government-to-government consultation is necessary before any specific
legislation is introduced that would amend the Act. That is not
intended in any way to diminish this vitally important hearing but to
acknowledge the expectations of Indian Country. That consultation is
especially important insofar as Title I, on self-determination
contracts, applies to federal departments beyond Interior. Which is why
the Nation respectfully submits that it is imperative that Tribes be
consulted on any proposed changes in the Act and that the impacts of
such changes may have on non-Interior programs be considered carefully.
All Tribes participating in either self-determination or self-
governance programs with any federal department must have a seat at the
table.
I thank you for your time and the opportunity to testify on this
important subject. Delaware Nation is happy to work with this
Committee, Congress, and the Administration to consider solutions to
the issues raised today and those that may arise during Tribal
consultation.
Wanishi.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Delaware Nation President,
Deborah Dotson

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Your written statement expressed concerns with the lack
of trained and experienced staff within the Office of Self-Governance
(OSG).

1a) Could you please provide examples of when the lack of trained
OSG staff hindered your tribe from providing a service?

Answer. Delaware Nation, like many other compacting Tribes, has
experienced significant delays in the transfer of program and contract
support cost funding from OSG. The explanation from OSG for delayed
transfer of funds is that they lack adequate staffing and are therefore
unable to keep up with the workload volume. Statements made by Delaware
Nation are not intended as a slight against OSG or its dedicated staff.
OSG simply does not have the level of staffing necessary to allow OSG
to move all funding to all compacting Tribes in a timely fashion.
Fortunately, Delaware Nation has had access to other non-federal
resources which it has used to bridge the gap between the beginning of
the program year and the date which funds are transferred. These non-
federal resources would be available for other services and
opportunities had they not been redirected to float otherwise federal
obligations.

1b) And has there been follow up communication from OSG after the
issue has been addressed?

Answer. OSG is responsive to inquiries but simply is not equipped
with the level of staff necessary to address the level of workflow for
which it is responsible. So, at the end of the day, while Delaware
Nation appreciates OSG's communication regarding staffing deficiencies
it does nothing to address the underlying staffing issue or the
workflow deficiency.

Question 2. Several witness statements mentioned the Department of
the Interior's lack of timeliness to distribute program funds under
self-governance compacts.

2a) Could you further elaborate on how this delay directly impacts
tribes?

Answer. When funds are delayed, Tribes are forced either to shutter
these vital programs until funds are received or to redirect other
tribal resources, if they exist, to operate the federal programs until
federal funds arrive. Tribes often forego other economic opportunities
to foot the bill for an inefficient federal government.

2b) Could you further elaborate on how any funding delays have
specifically impacted your tribe's self-governance programs?

Answer. Delaware Nation consistently uses non-federal dollars to
cover federal obligations until federal funds arrive from OSG such that
Delaware Nation citizens continue to have access to critical resources
without regard to when OSG transfers funds. This is only possible
because Delaware Nation's economic ventures provide revenue to bridge
the gap. Without those resources, Delaware Nation would be forced to
close the doors to its programs until compact funding is transferred.

Question 3. Where could Congress legislate regarding the 638
compacting process that would improve the 638 negotiations?

Answer. Because Interior is still working to promulgate regulations
to implement the PROGRESS Act's amendments to Title IV--DOI Self-
Governance, it is currently unclear whether the PROGRESS Act's
amendments achieve the intended results. This circumstance makes it
difficult to identify additional legislative changes. Those PROGRESS
Act amendments are the result of a decades-long effort by Tribal
leaders and any further amendments must be developed through meaningful
consultation. Delaware Nation is in favor of legislation to streamline
negotiations by importing Title I's 90-day deemed approved contracting
deadline into the Title IV compacting process. Delaware Nation would
also support legislation to impose automatic monetary penalties payable
to the Tribe or Tribal Organization where OSG fails to transfer funding
consistent with statutory deadlines.

3a) And what regulatory changes, if any, would you suggest to the
Department of the Interior to improve the 638 compact negotiation
process?

Answer. Again, because compacting Tribes have not yet operated
under the PROGRESS Act's forthcoming regulations, it is difficult to
propose further regulatory changes. However, Delaware Nation would be
in favor of regulations to implement the statutory changes identified
above so long as those regulations are a result of meaningful
consultation and negotiated rulemaking.

Question 4. Has the issue of inherent federal functions impacted
what programs and/or functions your tribe was able to include in your
638 compact?

4a) If yes, what was the function and or program that was deemed an
inherently federal function?

Answer. It is the responsibility of the Department of the Interior
to identify the programs, functions, services, and activities, or the
portions thereof, which may be transferred under 638 and Tribes are
forced to rely on those determinations. This scenario makes it
impossible for Tribes to know what other functions exist and how the
Department of the Interior determined they were inherently federal.
Delaware Nation has not been impacted directly by the issue of
inherently federal functions but the Department of the Interior's
inconsistent classification of functions can be interpreted to
indirectly impact all Tribes including Delaware Nation. Improper
classification of functions as inherently federal takes the function
and associated funding off the table for assumption via self-
determination contracts and self-governance compacts.

4b) And are you aware of any other tribes that were able to compact
that function and/or program?

Answer. N/A--please see response to prior question. We are aware of
functions being transferred to one Tribe but not to another Tribe in
the same Region but this has not happened directly to Delaware Nation.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for her testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Martin Harvier for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARTIN HARVIER, PRESIDENT, SALT RIVER
PIMA MARICOPA INDIAN COMMUNITY, SCOTTSDALE, ARIZONA

Mr. Harvier. [Speaking Maricopa Language] Kamduum. Chair
Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee.
I am honored to offer testimony on tribal self-governance,
compacting, and contracting. My name is Martin Harvier. I am
the President of the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community.
We were established by Executive Order in 1879. Our
community is home to the Auk Akimel O'odham, the Pima, and the
Xalychidom Piipaash Maricopa Tribes located in the Phoenix
Metropolitan area, the community spans 52,600 acres and has
approximately 11,000 enrolled members that require significant
government services to meet community needs.
Our engagement with self-governance compacts began in 1995.
Our initial compact included a handful of programs, such as
road maintenance, social services, and law enforcement.
Over time, we assumed control of additional programs
including land, titles, and records, which is commonly known as
LTRO. We also took in job training, transportation planning,
and detention and corrections.
We are particularly proud of our success with LTRO. Through
self-governance, we have streamlined business processes and
improved transaction times for leases and probates.
Before self-governance, leases took 6 months for the BIA to
record. Now, after we have taken over this responsibility,
leases are recorded in 48 hours. This has allowed for
tremendous economic growth in our community.
However, challenges persist. As evidenced by our tribal
trust evaluations, we still have work to do, including
addressing many deficiencies that were amplified during the
COVID pandemic.
The pandemic underscored the need for improved access to
Department of the Interior systems and timely staff training.
Delays in DOI security clearances, internet connectivity
issues, and dependence on external agencies for vital records
hindered efficiency.
As a result, we recommended several measures to address
these challenges, such as increased staffing at the Office of
Hearings and Appeals, develop backlog reduction plans, and
improve access to the DOI technology that is necessary to
fulfill self-governance agreements.
I want to focus on the last point for a moment. In our
community's last Trust Evaluation, we found a need to improve
our LTRO responsibilities. The Trust Evaluation identified that
we had limited staff that could access the Federal TAAMS
System.
We shared this frustration. We hired the required staff and
had them on payroll, but the BIA had not completed its
background checks. This took over a year. As a result, our
community received a negative evaluation finding because of a
process we had no control over. The finding is unfortunate, but
our employees must have this access.
Execution of our self-governance compacts depends on our
community supplementing Federal funds. Last year alone, the
community spent more than $37 million in tribal funds to
accomplish compacted responsibilities.
That is more than double the $14 million we received from
the BIA for these functions. It is clear, the base self-
governance and direct service funding levels do not meet the
actual needs of Indian Country.
Furthermore, we support the advance appropriations for the
BIA. Like the VA and IHS, advance appropriation would mitigate
uncertainties during a government shutdown.
Finally, we support the ongoing rulemaking for the Progress
Act, which harmonizes self-governance compact administration
and protects tribes from unauthorized terms.
In conclusion, we remain committed to enhancing service
delivery through self-governance contracting and compacting. We
appreciate the Subcommittee's attention to these critical
issues, and stand ready to work with you to advance tribal
self-determination.
Chair Hageman, Subcommittee Members, thank you for this
opportunity to testify.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Harvier follows:]
Prepared Statement of Martin Harvier, President, Salt River Pima
Maricopa Indian Community

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee: thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the
important topic of tribal self-governance contracting and compacting.
My name is Martin Harvier, President of the Salt River Pima Maricopa
Indian Community (SRPMIC).
On behalf of our Community I am happy to share our history and
experience with Self-Governance Compacts through the Department of
Interior (DOI), Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and to provide a few
observations that may be useful for the Committee in its oversight
capacity.
By way of background, the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community
was established by Executive Order on June 14, 1879 and is home to two
distinct tribes, the An Auk Akimel O'odham (Pima) and the Xalychidom
Piipaash (Maricopa). Today, SRPMIC shares borders with the fast growing
cities of Scottsdale, Tempe, Mesa, and Fountain Hills. The reservation
encompasses 52,600 acres and we have an enrollment of approximately
11,000 members.
SRPMIC is part of the fabric of the east valley of the Phoenix
metropolitan area and in order to serve our citizens best, government
services need to be delivered in a way that is interoperable with our
neighboring jurisdictions. Over time it has become clear that SRPMIC
can best achieve this goal by taking on federal government functions
through self governance.

That is why our Community entered into its first Title IV Self-
Governance Compact on October 1, 1995. The first tranche of programs
that were included in the Compact were:

Tribal Scholarships

Johnson O'Malley

Tribal Courts

Social Services (Indian Child Welfare Act, Welfare
Assistance Grant)

Housing Improvement Program

Law Enforcement

Road Maintenance

Agriculture

Real Estate Services

Real Estate Appraisals

Over time the SRPMIC assumed the following additional programs:

FY 2000--Job Training and Placement

FY 2002--Tribal Transportation Planning

FY 2003--Indian Reservation Roads Program

FY 2006--Detention/Corrections

FY 2007--Juvenile Detention Education

FY 2017--Land Title Records Office

FY 2022--Section 105(l) Leasing Program

Among these, perhaps the most impactful has been the assumption of
the functions of the Land Title and Records Office (LTRO). Through
this, the Community has been able to improve transaction times for
business leases, agricultural leases, home sites, right-of-way and
probates. One of the key parts of the LTRO function is to have access
to the BIA Trust Asset and Accounting Management System (TAAMS). Not
only did the community bring the TAAMS system ``in-house'', we also
hired and trained several staff people that are certified on the
system.

Along the way SRPMIC has gone through several Tribal Trust
Evaluation audits (TTE) with the BIA. These periodic audits are meant
to ensure the Community is faithfully upholding our responsibilities,
but they also serve as an opportunity to both strengthen tribal
programming as well as identify areas where the BIA and partnering
Agencies can improve. For example, in the TTE completed in 2022, it was
clear the pandemic greatly impacted the delivery of service. The audit
highlighted a number of deficiencies, not with our process, but with
BIA policy and procedure that we continue to struggle with today. This
includes probate transactions, access to IT systems such as ProTrac and
TAAMS, the security requirements for equipment and staff, and
communication with other agencies and jurisdictions. More specific
examples in these areas are noted below:

Reliance on BIA-Western Region Office (WRO) Division of
Probate Services (DPS) for Data Entry: In the Fall 2019,
SRPMIC probate staff issued a monthly death report to all
of the agencies and sent the physical hard copy probate
cases to the BIA-WRO for data entry. BIA-WRO would complete
data entry into a ProTrac database and send the completed
probate package to the Office of Hearings and Appeals
(OHA). Upon the departure of the two tenured SRPMIC staff
members who knew how to navigate the system well, BIA-WRO
requested that the new SRPMIC probate staff members assume
the data entry role in ProTrac to assist BIA-WRO due to
their growing caseload. While SRPMIC was eager to take on
this data entry role, SRPMIC had limited access to the
requisite ProTrac system.

Department of the Interior Requires Training for Systems
Use: SRPMIC staff are required to take various trainings to
utilize DOI trust systems/databases (ProTrac, TAAMS, etc.)
before staff are able to use the systems. During the 2022
audit time frame, there was no official probate training
for SRPMIC probate staff to attend. WRO staff instead
provided an informal training in March 2020 and it was
never completed due to the pandemic related closures and
work-from-home status of BIA staff.

BIA/SRPMIC Office Closures and Remote Working Conditions:
On March 19, 2020, the Community began its ``work from
home'' status as mandated by SRPMIC Council. SRPMIC Offices
were closed and only limited staffing was allowed in the
buildings at any given time. The Community Council
instituted an Emergency Declaration for the COVID-19
Pandemic on April 1, 2020. This declaration remained in
place through March 16, 2022.

SRPMIC Technology Needs for Laptop Procurement and
Imaging: SRPMIC staff worked diligently to ensure that work
continued during the COVID-19 Pandemic. During this time,
SRPMIC staff needed BIA support to gain remote access to
the DOI trust systems/databases. SRPMIC needed to procure
BIA-approved laptops to allow for work from home status
during the pandemic. It took time to confirm the specifics
for the laptops with the BIA and additional time to receive
the laptops due to supply chain issues during the Pandemic.
Once the laptops were received by SRPMIC, it took weeks to
have the BIA-WRO staff image the equipment. This delay
caused challenges for staff to complete and view work
product for probate and all trust functions. Additionally,
we experienced issues with the laptops being removed from
the BIA network and patch issues which required SRPMIC
staff to take laptops to BIA-WRO for repair and re-imaging.

Department of the Interior Systems Clearances for Staff
and Access to trust systems: SRPMIC staff is required to
have DOI Security Clearance to utilize the electronic BIA
trust systems (ProTrac, TAAMS, etc.). This process takes a
new staff member between 6 to 24 months to gain access.
During the pandemic, the process on the BIA side came to a
halt and receiving the credentials necessary to bring a new
staff member online and functional still continues to be an
issue for new staff. SRPMIC does not have authority to
request access to additional trust systems in Identity
Information System (IIS) and DOI Talent database. The
Superintendent is considered the Supervisor in multiple
databases and he/she is responsible for this approval,
exacerbating delays. SRPMIC is not in control of any of
these functions and the Community must rely on BIA's
approval and processing of DOI Security Clearance
processing.

Internet and Systems Connectivity from the BIA Salt River
Agency and the SRPMIC Office: Prior to the pandemic, SRPMIC
had continual Internet connection issues between the BIA
Salt River Agency Office and the Community Government. The
BIA owns the internet connection and system, and their
connection did not provide consistent or reliable access
for SRPMIC staff to conduct trust related work. In late
2019, the former BIA-WRO Director authorized an upgrade at
the BIA Salt River Agency offices at SRPMIC's expense to
create consistent and constant Internet connectivity. It
must be noted that prior to December 31, 2019, an SRPMIC
staff member working in the DOI trust systems would be
bumped from the system several times a day due to the
system's poor connectivity capacity. The connection upgrade
did not take place until March 2020.

Dependence on Various outside Agencies: Per the Code of
Federal Regulations, specific supporting documentation is
required to be included in a completed probate packet. Some
of the delays in completing cases during the reporting
period were due to dependence on other jurisdictions to
provide the information. For instance, probate staff rely
on the WRO to provide the IIM account balances and
documentation which must be included as part of the probate
packet. SRPMIC must request birth certificates, death
certificates, marriage/divorce and certification of Indian
blood of relatives through other probate agencies, other
tribes or other local/state jurisdictions. Receiving
supporting documentation from other states is challenging
due to jurisdictional rules and requirements to obtain
documents. For example, California has been historically
difficult to obtain documents from and in these cases staff
have to request family members to request the documentation
from the State of California. During the pandemic, there
were staffing delays in neighboring jurisdictions and in
other jurisdictions where SRPMIC members lived. As an
example, from March 2020 to January 2022, it took Maricopa
County between 5 to 16 weeks to receive a death
certificate. SRPMIC probate staff also rely on the
Southwest Land Titles and Records Office (SWLTRO) and other
LTRO's for certified land inventories when Community
members own land at other Indian reservations. In some
instances, LTRO's sent the inventory immediately to SRPMIC
probate staff after receiving the notification of death.
However, by the time SRPMIC probate staff have a final and
complete probate package, SRPMIC staff would have to
request an updated land inventory (BIA informal guidance is
that certified inventories cannot be older than 6 months).

While it is clear the pandemic caused and extreme dislocation of
services, the SRPMIC believe there are ongoing issues at BIA that, if
addressed, would today to improve their service and to make
transactional work much more efficient. As such, the SRPMIC made the
following recommendations to the BIA.

The Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) needs to hire
more judges.

OHA needs to develop a plan to address the SRPMIC and the
overall probate backlog. The probate backlog existed before
the pandemic and is only more extreme today. Community
requests that BTFA look at the backlog of probate cases by
WRO and other regional offices to compare the backlog
during the Pandemic in relation to the numbers noted in
this audit for the SRPMIC.

WRO Probate Staff needs to provide and be a technical
assistance resource to SRPMIC and other Self-Governance
tribes. WRO Probate Staff need to clearly understand that
the SRPMIC only holds a small part step of in the Probate
process and that SRPMIC can be a resource to further
support the BIA probate process.

BIA needs to provide a more efficient process to obtain
DOI Systems clearance and provide timely training for Self-
Governance tribes. From the SPRMIC's experience we had to
fight for access to the database and then beg for quality
training on how to use the database. Waiting 6 to 18 months
to have a new staff person be functional is unproductive
and very inefficient. The SRPMIC has requested additional
support to assist with clearance and training on numerous
occasions over the last decade with only limited and
temporary relief.

The SRPMIC embraces the accountability that needs to be placed on
both the respective Tribe and DOI-BIA. To date, the SRPMIC
recommendations have had no follow up from the agencies on how they can
improve their programming. As a result, there may be similar findings
with the 2024 TTE that has recently started.
As this hearing is focused on the advancement of tribal self-
determination through P.L. 93-638 contracting and compacting, it is
clear there is a tremendous amount of technical support that is needed
with functions such as LTRO. The SRPMIC has shown it can successfully
assume many federal functions of the BIA and we want to make sure our
federal partner is also committed to this success. Similarly the DOI
Inspector General Report in 2023 touched on the demands that are
required by the BIA to make sure federal funding is used in the most
effective way. We agree with the findings that greater internal
controls are necessary to track the flow of federal funds and to the
extent there are unspent savings we would support any redistribution of
funds to tribal programs or bolster its internal requirements for
programs such as LTRO and probate activity.
More generally, we believe the BIA must uphold its federal trust
responsibility to tribes to meet the needs of critical government
important services that are provided throughout a reservation. As it
was noted previously, the SRPMIC is located close to one of the largest
metropolitan areas in the Country and the demands are great to provide
necessary services throughout the Community. For instance, in recent
years there has been a growing demand for public safety services
including our implementation of the new authorities under the Violence
Against Women Act (VAWA). As federal law evolves, BIA funding through
compacts should reflect those growing responsibilities.
When the SRPMIC first compacted programs with the BIA in 1995 we
received $3,212,357.00. Following the addition of seven programs the
SRPMIC currently receives approximately $14.7 million with an
additional $6.9 million coming from USDOT for CMAQ. However, based on
the growth of the Community, in terms of increased enrollment and
development, the needs of the Community have grown exponentially where
the self-governance funding has not kept pace. For example, in Fiscal
Year 2023 the SRPMIC appropriated an additional $37.2 million of tribal
funding for compacted programs to meet the unmet need that exists.
The SRPMIC looks forward to working with the Congress and the
Administration to continue to improve programming efficiency and the
commensurate resources that are needed to fulfill the federal trust
responsibility of the federal government to native nations.

In addition to the recommendations to the LTRO and the Probate
functions, the SRPMIC offers the following observations:

The Congress should provide advanced appropriations for
the BIA, as there is provided for the Indian Health
Service. Just as there are advanced appropriations for
programs at the Department of Education, Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Department of Labor, and
Veterans Affairs, it should also be extended to tribal
programming to ensure that funds are available to maintain
critical Tribal government functions during times of a
federal government shutdown. Funding uncertainty causes
Tribes to redistribute funds from other Tribal programs,
resulting in diminished services.

SRPMIC supports the ongoing rulemaking process to
implement the PROGRESS Act and does not have any additional
policy recommendations at this time. The major impact the
PROGRESS Act will have on SRPMIC is the application and
administration to Titles IV and V Self-Governance Compacts.
The law reconciles Title IV (BIA/DOL programs) and Title V
(IHS programs) of the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act and reconciles the differences in
the two types of compacts to encourage more efficiency by
Indian Tribes who administer both types of Compacts. There
are also favorable changes in this section that require the
Federal Agencies to act in ``good faith'' and interpret the
federal laws, regulations, and executive orders in a manner
that will facilitate the implementation of Self-Governance
Agreements. There are additional technical changes to the
Funding Agreement negotiations regarding the Final Offer
process and timelines, and under what situations the
Federal Agencies can deny these Final Offers. Importantly,
there are other provisions that will protect tribes from
the Agencies that may impose unauthorized terms in a
compact or funding agreement. Overall these amendments will
provide more flexibility for the SRPMIC in its
administration of its BIA and IHS Self-Governance Compacts.

Chair Hageman and members of the subcommittee thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony on this important subject and SRPMIC
stands ready to be a constructive ally in improving services through
the Self-Governance contracting and compacting process.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Martin Harvier, President, Salt
River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your written statement, you mentioned inefficiencies
within the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) during the COVID-19 pandemic
that impacted your tribe's ability to provide services.

1a) Has BIA improved in this area, and has the agency created more
opportunity for tribal staff to have the training and access needed to
run programs included in your self-governance compact?

Answer. While the initial issues raised regarding training for
staff for Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community (SRPMIC) TAAMS
access have mostly been resolved we have encountered an additional
issue for Tribal staff that has impacted SRPMIC's ability to provide
compacted services.
On Thursday, March 7, 2024 SRPMIC was informed that the Salt River
Agency would be receiving our Right of Way packets, but they will now
be reviewed at the Western Region Office (WRO) level. Once the review
has been completed, the Salt River Agency (SRA) would then approve the
packet. This strays from the previous process of the SRA reviewing the
packed with WRO approving the packet. SRPMIC was never notified in this
change of process and this change in approval process has since created
a backlog in right of way approvals pending with the BIA. Below are the
pending packets and number of days pending.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5061.002

.epsAs per the federal regulation, 25 CFR 169.123 (Rights of Way
Over Indian Land), BIA is supposed to grant or deny the right-of-way
within 60-days of receipt of a complete package. We are not aware if
they have the necessary resources at the agency level, or if the agency
was instructed to include the WRO, or if there is another reason. In
any instance, the time of BIA review and approval of Right of Way
Easements have declined significantly since 2006, per the graph below.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5061.003

.epsThis delay in approvals can negatively impact SRPMIC's future
Trust Evaluation's. The decline in approval of Right of Way packets
greatly impacts SRPMIC's ability to provide trust functions to members
and needs to be addressed immediately.

Question 2. Please expand on the issues raised in your testimony
surrounding the tribal trust evaluation audits with the BIA and where
you see room for improvement.

Answer. Under the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act in accordance with 25 CFR 1000.354 the trust evaluation
should be completed annually. Since 2006, Salt River Pima-Maricopa
Indian Community has only received 7 completed audits as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5061.004

.epsWe understand that there may be staffing issues that prohibit
the Division of Trust and Review from maintaining annual reviews for
self-governance tribes. Our recommendation would be to provide adequate
funds for the Bureau of Indian Affairs to address the staffing issues
to maintain the codified legislation as it pertains not only Trust
Evaluations, but BIA functions as a whole.

Question 3. Several witness statements mentioned the Department of
the Interior's lack of timeliness to distribute program funds under
self-governance compacts.

3a) Could you further elaborate on how this delay directly impacts
tribes?

Answer. Without advanced appropriations and the lack of timeliness
to distribute funds under the self-governance compacts Tribes are left
with two options.

1.  Tribes that are capable of diverting different streams of funding
to cover PSFA's will do what is possible to meet the needs
of Tribal members.

2.  Tribes without the ability or flexibility to cover PSFA's are
left to delay the delivery of PSFA's to Tribal members
until funding is provided.

In either instance the delay in funding can impact the Tribe's
ability to provide the compacted or contracted PSFA's, which ultimately
impact Tribal members.

3b) Could you further elaborate on how any funding delays have
specifically impacted your tribe's self-governance programs?

Answer. Since FY 2020, SRPMIC has not received a fully executed
Annual Funding Agreement (AFA) for the fiscal year (FY) prior to
October 1st. Without the AFA for the FY, SRPMIC does not receive a
signed Authority to Obligate (ATO) until well into the FY. With this
delay SRPMIC has to either rely on any carryover or Tribal funds to
supplement PSFA's until ATO's are issued and money can be drawn. For
example:

FY 2023 SRPMIC did not receive the 1st FY 2023 ATO until
January 31, 2023, approximately 4 months into FY 2023.

FY 2024 SRPMIC did not receive a fully executed amendment
to the Multi-Year Funding Agreement and AFA until February
12, 2024 and the 1st FY 2024 ATO was issued on February 29,
2024, approximately 4 months and 28 days into FY 2024.

Without the timely funding that is due to Tribes to perform
inherently federal functions, we are left to find alternative funding
sources to maintain services until self-governance allocations are
produced.
SRPMIC recommend the addition of awarding officials within the BIA
and the Office of Self-Governance to help facilitate the movement of
ATO's to Tribes. As of now the only awarding official in the Office of
Self-Governance is the Director and when she is not available a backlog
of ATO's accumulates which delays the necessary funds being distributed
to Tribes.

Question 4. Where could Congress legislate regarding the 638
compacting process that would improve the 638 negotiations?

4a) And what regulatory changes, if any, would you suggest to the
Department of the Interior to improve the 638 compact negotiation
process?

Answer. With the pending implementation of the PROGRESS Act, the
law reconciles Title IV (BIA/DOL programs) and Title V (IHS programs)
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act and
reconciles the differences in the two types of compacts to encourage
more efficiency by Indian Tribes who administer both types of Compacts.
There are favorable changes in this section that require the Federal
Agencies to act in ``good faith'' and interpret the federal laws,
regulations, and executive orders in a manner that will facilitate the
implementation of Self-Governance Agreements. There more technical
changes to the Funding Agreement negotiations regarding the Final Offer
process and timelines, and under what situations the Federal Agencies
can deny these Final Offers. There are other pro-tribal provisions in
the law, including a provision that protects tribes from the Agencies
trying to impose unauthorized terms in a compact or funding agreement.
Overall these amendments are in provide more flexibility for the
Community in its administration of its BIA and IHS Self-Governance
Compacts. Other than this, the rulemaking process does not help (as is)
with the deficiencies previously noted

Question 5. Has the issue of inherent federal functions impacted
what programs and/or functions your tribe was able to include in your
638 compact?

5a) If yes, what was the function and/or program that was deemed an
inherently federal function?

Answer. In FY 2017 SRPMIC assumed the Land Titles and Records
(LTRO) function that was deemed an inherently federal function after
many years of discussion between SRPMIC and BIA.

5b) And are you aware of any other tribes that were able to compact
that function and/or program?

Answer. SRPMIC is aware of other Tribes that were able to compact
the LTRO. We are also aware of additional Tribes who wish to compact
LTRO but are being told that this is not an inherently federal function
and being denied the addition to their compact.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for his testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Cheryl Andrews-
Maltais for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHERYL ANDREWS-MALTAIS, CHAIRWOMAN,
WAMPANOAG TRIBE OF GAY HEAD AQUINNAH, AQUINNAH, MASSACHUSETTS

Ms. Andrews-Maltais. Good afternoon, Madam Chairwoman,
Ranking Member, and honorable Subcommittee Members. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify here today.
My name, again, is Cheryl Andrews-Maltais and I am the
Chairwoman of the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah. My
tribe has lived on our Aboriginal homelands since time
immemorial and we have occupied the island Noepe, what is also
known as Martha's Vineyard, for over 13,000 years.
We are part of the Great Wampanoag Nation and we are the
first people to meet the pilgrims in 1620 and we were the
original signatories to the first treaty in this hemisphere,
the 1621 Treat of Peace between us and King James I.
Like other tribes in New England, we were the first to
endure colonial laws, which were written to limit and take away
our inherent sovereignty, our rights, our culture, our lands,
and our traditional way of life.
But despite over 400 years of this attempted genocide and
acculturation, we remain here strong and resilient. I began
with this brief history of my people as an example of the fact
that most of our tribes have faced, with other treaties, with
the United States.
Before contact, as Indigenous Peoples of these lands, all
tribes maintained thriving communities and robust economies
with significant intertribal trade and commerce, political
alliances and sophisticated Indigenous knowledge, through which
we utilized, maintained, managed, and preserved our natural
resources.
Our rights to practice our way of life was given to us by
the Creator as sovereign Tribal Nations and we exercise those
rights as individual governments and stewards of our land and
our natural resources for ourselves and our future generations.
The Indian policies that were initially established were
devised to strip us of all that we knew and held dear. They
were specifically designed to kill the Indian and eradicate us
from existence, a systematic plan to divest us of all of our
lands and natural resources and a way to enforce us into
submission and into a way of life foreign to us resulting in
the deaths of hundreds of thousands of us through war,
starvation, disease, and broken spirits.
However, we are still here. We have survived resistant,
resilient, and strong. Through the centuries, we have also
witnessed the failed policies of the United States as they have
intended to try to help us as Native peoples.
As documented in the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: A
Quiet Crisis and its follow-up report, Broken Promises, the
United States has failed to meet its trust and treaty
obligation and has failed to adequately fund tribes and Federal
agencies in order to meet its obligations to the tribes.
However, a dynamic shift in the Indian policies came with
the passage of the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act. This forward-thinking legislation was one of
Congresses first efforts to meaningfully acknowledge Tribal
Nations sovereignty and recognize our ability to administer
programs and services at a higher level of expertise and
effectiveness then before.
It empowered our Tribal Nations across the country to
assert our sovereignty and determine our own destinies, which
has had far better outcomes.
This is the route that my tribe chose. Self-governance has
provided a mechanism through which we have been able to better
provide for our people. Self-governance has been
transformative.
This could not have been proven more clearly than with the
accomplishments of so many tribes during the recent COVID
pandemic. Tribes were provided direct Federal funding with
simple specific guidance for the use of the funds.
And, like with self-governance, we demonstrated how well we
can do our jobs when given the resources and the Federal
Government steps out of the way.
While some strides have been made, the government still
seems to treat our sovereign nations as wards of the government
with a paternalistic perspective. Federal funding across Indian
Country is often delivered through a competitive grant process
or through states.
Grant funding fails to reflect the unique nature of Federal
trust obligation and tribal sovereignty by treating Tribal
Nations as non-profits rather than governments, which is an
abrogation of the Federal trust responsibility.
Advancing self-determination and self-governance is a must.
The expansion of the ISDEAA authorities would be the next
evolutionary step for the Federal Government's recognition of
tribal sovereignty and would reflect its full commitment to
tribes.
As previously noted, we Tribal Nations are political,
sovereign entities with the status that stems from our inherent
sovereignty and we, as self-governance peoples, predate the
founding of the United States.
We call upon Congress to enact legislation that expands
self-governance capabilities across the Federal Government so
that we may fully exercise our inherent sovereign rights to
manage our affairs and resources.
Thank you for your attention to this critical issue, and I
stand ready to assist in any way to work together to strengthen
tribal sovereignty and self-determination.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Andrews-Maltais follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairwoman Cheryl Andrews-Maltais, Wampanoag
Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah

Good Afternoon Chairwoman Hageman, Ranking Member Fernandez and
Honorable Subcommittee Members, thank you for the opportunity to
testify regarding the issue of: Advancing Tribal Self-Determination:
Examining the Bureau of Indian Affairs' 638 Contracting.''
My name is Cheryl Andrews-Maltais and I am the Chairwoman of the
Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah currently serving in my fifth term
and a Board Member of the United South and Eastern Tribes (``USET'').
My Tribe has lived in our ancient aboriginal homelands since time
immemorial and have occupied the island of Noepe (also known as
Martha's Vineyard) off the coast of Massachusetts for over 13,000
years. We are part of the Great Wampanoag Nation and are know as ``The
People of the First Light''. Not only are we the People of the First
Light, we are the Peoples of many firsts: we are the People who had
first contact with the Pilgrims in 1620 in Pawtuxet which now known as
Plymouth and we are the People with whom King James I of England made
the first Treaty in this hemisphere, the 1621 Treaty of Peace. This
Treaty recognized and respected the sovereignty of the both our
sovereign nations--The Wampanoag Nation and Britain. We are also the
survivors of the first germ warfare in this hemisphere perpetrated
against our People to decimate our population and steal our lands. We
are the People who were put into the first concentration camp in this
hemisphere during Metacom's (also known as King Philip's) War. And we
were the first People to have our lives, lands and natural resources
stolen from us through murder, trickery and enacted laws, specifically
designed to eliminate us through the attempted and systematic cultural
and literal genocide of our People. Like other New England Tribes, we
were the first to endure Colonial laws that were written to limit or
take away our inherent sovereign rights, our culture, our ceremony and
spirituality and our traditional ways of life and living.
However, while we are some of the first People to experience and
survive the devastation of Colonialism, despite over 400 years, four
centuries of this attempted genocide and attempted acculturation and
colonialism, we are still here; resistant, resilient and strong. Before
contact, as the Indigenous Peoples of these lands, we maintained
thriving communities and robust economies with significant intertribal
trade and commerce, political alliances and sophisticated Indigenous
knowledge; through which we utilized, maintained, managed and preserved
our natural resources for our sustenance and subsistence. Our right to
live and practice our ways of life was given to us by our Creator and
as sovereign Tribal Nations, we exercised those rights as independent
governments and stewards of our lands and natural resources for
ourselves and our future generations to come.
I began with this brief history of my People, as an example of most
of our Tribes who have faced similar if not the same fate, whether
their Treaties or agreements were with another country or the United
States. We all had thriving communities and robust economies, our
traditional ways of life and natural resource management which has
sustained us. Our lands and resources were so bountiful and attractive;
that when the foreigners came, they coveted them so much, that they
would do anything to possess them. This was the beginning of the Indian
policies established to strip us of all that we knew and held dear, our
culture, traditions, our lands and our natural resources. These
policies, designed to ``kill the Indian'' and eradicate us from our
lands were specifically designed to remove us from all that we knew and
honored. Despite the promises made in the Treaties in exchange for
peace, or access to our resources, these policies were actually a
systematic plan to divest us of all of our lands and natural resources.
These policies were designed as a way to try to force us into
submission, into a way of life foreign to us, resulting in the death of
hundreds of thousands of us through wars, starvation, disease and
broken spirits. However we still survived, resistant, resilient and
strong.
Through these centuries, we have witnessed the failures of these
Indian policies, and the inability of the United States to keep its
promises; promises made to us in exchange for the lives of our
Ancestors, our lands and natural resources. As documented in the United
States Commission on Civil Rights 2003 Report: A Quiet Crisis and its
2018 follow up Briefing Report: Broken Promises, the United States has
failed to meet its trust and treaty obligations and has failed to
adequately fund Tribes, and/or agencies like Indian Affairs in order to
meet their obligations to the Tribes. While the Bureau of Indian
Affairs has made significant strides in changing the culture within the
agency to better support Tribal Nations, there still seems to be
pressure from Congress to treat sovereign Tribal Nations as wards of
the government, with a paternalistic perspective, disregarding that
Tribal Nations have a unique political relationship with the Unites
States, unlike any other political subdivision or non-profit
organization.
Through our tenacity, we have been able to demonstrate that despite
the United States' failure to meet its treaty and trust
responsibilities our Tribal Nations remain, that we are the same strong
resistant and resilient People, with the knowledge and capacity to care
for our own People. We have been able to demonstrate that the polices
of the United States have not succeeded in doing what they were
intended to do. Nevertheless, during this time, we also realized that
we, as sovereign Tribal Nations, can assist the United States in
fulfilling its trust and treaty obligations. We recognized that by
providing us with the resources we need for us to rebuild our own
Communities and economies, then stepping aside while we provide the
programs and services that we design to best meet the needs of our
People, we can all do better.
Advancing Self-Determination Through the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act

A dynamic shift in the policies and way of thinking, came with the
passage of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act
(ISDEAA) in 1975 (Public Law 93-638). I am honored to address you today
regarding the critical matter of advancing self-determination through
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (P.L. 93-
638, 25 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 5301 et seq.). This landmark legislation has
empowered Tribal Nations across the United States to assert our
sovereignty and determine our own destinies.
This forward-thinking legislation was one of the first efforts to
meaningfully acknowledge Tribal Nations' sovereignty and recognize our
ability to administer the programs and services, promised to us by the
United States, at a level of expertise and effectiveness which has had
better outcomes than ever before. One of the fundamental aspects of the
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act is the
distinction it draws between ``self-governance'' under Title IV and
``self-determination'' under Title I.
Title IV of the Act allows participating Tribes to negotiate
funding agreements with the Department of the Interior for Public Law
93-638 programs, granting Tribes the authority to assume control over
these programs and service. This is the route my Tribe chose and which
has allowed us to design our own programs and services in a manner that
best serves our Tribal Members and their needs.
A key differentiator between self-determination contracts and self-
governance compacts lies in the level of tribal flexibility afforded.
While Tribes under Title I contracts must seek approval from the
Department of the Interior for substantial changes, Tribes under Title
IV compacts have greater autonomy. They can redesign or consolidate
Public Law 93-638 programs and reallocate funds within selected
programs without prior approval from the Department of the Interior.
This is an essential aspect of Tribal self-determination. Tribes make
the best decisions with regard to the effectiveness of program and
service delivery to their People.
With the expansion of Self-Governance through the amendments of the
ISDEAA under Title IV in 2000, Tribes have been able to unlock more
opportunities for creative programing and community building by
negotiating directly with Federal Agencies for the administration of
the funding. As this success demonstrated the effectiveness of Tribal
decision making and innovation when it came to designing and delivering
programs and services, the expansion of the rights and responsibilities
of the Tribal Nations proved that Tribal control, would not only assist
the United States in fulfilling its trust and treaty obligations to
Tribes, it benefited both the Tribes and the United States.
My Tribe, the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah), became the
first self-governance Tribe in the Eastern region. The Tribe's decision
to pursue self-governance underscores the importance of enabling Tribes
to exercise genuine self-determination over their affairs without the
need for constant oversight from Federal agencies. While this has been
a strong step forward, there is still the need for greater funding,
self-governance expansion and flexibilities for the Tribal Nations to
truly flourish.
The potential for even greater success is with the expansion of
Self-Determination and Self-Governance. In my fifth term as Chairwoman,
I have witnessed firsthand the transformative power of self-governance.
This could not have been proven more clearly than with the
accomplishments of so many Tribes during the recent COVID-19 Pandemic.
This was the first time that all Tribes were provided direct Federal
funding, with simple and specific guidance for the use of those funds,
and Tribes demonstrated how well we can do our jobs, when given the
resources and the government steps out of the way. Tribes, who were
among the most vulnerable populations, did a far better job in
preventing, preparing for and responding to the deadly COVID-19
pandemic than any other government instrumentality. For example, our
Tribe's ability to develop and manage our own COVID-19 response
programs, without waiting for permission from the Bureau of Indian
Affairs has been instrumental in protecting the health and well-being
of our community during these challenging times. Self-governance gave
us the ability to respond quickly, mitigating the number of cases and
ultimately deaths caused by COVID-19.
In addition to leading my Tribal Government for five terms as a
Self-Governance Tribe, I previously served as a Senior Advisor to the
Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, and I currently serve on various
national advisory councils and committees like the BIA and IHS Tribal
Self Governance Advisory Committee and the Heath and Human Services
Secretary's Tribal Advisory Committee. It is with this experience in
mind that I urge the expansion of self-governance to all Federal
agencies, programs, and funds. Much of the Federal funding across
Indian Country is delivered through the competitive grant process (and
often through the states). Not only is this an abrogation of the
Federal trust responsibility to force Tribal Nations to compete for
Federal dollars, but the competitive grant process often precludes many
Tribal Nations from having access to those dollars at all. Grant
funding fails to reflect the unique nature of the Federal trust
obligation and Tribal sovereignty by treating Tribal Nations as non-
profits rather than governments. Self-governance Contracting and
Compacting should be an available option across the Federal system.
Many opportunities still remain to improve and expand upon the
principles of self-governance and self-determination. An expansion of
ISDEAA authorities to all programs across the Federal government would
be the next evolutionary step in the Federal government's recognition
of Tribal sovereignty and reflect its full commitment to Tribal Nation
sovereignty and self-determination. The expansion of self-governance
contracting and compacting will not only empower us to better serve our
citizens and communities, but it will enhance our abilities to manage
our lands. Expansion would empower Tribal Nations to administer Federal
programs in co-management, stewardship, agriculture, deployment and
maintenance of critical infrastructures, and pursue economic
development on our lands. We call on Congress to enact legislation that
expands our self-governance capabilities across the Federal government
so that we may fully exercise our inherent sovereign rights to manage
our affairs and resources.
Despite the success of Tribal Nations in exercising authority under
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA),
the goals of self-governance have not been fully realized. As Tribal
Nations, we are political, sovereign entities whose status stems from
the inherent sovereignty we have as self-governing peoples that pre-
dates the founding of the United States. The U.S. Constitution,
Treaties, Statutes, Executive Orders, and judicial decisions all
recognize that the Federal government has a fundamental trust
relationship to Tribal Nations, including the obligation uphold the
right to self-government. Our Federal partners must fully recognize the
inherent right of Tribal Nations to fully engage in self-governance, so
we may exercise full decision-making in the management of our own
affairs and governmental services.
All Federal programs and dollars must be eligible for inclusion in
ISDEAA self-governance contracts and compacts. We must move beyond
piecemeal approaches directed at specific functions or programs and
start ensuring that Tribal Nations have real decision-making in the
management of our own affairs and assets. It is imperative that Tribal
Nations have the expanded authority to redesign additional Federal
programs to appropriately serve our communities as well as have the
authority to redistribute funds to administer services among different
programs as necessary. To accomplish this requires a new framework and
understanding that moves us further away from the current archaic,
paternalistic approach of the Federal government managing Indian
affairs.
Advancing Self-Determination is a must as funding is inadequate,
human resources are scarce and the relationship between Tribal Nations
and the Bureau of Indian Affairs ever-evolving. In the almost 50 years
since the passage of the ISDEAA, Tribal Nations have demonstrated our
capacity and expertise to take on more Federal responsibilities when
and if they so choose. It is time to begin to re-envision the role of
the Bureau from paternalistic regulator to a true partner and advocate
for Tribes as we continue to serve our people.
Authorize Interagency Transfer of Federal Funds to Support Tribal
Programs and Services

The Federal government has a long track record of failing to uphold
its trust and treaty obligations to fully fund Tribal programs and
services. USET SPF fully supports the ability of Tribal Nations to
request and receive funds from any Federal agency through ISDEAA 638
self-governance contracts and compacts.
Since passage of ISDEAA, Tribal Nations have become experienced in
managing complex Federal programs under these types of agreements.
These agreements empower us to administer Federal funds in a manner
that we deem appropriate and necessary to achieve our goals and
priorities to better serve our citizens and communities. The 638
contracting and compacting method empowers our Tribal Nations to fully
exercise our sovereignty and self-determination. Other methods of
Federal funding, especially grant and competitive grantmaking models,
treat Tribal Nations as not-for-profit entities, instead of sovereign
governments, and create unnecessary barriers to services provided in
fulfillment of perpetual trust and treaty obligations. Under a 638
mechanism, Tribal Nations can determine how to utilize funds received
from Federal agencies to appropriately utilize such funds to better
serve our citizens and communities.
Expand the 477 Program Across the Federal Government

Established in 1992 by Public Law 102-477 (P.L. 102-477), the 477
program was intended to reduce unemployment in Tribal communities by
establishing employment opportunities consistent with the purposes of
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA).
The program also sought to increase the effectiveness of employment and
training programs by streamlining administrative requirements through
consolidation of budgeting, reporting, and auditing systems. Congress
amended the 477 program through the, ``Indian Employment, Training and
Related Services Consolidation Act 2017'' (P.L. 115-93), which
empowered Tribal Nations and organizations to consolidate eligible
employment, training, and related services from different Federal
sources. The intention of this was to reduce the administrative,
reporting, and accounting cost burdens on Tribal Nations and
organizations.
The 477 program 2017 amendments also directed Federal agencies to
sign an Interagency Memorandum of Agreement (Interagency MOA) to
implement the consolidation of eligible employment and training
programs across a number of Federal agencies. However, following the
Interagency MOA that was signed in December 2018--without Tribal
consultation--other Federal agencies sought to implement their
employment and training programs using their own methods and
prerogatives without Department of the Interior (DOI) leadership and
direction. It was not until October 7, 2022 that the Administration
announced the signing of an updated Interdepartmental MOA to implement
the 477 program. The 2022 Interdepartmental MOA has sought to
streamline plan approval procedures and re-affirmed the decision-making
authority of the Secretary of the Interior in approving 477 Program
plans. The goal of the 2022 Interdepartmental MOA is to increase Tribal
Nation economic resilience through employment and training programs and
services based on our Tribal community priorities and initiatives.
The 477 program serves as a positive model for reducing reporting
burdens on Tribal Nations and organizations, as it eliminates
underlying reporting requirements for Federal programs integrated into
each 477 plan and replaces them with a single annual report. For these
reasons, I strongly recommend that Congress and the Subcommittee on
Indian and Insular Affairs advance legislation to expand the 477
Program across the entirety of the Federal government. Enacting a law
that will reduce reporting burdens and streamline administrative
requirements for Tribal Nations will support our efforts in Nation
rebuilding and ensure our economic resilience through Tribal-centric
goals and initiatives in employment and training services.
The Directives of EO 14112 Must be Made into Law

On December 11, 2023, President Biden Issued Executive Order 14112,
``Reforming Federal Funding and Support for Tribal Nations to Better
Embrace our Trust Responsibilities and Promote the Next Era of Tribal
Self-Determination'' (EO 14112). This Executive Order was issued to our
inherent sovereignty and self-determination to advance economic growth,
pursue Nation rebuilding, and directly address the economic, social,
and public health priorities of our citizens. The current service model
of Federal funding allocation, administration, and oversight remains a
paternalistic, pre-self-determination era mechanism that stifles the
proper management and use of Federal resources in Indian affairs. In
order to usher in a new era of Tribal self-determination, Federal laws
and regulations must be rescinded or revised to truly advance our
sovereign efforts to pursue economic development and Nation rebuilding
for the improved economic, social, and public health of our
communities. We remind Congress and the Subcommittee, however, that no
level of economic success attained by Tribal Nations diminishes or
eliminates the United States' moral and legal trust and treaty
obligations to fully fund Tribal programs and services. While ISDEAA
638 contracting and compacting was an initial, positive step forward in
advancing our sovereignty and self-determination, the Federal
government must remove statutory and regulatory barriers for us to
appropriately manage Federal programs and funds for the benefit of our
communities and citizens.
Oversight is Needed to Accurately Verify Tribal Funding Levels Without
Penalizing Tribes

Congress should exercise its oversight authority in determining how
much actual funding actually reaches Indian Country. The Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) asserts that over $20 billion in Federal
dollars is appropriated to Indian Country annually. From the
perspective of the Tribes and Tribal advocates, including those who
serve on budget formulation committees for Federal agencies, this
number seems to be widely inflated, with far less actually reaching
Tribal Nations and Tribal citizens. We suspect that OMB arrives at this
figure by tallying the amount for which Tribal Nations and entities are
eligible, regardless of whether these dollars actually reach Indian
Country. OMB should be required to provide a full accounting of Federal
funding which is actually distributed to Indian Country. To date, OMB
has not responded to this request. However, this information is
absolutely essential to the measurement of the Federal government's own
success in meeting its obligations and the work of Tribal Nations.
In reading through the Office of the Inspector General Report: The
Bureau of Indian Affairs Can Improve the Closeout Process of Public Law
93-638 Agreements, I believe it is incumbent upon the Bureau to ensure
that all appropriated funds are utilized effectively and efficiently to
fulfill their intended purpose: enabling Tribes to provide essential
government services for their Tribal Members and the close-out process
is a critical component of verifying those funds. And while the Bureau
concedes to many of the Report's observation and has agreed to
corrective measures, the Report's tone still resonates with a
paternalistic view of the relationship between the Bureau and the
Tribal Nations. Let me be clear--the United States' trust and treaty
obligations have no end date nor are Tribal Nations equal to other
``grant recipients.'' This funding is a critical part of the United
States fulfilling its ongoing trust and treaty obligations. We have
paid it forward with the lives of our Ancestors, our land and our
natural resources; and this debt to us, to Indian Country, is ongoing
and does not go away.
While there is merit to ensuring that any unexpended funding should
be accounted for and redistributed, this should not be at the expense
of a Tribe who has been sent funding they are entitled to only to be
ordered to spend those funds in accordance with an arbitrary timeline
imposed upon them by the Federal government. Self-Determination is
self-explanatory--Tribes get to decide how and when to spend their
funding. The single annual audit should be sufficient to ensure that
expenditures are consistent with its intended authorization. In the
same manner that aid to foreign countries does not require this type of
reporting and oversight nor should burdensome reporting and oversight
be imposed upon Tribal Nation for repayment of a debt owed to us.
As we consider the future of Tribal Self-Determination, we must
remain steadfast in our commitment to upholding the principles
enshrined in the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance
Act. By fostering collaboration, accountability, and mutual respect
between Tribal Nations and the Federal government, we can continue to
advance the cause of Indigenous sovereignty and self-governance.
In conclusion, both Title I and Title IV ISDEEA agreements are
critical towards ensuring that Tribal Nations have the tools and
resources necessary to chart their own course toward prosperity and
self-sufficiency.
Thank you for your attention to this critical issue. I stand ready
to assist in any way possible as we work together to strengthen Tribal
Sovereignty and Self-Determination.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Hon. Cheryl Andrews-Maltais,
Chairwoman, Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head Aquinnah

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your testimony, you mentioned the importance of
flexibility given to tribes participating in a self-governance compact.

1a) Could you further expand on your tribe's experiences with this
level of flexibility and autonomy and how it has overall improved
tribal members experience with programs?

Answer. Thank you for the opportunity to provide further testimony
on this important issue. Due to our very unique situation, we opted
into Self-Governance on both the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and the
Indian Health Services (IHS) sides. Deciding to enter into Self-
Governance Compacting has made a significant difference in how we are
able to better meet the needs of my Tribal Community.
By way of background, our Tribe is small with a current Tribal
population numbering about 1500 enrolled Tribal Member/Citizens.
Because our Tribal offices and Aquinnah Homelands are on the island of
Noepe (aka Martha's Vineyard), it has created a very unique set of
challenges. The island is a world-wide tourist destination and has
attracted wealthy and famous people from all sectors, including
Presidents since President Grant. With so much notoriety focused on our
island homelands, by the 1970s more and more notable celebrities came
to the island to build summer, 2nd or 3rd homes. This influx of wealthy
and notable people moving to the island forever changed the nature,
demand for land and the characteristics of the island. Not having legal
counsel or being accustomed to the court system, many of our Tribal
Member/Citizens were swindled out of their lands, or their lands were
taken for back-taxes, or portions sold of land just to make ends meet.
Additionally, there was little opportunity for professional or gainful
year-round employment and limited education opportunities, so many of
our Tribal Members/Citizens were forced to move to the other end of the
island, or off the island all together.
The attrition of our Tribal Member/Citizens having to move off the
island just to make ends meet continues to this day at an alarming
rate. Due to the astronomically high cost of living, the lack of
available, never mind affordable, housing and the lack of many
meaningful year-round employment opportunities; only about 25% of our
Tribal Member/Citizens live on the island. The remaining 75% of our
Tribal Member/Citizens live on the mainland, with the highest
concentrations living in the northeast and New England, with
significant numbers remaining in Massachusetts, Rhode Island and
Connecticut. The balance of our Tribal Member/Citizens live in the rest
of United States and around the world.
Prior to Self-Governance, the ability to serve my Tribal Community
was extremely challenging because most Indian Polices under both the
BIA and IHS are far too restrictive. Even now, most Indian Policies
written to provide essential services to Tribal Member/Citizens are
still predicated on the old failed Indian Policies and an antiquated
reservation system, which in most cases has never fit Tribes in the
east, and hasn't fit the rest of Indian Country in general since the
Allotment and Relocation eras. Additionally, as Tribal Nations grew and
rebuilt their economies, there was a need to expand into areas outside
of the proverbial ``reservations'' in order to accommodate our growing
populations, and for Tribal Member/Citizens to find educational
opportunities and or meaningful employment outside the confines of the
reservations and often outside their local areas.
In our case, while the funding is still woefully inadequate, the
flexibilities contained within the Self-Governance amendment option
provided us with the ability to re-design programs such as our Social
Services, and roll up other associated programs, services and function
activities (PSFAs) funding to create services that could reach a
greater amount of our People. While many of our People still lived in
our Ancestral Wampanoag Homelands, the majority did not live on the
island. The old policies were extremely restrictive of who and how you
could serve your People, incorrectly interpreted our service area to
restricting us to providing services only to those Tribal Member/
Citizens who lived in a limited geographical area, and used
inapplicable income thresholds for eligibility. This disparity in
access to services created great dissention and disharmony in our
Tribal Community, because it was inconsistent with our culture and
traditions of equality for all. Under Self-Governance, we were able to
expand our service areas to include more of our eligible Tribal Member/
Citizens to receive critical and necessary support services.
The old policies also required an inordinate amount of reporting
and limited access to funding. This situation created administrative
burdens and cash-flow issues, which negatively affected timely payments
to vendors, and the draw-down process was complicated and
overburdensome. Although the Federal Government has not provided the
prompt full payment for our Self-Governane Compacts by the beginning of
the fiscal year, as required by the statute, it's far better than
regular 638 contracting or direct services. Not having to receive our
funding in quarterly installments, after having to report on all
expenditures first, has made planning more effective and vendor
payments far more timely and streamlined.
Under Self-Governance ``lump-sum'' payments we could maximize our
funding by combining the funding line items and re-allocate the funding
to recreate more effective support for our Tribal Member/Citizens.

Question 2. Several witness statements mentioned the Department of
the Interior's lack of timeliness to distribute program funds under
self-governance compacts.

2a) Could you further elaborate on how this delay directly impacts
tribes?

Answer. Funding delays have had serious impacts on Tribal
Governments. Tribal Governments, unlike other government
instrumentalities, do not have a tax base. Additionally, like my Tribe,
most Tribal Governments are totally reliant on the program funding to
administer necessary programs and services. When Tribal Governments are
not supplemented by other funding, the failure of the Department of the
Interior to get the funding to Tribal Governments can create Tribal
Government shutdowns. Not only do these delays harm our Tribal Member/
Citizens who rely on the necessary services the Tribal Government
provides on behalf of the United States, it impacts employees who may
have to be laid-off, affecting their lives and livelihood, impacting
employee retention by causing them to potentially seek other
employment; further injuring the Tribal Member/Citizens. It also
affects the Tribal Government's ability to timely pay its vendors,
creating a negative impact on Tribal Government's ability to secure
vendors for goods and services. And when it comes to paying on behalf
of or re-imbursing Tribal Member/Citizens for their financial outlays,
this can affect the Tribal Member/Citizen's credit ratings because the
bills that were guaranteed by us are sent to collection agencies.

2b) Could you further elaborate on how any funding delays have
specifically impacted your tribe's self-governance programs?

Answer. The uncertainty of funding and/or timely funding creates
unnecessary stress on the part of the Tribal Government and erodes the
trust that we have with our Tribal Member/Citizens, our employees and
our vendors. We've had to develop plans for how to continue to support
the Tribal Community with the possibility of limited to no staff, no
funding to pay bills or obligations and the potential going in to the
limited reserves that we have, which were obligated to other
initiatives.

Question 3. Where could Congress legislate regarding the 638
compacting process that would improve the 638 negotiations?

3a) And what regulatory changes, if any, would you suggest to the
Department of the Interior to improve the 638 compact negotiation
process?

Answer. Congress could move the funding for Tribal Governments from
discretionary to mandatory in appropriations. The United States trust
and treaty obligations to Tribal Governments should not be at the
discretion of individual Congresses. As previously stated, Tribes have
paid it forward with the lives of our Ancestors, our land and our
natural resources. Mandatory and advanced funding for Tribes would help
to better meet the needs of the Tribes, and better fulfill the
obligation of the United States to our Tribal Governments. Full and
mandatory funding for Tribes is a must as well. More information is
contained in the Quiet Crisis and Broken Promises Reports. For Tribal
Governments, the only human condition housed within the Department of
the Interior (DOI), it's disrespectful to the Peoples and sacrifices
that we have made, to have to compete with the limited dollars in the
DOI Budget. This is not honoring the promises made to us for peace and/
or in exchange of our lands and natural resources. The Department of
the Interior generates billions of dollars of revenue for the United
States from Indian Lands (and resources). Congress can alleviate much
of the uncertainty by changing the way they fund Tribal Nations (Indian
Country).
Congress could also fix how Indian Country is funded across the
Federal Family. Tribal Governments are political entities, each
entitled to adequate funding to rebuild our Communities and our
economies which, under Federal Policies, were systematically dismantled
to eliminate us from existence. Tribes should not be treated as non-
profits or states to compete against each other and those entities for
the funding to rebuild our Communities and economies under a grant
structure.
Instead, Congress should look to a weighted formula-based funding
structure that will provide all Tribal Governments, listed on the
Secretary's List, with annual appropriations to run our governments and
rebuild our Communities and economies. Each formula must have minimums
and caps, and a set aside for extenuating circumstances. For example,
if the funding is for infrastructure, the funding should have 50%
equally allocated to each Tribe. Then weighted by 30% allocation based
upon Tribal Government land base holdings. Finally retaining 15% to be
allocated by population, with the remaining 5% for Tribal Governments
with extra high costs of goods and services, and/or extra-large
populations and or extra-large land holdings. A similar formula
breakdown could be if the funding was for direct services to
individuals, the weight would be similar with the 50% equally divided,
however the 30% weighted allocation area would be based upon
population, then land holdings at 15% with the retained amount of 5%
for extra-high cost of goods and services, extra-high populations and
extra-large land bases.
Then if Congress was to look across the entire federal system of
grants to see where funding has been set aside for Tribal Governments,
or where Tribal Governments are eligible to receive funding, then
pooled it into the general-purpose areas, there would be far more
funding to offer. By pooling all of the general-purpose area funding
across the federal family into, a weighted formula, under a Self-
Governance model. Then all Tribal Governments can begin to
appropriately design and plan their programs and services, with funding
to sustain the programs and services so there isn't any uncertainty of
whether or not the Tribe will be ``awarded'' funding that we are all
entitled to, and each Tribal Government can design the programs and
services to better meet it's unique and individual needs to service its
People and rebuild its Communities and economies as they determine.
Tribal Governments should never have a cost share for any federal
funding. And, Tribal Governments should not be wasting our very limited
and valuable human and financial resources, on writing grants for which
we may never receive, and/or reporting on the funding that we do
receive. No financial aid to other Sovereigns for assistance is
conditioned the way funding to Tribal Governments is. And no other
Sovereign has the special relationship that Tribal Governments have
with the United States, nor is any other Sovereign owed the debt that
Sovereign Tribal Nations are. We provide a single audit which should
suffice to verify that Tribal Nations are expending our funding
consistent with its intended purposes.

Question 4. Has the issue of inherent federal functions impacted
what programs and/or functions your tribe was able to include in your
638 compact?

4a) If yes, what was the function and/or program that was deemed an
inherently federal function?

4b) b. And are you aware of any other tribes that were able to
compact that function and/or program?

Answer. So far, we have not had the issue of being denied the
opportunity to assume the federal functions that we have requested.
However, that is probably because we haven't re-negotiated our Compact
in several years. I am aware of some Tribes that have had issues with
attempting to assume certain functions.

Additional Recommendations for Congress to consider:

All Legislation should have very specific language that states the
statute it is applicable to, and includes all federally Recognized
Tribal Governments listed on the Secretary's list, and that the
legislation repeals any other provision of law contrary to the full
application of this statute to all federally Recognized Tribal Nations.

Re-envision the Federal Government's Relationship with Tribal
Nations, to review all funding across the federal family for allocation
and weighted formula application.

To stop writing legislation that treats Tribal Governments as non-
profits or states, requiring sovereign Tribal Nations to receive the
United States funding obligation in the form of grants, compete against
each other for funding, have to come up with additional funding as a
``match'' and/or be required to report on funding expenditures beyond
the single audit requirement.

Provide a Self-Governance model option for as many Tribal
Governments who determine they have the capacity to customize their
programs and services as they are able to, and or see fit.

Legislate for Tribal Government Self-Governance across the board in
all cabinets and departments. Pool funds from all cabinets/bureaus into
a general-purpose areas for weighted formula distributions, with
weighted formula percentages determined by purpose areas (similar to
the ARPRA funds 50% equally split), establishing minimum and capped
amounts, with weighing the balance of the funding as it pertains to
purpose area and related distributions.

Thank you again for the opportunity to answer these additional
questions. I am happy to have a more detailed and in-depth discussion
on how these ideas can be implemented to improve the distribution of
federal funds, in the effort to help fulfill the United States Trust
and Treaty Obligations to our Tribal Governments.

______

Ms. Hageman. I think the witness for her testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Jay Spaan for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAY SPAAN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, SELF-GOVERNANCE
COMMUNICATION & EDUCATION TRIBAL CONSORTIUM, TULSA, OKLAHOMA

Mr. Spaan. Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Jay Spaan. I am a citizen of the Cherokee Nation and serve as
the Executive Director for the Self-Governance Communication &
Education Tribal Consortium. It is a great honor to be here
today to discuss self-determination and self-governance.
I am going to start with a few general remarks about these
authorities and then focus on opportunities for Indian Affairs
to make the implementation of the authorities more efficient.
Self-Determination Contracting and Self-Governance
Compacting are effective mechanisms that tribal governments use
for delivering Federal programs to their communities.
Nearly all Tribal Nations administer BIA or IHS programs
using Self-Determination Contracts and more than 280 Tribal
Nations have BIA or IHS programs delivered through Self-
Governance Compacts.
Both self-determination and self-governance are authorized
in the Indian Self-Determination, Education, and Assistance
Act, but they are distinct authorities and mechanisms, each
with its own attributes, benefits, and regulatory framework.
Self-governance was developed as a tribally-driven
initiative to improve upon and move beyond the limitations that
tribes experienced using self-determination.
As such, self-governance authority provides tribes with
greater flexibility and more efficiencies. For instance, under
self-governance, tribes have the authority to redesign Federal
programs in ways that better address local needs without
Federal interference.
Self-determination authority differs in that it requires
tribes to submit redesign proposals for Federal review and
approval. Another difference between self-determination and
self-governance is that they are managed by different entities
within Indian Affairs.
BIA administers Self-Determination Contracts while the
Office of Self-Governance oversees and manages Self-Governance
Agreements. Both BIA and the Office of Self-Governance are
overseen by the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Indian
Affairs.
Fifty years of experience has shown that self-determination
and self-governance are successful. Tribal Nations have
demonstrated that local control, local delivery, and knowledge
of need ultimately result in the delivery of more effective
programs, greater administrative and governance capacity,
increased accountability, and more extensive economic benefits.
While the success of self-governance is undeniable, there
are opportunities for our Federal partners to make
implementation of the mechanism within Indian Affairs more
effective and efficient.
For example, some Tribal Nations with Self-Governance
Agreements do not receive all the funding and supporting
documentation owed to them within the time frames identified in
their agreements.
One tribe told us they are still waiting for $13 million
from Fiscal Years 1922 and 1923 owed for administration of
programs assumed under a Self-Governance Compact.
The concern of timely discernment of funds was also raised
by the GAO in 2019. GAO specifically noted that Interior's
inability to disperse funds within time frames agreed to in
self-determination and self-governance agreements can cause an
undo burden on some tribes and dissuade other tribes from using
the mechanisms.
The GAO report indicated that a complex distribution
process and significant vacancies in key positions are both
factors that contribute to the delays. In addition, Tribal
Nations have raised concerns that self-governance has not been
effectively integrated throughout BIA's structure and
organization and that key offices do not coordinate as needed
to effectively fulfill their responsibilities.
As previously mentioned, the Office of Self-Governance and
BIA are separate entities under Indian Affairs. In part, this
organizational arrangement was intended to ensure that BIA's
initial reluctance to embrace self-governance would not hinder
the opportunity for Tribal Nations to use it.
However, for Tribal Nations with Self-Governance
Agreements, separation without effective collaboration may
limit access to some BIA offices, programs, and resources.
Further, due to ineffective collaboration and a lack of
sharing basic information within the organization, some tribes
have experienced situations in which they were delayed in
receiving programmatic funding increases.
Finally, we continue to hear examples of tribes that
received conflicting information, depending on the office
within Indian Affairs that they are speaking with.
For instance, we recently heard that a tribal government
was denied a request to compact a BIA program by the Office of
Self-Governance on the basis that BIA had no funds to support
the program.
When the tribe met with BIA directly, the Bureau found
funding to support the tribe's request. It is unclear why
tribes continue to receive inconsistent information from the
Bureau, depending on which office is asked, but it seems
reasonable that a lack of collaboration and information sharing
contributes to this problem.
I respectfully offer the following suggestions for the
Subcommittee. Indian Affairs should implement comprehensive
modernization efforts for technology systems, improve data
management and data sharing capabilities, and streamline
unnecessarily complex processes.
Two, Indian Affairs should ensure that self-governance is
integrated and understood throughout the Department, including
BIA, so that tribes with Self-Governance Agreements are not
isolated to only one office.
Thank you for the opportunity to share information with
you. Chair Hageman, Vice Chair Leger Fernandez, and members of
the Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I am
happy to respond to any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Spaan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jay Spaan, Executive Director, Self-Governance
Communication & Education Tribal Consortium

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of the
Subcommittee: On behalf of the Self-Governance Communication and
Education Tribal Consortium (SGCETC), I am pleased to be here today to
share information and discuss how Tribal Nations use Self-Determination
and Self-Governance authorities to reassume the administration and
implementation of Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) programs. SGCETC is a
non-profit Tribal consortium that supports Tribal Self-Determination
and Self-Governance by promoting communication, providing education,
offering technical assistance, facilitating collaboration, and sharing
resources among all Tribal Nations.
The enactment of the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act (ISDEAA) of 1975 (Public Law 93-638) marked a pivotal
shift in how federal resources and programs were delivered to Tribal
Nations. Before the act, the BIA and the Indian Health Service (IHS)
administered most federal resources and programs that serve Tribal
Nations. Passage of the ISDEAA and its subsequent amendments provide
Tribal Nations with alternative models--Self-Determination contracts
and Self-Governance compacts--for the delivery of BIA and IHS resources
and programs to their communities. Essentially, ISDEAA authorizes
Tribal Nations to better serve their communities by reassuming
administration and implementation of select federal programs--putting
Tribal governments in the role previously held by BIA and IHS.
Brief History of Self-Determination Contracting and Self-Governance
Compacting at BIA

In 1975, ISDEAA formally ushered in a new era of Federal Indian
policy that recognized Tribal sovereignty and the inherent right of
Tribal Nations to self-govern. ISDEAA authorized Tribal Nations to
negotiate Self-Determination contracts, enabling them to take over some
administrative duties previously managed by the BIA.
Enactment of the ISDEAA was a significant step for Tribal
sovereignty. Yet, Tribal Nations faced challenges in the late 1970s and
early 1980s implementing this new authority--largely due to resistance
from the federal bureaucracy to relinquish control over federal
programs that BIA was accustomed to administering.
In 1987, corruption and mismanagement of funds were exposed within
the BIA. These revelations, coupled with pressure from Tribal leaders
for BIA to relinquish control of federal programs that Tribal Nations
administered using Self-Determination contracts, laid the groundwork
for the strategic evolution of Tribal authority from Self-Determination
to what is now known as Self-Governance compacting.
Self-Governance compacting is based on the idea that Tribal
governments should receive both funding and the authority to design and
implement federal programs that serve their communities without federal
interference.
In 1988, Congress approved ISDEAA amendments to test this concept--
establishing a 5-year demonstration project within the Department of
the Interior (DOI).\1\ This project expanded Tribal authority over
programs and functions, reduced federal oversight, and provided greater
flexibility for Tribal governments to redesign and reallocate resources
to meet the unique needs of their communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Indian Self-Determination Amendments of 1987, Pub. L. No. 100-
472.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recognizing the success of Self-Governance authority, Congress made
it a permanent option for Tribal Nations in 1994.\2\ Recently, Congress
further amended ISDEAA with the Practical Reforms & Other Goals to
Reinforce the Effectiveness of Self-Governance & Self-Determination for
Indian Tribes (PROGRESS) Act of 2020 to streamline the negotiation
process, enhance administrative efficiencies, and provide more
flexibility in administering contracts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Indian Self-Determination Act Amendments of 1994, 108 Stat.
4250.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Self-Determination and Self-Governance Are Effective Mechanisms for the
Delivery of Federal Programs and Resources to Tribal
Communities

Each Tribal Nation voluntarily decides whether, and to what extent,
to pursue the administration of federal programs using Self-
Determination and/or Self-Governance mechanisms. At least 569 of the
574 federally recognized Tribal Nations have negotiated a Self-
Determination contract with BIA and/or IHS, and more than 380 Tribal
Nations negotiated a Self-Governance compact with the BIA and/or IHS to
assume administration of one or more federal programs.
Using these mechanisms, Tribal Nations have reassumed the
administration and implementation of a variety of programs and
functions from the BIA covering activities, including but not limited
to: programs to manage natural resources and economic development,
operate utilities, repair and maintain roads and bridges, inspect oil
and gas operations, survey lands, manage land records, conduct land
appraisals, administer social services and child welfare programs,
administer tribal courts, implement land and water claims settlements,
administer education and scholarships programs, and provide law
enforcement services.
Since its inception nearly 50 years ago, the motivating theory
behind Self-Determination and Self-Governance has proven true. Tribal
Nations have amply demonstrated that local control, local delivery, and
knowledge of need ultimately result in the proliferation of more
effective programs, greater administrative capacity, increased
governance capacity and leadership skills, and more extensive economic
benefits. For instance, the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic
Development found that beginning in the late 1980s (when ISDEAA was
amended to include Self-Governance compacts) until 2022, the per capita
income of the average Tribal citizen living on-Reservation has
increased by 61% and the proportion of families on-Reservation with
children living in poverty has been reduced from 47.3% to 23.5%.\3\ In
addition, in 2022, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
identified the use of Self-Determination contracts and Self-Governance
compacts as a best practice for federal agencies to distribute funds
intended for Tribal Nations and their citizens quickly. GAO also noted
that using these mechanisms mitigates administrative burdens for both
Tribal governments and federal agencies.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development,
American Indian Self-Determination Through Self-Governance: The Only
Policy That Has Ever Worked, Statement to The Commission on Native
Children by Joseph P. Kalt (December 15, 2022).
\4\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, COVID-19 RELIEF FUNDS:
Lessons Learned Could Improve Future Distribution of Federal Emergency
Relief to Tribal Recipients, GAO-23-105473 (Washington, D.C.: December
2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Self-Governance compacting provides flexibility for Tribal Nations
to use federal funds more effectively and efficiently by (1)
redesigning programs to meet local priorities, (2) integrating related
resources to reduce fragmentation at the Tribal government level, and
(3) providing opportunities to waive some federal agency rules and
guidance that hinder local solutions. It also reduces administrative
and reporting burdens while increasing local accountability, allowing
more focus on program delivery.
Key Differences in Self-Determination and Self-Governance

Self-Determination (Title I of ISDEAA) and Self-Governance (Title
IV of ISDEAA) both aim to transfer control over programs, functions,
services, and activities (PFSAs) from the federal government to Tribal
governments, allowing more local control and decision-making authority
over federal resources and decreasing bureaucratic processes. Yet,
Self-Determination and Self-Governance are each distinct authorities
and mechanisms. For instance, Self-Governance authority allows Tribal
Nations to administer and redesign federal programs based on their
priorities and local needs, free from federal interference. Self-
Determination authority generally requires Tribal governments to submit
standards and redesign proposals for federal review and approval--
providing the BIA with more control and involvement over implementing
the resources and programs. The following table developed by the GAO
compares key attributes of Self-Determination and Self-Governance
authorities.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5061.001

.epsAnother significant difference between Self-Determination and
Self-Governance is that Self-Determination contracts and Self-
Governance compacts are managed by two different organizations within
Indian Affairs.

For Self-Determination contracts, BIA negotiates,
approves, manages, and monitors the contracts. The funding
for Self-Determination contracts also flows through BIA
regional offices.

For Self-Governance compacts, the Office of Self-
Governance (OSG) has a variety of responsibilities
associated with managing Self-Governance agreements,
including: determining if a Tribal Nation is eligible to
negotiate a compact, participating in negotiations with
Tribal governments and BIA programs to identify the amount
of funds that will be included in the Self-Governance
agreements, processing waivers of BIA regulations, and
transferring funds to Tribal Nations with Self-Governance
agreements. OSG also monitors Tribal governments'
compliance with Single Audit Act requirements and
coordinates the collection of budget and performance data
from Tribal Nations that have a Self-Governance compact.

BIA and OSG are both overseen by DOI's Office of the Assistant
Secretary--Indian Affairs.
Indian Affairs Needs to Take Actions to Help Ensure the Continued
Expansion and Success of Self-Determination Contracting and
Self-Governance Compacting

Indian Affairs has taken actions in recent years to streamline some
BIA operations and reduce administrative burdens. For instance, Indian
Affairs has worked to improve and reform some outdated or inefficient
policies and processes, such as its effort to streamline the land
acquisition, rights-of-way, and business lease application processes.
However, numerous challenges that Tribal Nations face in working with
Indian Affairs, including BIA and OSG, indicate that more work is
needed and must be aimed at empowering Tribal Self-Governance. Indian
Affairs should ensure its organizational capacity, structure and
processes promote opportunities for increased Self-Governance.

Systems and Processes Need to be Modernized and Streamlined to
Support the Continued Growth of Self-Governance Many Tribal Nations
have expressed concerns that Indian Affairs' systems and processes are
outdated and needlessly complex--creating significant challenges and
inefficiencies for Tribal Nations with Self-Determination and Self-
Governance agreements and hindering the expansion of Self-Governance
for other Tribal Nations. All administrative aspects associated with
entering into and functioning under a Self-Governance agreement--from
initial application, vetting, negotiation, finalization of agreements,
delivery of funds, provision of payment details, and data collection
for future year payments--need to be simplified and streamlined for the
continued success of Self-Governance.

The following examples highlight the challenges created because of
outdated and overly complex systems and processes:

OSG does not ensure that Tribal Nations with Self-
Governance agreements receive funds within the required
time frames. Many Tribal Nations with Self-Governance
agreements have expressed concerns about delays in
receiving funds and the supporting documentation that were
negotiated and agreed upon with DOI. In one example, a
Tribal government is still waiting for the Department to
provide $13 million owed from FY 2022 and FY 2023 to
administer federal programs under a Self-Governance
agreement.

In 2019, GAO reported to Congress that Tribal governments
may be dissuaded from using Self-Determination and Self-
Governance mechanisms due to DOI's inability to provide
Tribal Nations with funds to administer federal programs
within the time frame specified in Self-Determination and
Self-Governance agreements.\5\ The GAO found that when
funds are not disbursed in a timely manner, Tribal
governments may have to use funds from their general
revenue accounts to cover expenses for federal programs or
seek other sources, such as loans, to cover program
expenses. When a Tribal government must use its funds for
the administration of federal programs--even temporarily--
it can adversely affect it in various ways, including lost
opportunities to use Tribal funds for improving the Tribes'
economic conditions, reducing other services provided to
Tribal communities, and furloughing Tribal government
employees. The GAO and Indian Affairs identified several
reasons for the delays in distributing funds, including a
substantial number of vacancies in key positions, such as
Awarding Officials. In addition, the distribution process
requires numerous steps and approvals that can bog down the
flow of funds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, INDIAN PROGRAMS:
Interior Should Address Factors Hindering Tribal Administration of
Federal Programs, GAO-19-87 (Washington, D.C.: January 2019).

Tribal Nations have expressed concerns that the OSG
database, which is intended to provide critical information
related to funding does not always have timely information
needed to fully account for the purpose of specific funds.
Tribal Nations continue to push OSG to update and modernize
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the system.

Some Tribal Nations have reported that BIA and OSG are
unresponsive to requests for information to negotiate a
Self-Governance compact or that simple requests result in
overly burdensome processes to obtain information. For
example, one Tribal Nation reported that it requested
funding information from BIA related to the programs that
serve the Tribal Nation--a request that should be simple
and straightforward to answer for the BIA. Rather than
sending an electronic file with the information, the BIA
saved several Word documents on a CD and physically mailed
the CD to the Tribal Nation. This outdated process
unnecessarily prolonged the process and added
administrative burdens for both BIA and the Tribal
government.

In 2019, the GAO reported to Congress that BIA remains
reluctant to share vital information needed by Tribal
governments to negotiate a Self-Governance agreement. The
GAO also found that some information provided to Tribal
Nations is inconsistent among BIA regions and noted that
BIA often lacks documentation or justification for its
determinations that impact Tribal Nation's access to
programs and resources for inclusion in Self-Governance
agreements.

Self-Governance Needs to be Better Integrated Throughout Indian
Affairs and More Coordination is Needed Between OSG and BIA Self-
Governance has not been effectively integrated throughout BIA's
structure and organization. OSG currently resides under Indian Affairs,
outside of the BIA. This organizational arrangement was intended to
ensure that BIA's reluctance to embrace Self-Governance would not
hinder how Tribal Nations use the authority. However, it may have also
limited access to some BIA offices, programs, and resources for Tribal
Nations with Self-Governance compacts and provided some BIA offices
with an excuse to neglect their duties that should extend to all Tribal
Nations--regardless of whether the Tribal government has a Self-
Governance agreement.

The following examples highlight the challenges created due to the
lack of integration of Self-Governance across Indian Affairs and the
lack of coordination between BIA and OSG:

Some Tribal Nations with Self-Governance agreements faced
delays receiving programmatic increases in base budgets
because of the lack of integration and coordination between
OSG and BIA. For instance, the DOI Inspector General
reported in 2018 that poor communication between BIA and
OSG resulted in some Tribal Nations missing out on funding
intended for them for nearly two years.\6\ It is unclear
why BIA and OSG do not share basic information, but Tribal
Nations continue to raise concerns that the lack of
coordination hinders effective implementation of Self-
Governance authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of the Interior,
Indian Affairs Offices' Poor Recordkeeping and Coordination Threaten
Impact of Tiwahe Initiative, Report No: 2017-ER-018 (Washington, D.C.:
September 2018).

Some Tribal Nations with Self-Governance agreements do not
receive notifications from BIA on funding opportunities or
data requests because of their status as a ``Self-
Governance Tribe.'' As a result, Tribal Nations with Self-
Governance agreements could miss out on funding
opportunities and often learn of data requests with limited
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
time to compile and submit information.

Some Tribal Nations have stated that BIA officials have
discouraged them from negotiating a Self-Governance
agreement. For instance, Tribal officials have been told
BIA would no longer provide support if they entered into a
Self-Governance agreement even though the statute clearly
requires the agency to provide technical assistance and
perform any PSFAs left with the BIA. In another instance,
Tribal officials have been encouraged by Indian Affairs
officials to pursue alternative mechanisms over Self-
Governance--mechanisms which provide federal agencies with
more control when compared to Self-Governance.

One Tribal Nation told SGCETC that OSG denied a request to
compact a BIA program stating that BIA had no available
funds. However, when the Tribal Nation met with BIA
directly, BIA staff identified funding for the program that
could be incorporated into the Self-Governance compact.

SGCETC offers the following suggestions for the Subcommittee's
consideration:

Congress could direct Indian Affairs to identify and
implement comprehensive modernization efforts for
technology systems, improve data management and sharing
capabilities, and streamline unnecessarily complex
processes associated with Self-Determination and Self-
Governance.

Congress could direct Indian Affairs to ensure that Self-
Governance is integrated and understood throughout the
Department, including BIA, so that Self-Governance is not
isolated.

SGCETC appreciates the opportunity to share information on Self-
Determination and Self-Governance with the Committee. Chair Hageman,
Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and Members of the Subcommittee, this
completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to any
questions that you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Jay Spaan, Executive
Director, Self-Governance Communication & Education Tribal Consortium

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Please expand on your answer during the hearing about
the 638 closeout process and self-governance compacts.

Answer. Self-Governance compacts do not have a term. These
documents redefine the relationship between the agency and the Tribal
Nation under a Self-Governance model. As such, a closeout process is
not needed. The funding agreements associated with a Self-Governance
compact identify the specific PSFAs a Tribe is assuming and the
associated Tribal shares for the program.

1a) What nuances should this committee be aware of regarding a 638
closeout process?

Answer. Tribal Nations do have the option to include one-time
funds, such as for a construction project, in their agreements. These
funds often have unique reporting requirements outside of the Single
Audit Act reporting requirements that require more extensive reporting
and oversight. These projects may be closed out by a BIA inspection to
certify completion and through submission of additional reports to the
agency.

1b) Do annual funding agreements have a closeout process, and if
so, are there ways to improve it?

Answer. Funding agreements also do not have a term but, at the
request of a Tribe, can be renegotiated if the Tribe wants to assume
administration for additional PSFAs or to return PSFAs to the federal
agencies. Tribal shares would be renegotiated at that time. It is
important to note that PSFAs are not considered one-time funds. These
are the base funds needed for the long-term implementation of federal
programs and services and the funds do not expire under a Self-
Governance agreement.

Question 2. Your testimony mentioned the disconnect between the
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Office of Self Governance (OSG)
and the impact it has on self-governance compacts.

2a) Could you describe instances in which this disconnect has
affected tribes?

Answer. Some Tribal Nations with Self-Governance agreements faced
delays receiving programmatic increases in base budgets because of the
lack of integration and coordination between OSG and BIA. For instance,
the DOI Inspector General reported in 2018 that poor communication
between BIA and OSG resulted in some Tribal Nations missing out on
funding intended for them for nearly two years. We recently heard that
BIA faced challenges disbursing programmatic increases for another
program because they were uncertain about what Tribal Nations assumed
the program under Self-Governance. In addition, one Tribal Nation told
SGCETC that OSG denied a request to compact a BIA program stating that
BIA had no available funds. However, when the Tribal Nation met with
BIA directly, BIA staff identified funding for the program that could
be incorporated into the Self-Governance compact. We are thankful that
the Tribe did not just take the initial response from OSG as the final
answer, but we believe this is an example of the lack of coordination
between BIA and OSG.

2b) Are there any suggestions for better communication between BIA
and the OSG?

Answer. It is unclear why communication between BIA and the OSG
remains problematic but both offices fall directly under the Assistant
Secretary--Indian Affairs.

At the Indian Health Service, the Office of Tribal Self-Governance
is more integrated into the overall IHS structure. This approach has
allowed more staff knowledge and awareness across the agency about
Self-Governance and has also allowed for IHS to use resources in a
manner that reflect a changing environment as more and more Tribal
Nations assume programs under Self-Governance agreements.

Question 3. Please provide further details regarding the
unresponsiveness of BIA and the OSG to information requests from
tribes.

Answer. We continue to hear examples from Tribal Nations that they
do not receive critical information on programmatic funding and tribal
shares from BIA in a timely manner. This information is critical for a
Tribe to determine if assuming administration under Self-Governance is
feasible. This information comes directly from BIA Regions though OSG
may serve as a liaison in efforts to obtain the information. As
mentioned in the written testimony, one Tribal Nation reported that it
requested funding information from BIA related to the programs that
serve the Tribal Nation--a request that should be simple and
straightforward to answer for the BIA. Rather than sending an
electronic file with the information, the BIA saved several Word
documents on a CD and physically mailed the CD to the Tribal Nation.
This outdated process unnecessarily prolonged the process and added
administrative burdens for both BIA and the Tribal government.

In addition, some Tribal Nations with Self-Governance agreements do
not receive notifications from BIA on funding opportunities or data
requests because of their status as a ``Self-Governance Tribe.'' As a
result, Tribal Nations with Self-Governance agreements could miss out
on funding opportunities and often learn of data requests with limited
time to compile and submit information.

3a) Do you think the good faith negotiation requirement in the
PROGRESS Act will improve this?

Answer. We are optimistic that full implementation of the PROGRESS
Act and completion of the rulemaking process will provide significant
benefits for Tribal Nations. For instance, the final offer requirement
should provide great assistance to Tribal Nations in addressing lengthy
agency delays related to review of Self-Governance agreements. However,
we are hesitant to speculate whether implementation of the PROGRESS Act
will help address all challenges associated with timely responses and
sharing of information.

Question 4. What do you think are the two to three most important
technology and data management systems within DOI that need to be
updated first in order to improve the processes associated with 638
contracts and compacts?

Answer. The GAO previously reported that the Department of the
Interior's financial data management system is not equipped for the
unique aspects of Self-Determination Contracts and Self-Governance
Compacts. As a result, DOI officials stated that properly tracking and
monitoring the timeliness of payments is difficult. The timely
distribution of funds is a significant concern for Tribal Nations. When
funds are not disbursed in a timely manner, Tribal governments may have
to use funds from their general revenue accounts to cover expenses for
federal programs or seek other sources, such as loans, to cover program
expenses. When a Tribal government must use its funds for the
administration of federal programs--even temporarily--it can adversely
affect it in various ways, including lost opportunities to use Tribal
funds for improving the Tribes' economic conditions, reducing other
services provided to Tribal communities, and furloughing Tribal
government employees. We strongly encourage DOI to initiate Tribal
Consultation to identify the most important technology and data
management systems that need to be updated first but believe that DOI's
own acknowledgement that its financial data management system is not
equipped for Self-Determination and Self-Governance makes it an ideal
candidate for upgrades.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for his testimony. And one
of the things that I very much appreciate is that you brought
actual solutions and ideas of how you see things that can be
fixed and addressed in addressing this program.
So, I appreciate the testimony from all five of you.
The Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes of
questioning, beginning with myself.
Mr. Newland, in your testimony, you mentioned that BIA was
working to resolve the three recommendations to resolve unspent
funds and create better processes for closing out funds.
Can you explain how the BIA has and is implementing further
changes and how many closeouts have happened since the report
was actually released?
Mr. Newland. Thank you for the question, Madam Chair. I can
report that, by the end of this Fiscal Year, we anticipate
having 141 of the 183 listed contracts in the IG report
effectively closed out and we are working with the tribes for
those other 42 agreements to make sure that we are able to
continue to support their efforts to spend down those funds.
With respect to the other two recommendations in the IG's
report, we are working to create the information and IT systems
that were included in those recommendations and estimate that
we will complete testing on that system by the end of this
Fiscal Year.
On the third recommendation, we are targeting the end of
the calendar year for closing out that recommendation.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. Could you also please elaborate on
your testimony regarding the Progress Act's Negotiated
Rulemaking Committee. And, specifically, what I would like you
to discuss is what major obstacles are left to discuss and is
the Committee on track to meet their final rule proposal
extended deadline of December 21 of this year?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair. We are effectively or
essentially at the end stage of the negotiated rulemaking where
the Committee meets with Federal officials to hash out the
language of the rule.
What is left to do is finish drafting the text of the rule
and propose it and engage in consultation. And we do expect to
complete that work by the statutory deadline.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Thank you.
I would also like to question President Deborah Dotson.
President Dotson, you provided testimony regarding reporting
windows and how those windows do not always align with tribal
program years.
Why doesn't each tribe just operate through programs on a
Federal Fiscal Year and is there a hardship created with
realigning programs with the Federal Fiscal Year?
Ms. Dotson. Thank you, Madam Chair for your question.
We have the right to set our programs and our Fiscal Years
when we would like to, which best serves our people.
And if we were to put our Fiscal Years with the
Government's Fiscal Year, we could lose funding if we did that.
We want to have the maximum funding to serve our people.
Ms. Hageman. OK. And for President Harvier, your testimony
mentions the impact of assuming functions of the Land, Title,
and Records Office. How have the improvements you have made
helped your tribe integrate with other communities in the
Phoenix Metro area?
Mr. Harvier. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think for the previous leadership of our community for
many years, and because of our location around the metropolitan
area and the cities that surround our community, we have always
tried to have good relationship with their surrounding cities
and currently, we have agreements, for example, with solid
wastewater agreements with our surrounding cities.
So, being a self-governance tribe, it makes it easier for
us because we have control over what we are doing on our side
in working with the cities. For example, our law enforcement.
Currently, our law enforcement is cross deputized and it is
always a concern in Indian Country when outside law enforcement
come into Indian Country. I think our relationship, because of
our self-governance compact and having our law enforcement
cross deputized, there is that discussion and that relationship
that we have, because of self-governance, that we are able to
work with the surrounding cities.
Ms. Hageman. That is all very good. Thank you.
And just another question is, how has your ability to
shorten bureaucratic times for documentation, that would
usually take the BIA so much longer, impacted economic
development on the reservation?
Mr. Harvier. Well, that was a big plus for us in taking the
Land, Records, and Titles over as a community. With the
development that happens within our community, I think
developers that are wanting to develop and have a site chosen,
they want to be able to move things along.
So, having the Land, Records, and Titles in house and the
time frames that we meet, I think it assures the developers
that a project can start on time and things can start moving,
instead of having to wait to go through the process of waiting
months.
So, it has been a big benefit to the community for economic
development in our community.
Ms. Hageman. It sounds like it has benefited everyone to be
able to do this, to process these documents on a much faster
basis. So, thank you for that.
I am now going to recognize the other members of the
Committee and I will recognize Ms. Leger Fernandez for 5
minutes of questions.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
And thank you, President Harvier, for pointing out how much
your tribe actually provides to carry out the functions that
the Federal Government, in its trust responsibility, is
supposed to be doing.
It is more than a two-to-one ratio, right? I am curious,
and I would like to ask President Dotson and Chair Andrew-
Maltais whether you also provide tribal funds to meet these
obligations for the compacting contracting that you do?
And then a second one is, whether you also compact contract
IHS functions, or is it just all BIA, BIE?
Ms. Dotson. Thank you for the question. Yes, we provide
funding to initiate programs that we have a short fall in and
we do not contract for IHS.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Chairwoman?
Ms. Andrews-Maltais. Thank you for the question.
We are actually a self-governance on both the Indian Health
Services as well as BIA for about 20 years. And because the
funding is so inadequate, we wind up by having to, the
terminology now is called braiding, but we use grants to
supplement the programs and services that we are able to
provide for our community members because without the ability
to redesign, we wouldn't be able to administer the programs and
the services in the way that they need to to meet our people's
needs.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. The flexibility that compacting
provides and the flexibility within the IHS system, in terms of
the multiple sources of revenue really makes a difference.
Ms. Andrews-Maltais. Absolutely.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And I think that is the point that was
made in Secretary Newland's testimony about the benefits of the
leasing program.
President Harvier, do you also compact IHS?
Mr. Harvier. We just built a new health facility in our
community and right now, I guess, what we are going through is
a process in working with more on the IHS side in building the
community, taking that project over as a self-governance
project.
The situation that we faced after the project was
completed, it is the start-up costs that we occurred as a
community and now, trying to get those funds reimbursed. Those
are some of the issues that we face and I will just say, I
think we have been blessed as a community to be able to add
more funding to programs that are so necessary for our members,
but there are a lot of tribes out there that don't have that
opportunity and that is where, to me, as a tribe, we are not
really being able to service our members the way we would like
to and how important that funding is to the tribes and getting
it out in a proper time.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And to Secretary Newland, I have a
couple of questions. One is, given the inability of smaller
tribes, although it is really amazing the number you gave in
your testimony is that $887 million of the $892 million of our
American Rescue Plan you actually were contracting and
compacting?
That is really great and thank you for doing that. I think
that is important. But I would like you to address two things.
One is, what we might do to think about how we help smaller
tribes who do not have a supplemental source of funding for
these programs to compact and contract more?
And two, we heard testimony from several witnesses about
the timeliness of actually getting the money. Some suggested
that Congress should actually put it into law. Well, it is kind
of already in the law.
So, can you tell me what you are doing to make sure that
that is there so we don't, I mean, how do we get the money to
the tribes quickly? What are you doing to make sure that
happens?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Both of your questions are actually related to your first
observation about moving the Rescue Plan money through Public
Law 638 contracts.
The team that we have, in Indian Affairs, at the
Department, when they have the resources to do the work, they
are able to move this money out and move it quickly.
The challenge with getting money out in a timely manner and
then meeting the close-out obligations on the backend is really
a matter of resources, which has been reflected in the
Department's budget requests the past several years.
One of the things that we can do to move this money more
quickly is make sure we have the awarding officials within the
BIA who are capable of handling the volume on both ends.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Yes. You had pointed out that you had
the same staff when you started as you have now.
OK. Thank you. With that, my time is expired, and I yield
back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mrs.
Radewagen for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Chairwoman Hageman.
Mr. Spaan, in Secretary Newland's testimony, he mentioned
that a Self-Governance Compact has not been closed out in the
history of the program. Is there a reason to include a close-
out process for 638 compacts or is that a question that should
be left to negotiation between the Secretary and tribes?
Mr. Spaan. Thank you very much for that question.
Compacts are different then Self-Determination Contracts.
Compacts, whenever they are negotiated, do not have a term. The
Compacts really set the stage for re-establishing a
relationship between the tribe and the Federal Government.
So, whenever those get initiated, they are not active for a
certain amount of time. What then happens is there are funding
agreements that get negotiated where individual Program
Services Function Activities get negotiated and put into that
funding agreement.
That funding agreement is renegotiated periodically with
the tribe and the Federal Government coming together. So, if
there are any changes that are needed, that happens within the
funding agreement during the negotiation process.
I think with the kind of close-out, I think there is also a
difference between project versus program based. So, I think
that project based is something that does have a lot of
reporting requirements and sort of a close out.
Mrs. Radewagen. And President Deborah Dotson, in your
testimony, you mentioned that you entered into a Self-
Governance Compact by transferring items previously operated
under Self-Determination Contracts. How did your tribe
determine that a Self-Governance Compact would serve you better
and would you suggest any improvements for the negotiation
process for Self-Governance Compacts?
Ms. Dotson. Thank you for the question.
I was not in the office at the time when we negotiated our
Self-Governance Compact, however, it gives us more flexibility
to move funding around so that we can fund more programs.
And the improvement I would suggest is that adequate
staffing would help. It would help with getting the funding out
to us.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Ms. Hageman. Well, I want to, again, thank the witnesses
for your valuable testimony and the Members for their
questions.
For those of you who have been watching this Subcommittee
over the last year, I believe that it is apparent that the
things that we have really been focusing on have been economic
development for our tribes. Improving the economic conditions
and giving them the opportunity to make decisions that are
going to be in the best interest of their members.
It has been one of my priorities and one of my agendas to
ensure that we are recognizing and acknowledging the
sovereignty and autonomy of these Tribal Nations so that you
can do what is in the best interest, not only in the short term
but in the long term.
Having these kinds of hearings helps us to understand what
the current legislative landscape looks like, how we can
streamline it, how we can make it better, and what we can do
for all of our tribal members.
So, I appreciate the fact that you are willing to travel to
Washington, DC. I know it is not easy to get here. I have to
come here from Wyoming and go through Denver. I have to drive
100 miles just to even catch the plane, but we very much
appreciate you coming here.
We don't always have a full array of folks coming here to
question. I had four hearings today myself. We have so many
things going on, but I do want you to understand that your
testimony is extremely important to us and helps us to be
better at drafting legislation that is, again, in the long
term, going to be able to help you with your management and the
decisions that you are making for your members.
Again, thank you very much for being here. I want to state
that the members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing.
Under Committee Rule 3, Members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on Monday,
March 11, 2024. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you.

[Whereupon, at 3:19 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
