- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2997, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO CONVEY TO MESA COUNTY, COLORADO, CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND IN COLORADO, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "CLIFTON OPPORTUNITIES NOW FOR VIBRANT ECONOMIC YIELDS (CONVEY) ACT"; H.R. 3025, TO PROVIDE FOR NO NET INCREASE IN THE TOTAL ACREAGE OF FEDERAL LAND IN THE VIRGIN ISLANDS NATIONAL PARK ON ST. JOHN, UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS; H.R. 3049, TO PROVIDE FOR THE EXCHANGE OF CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND AND STATE LAND IN THE STATE OF UTAH, "UTAH SCHOOL AND INSTITUTIONAL TRUST LANDS ADMINISTRATION EXCHANGE ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 3250, TO RECOGNIZE THE MARGARET WOODBURY STRONG MUSEUM IN ROCHESTER, NEW YORK, "NATIONAL MUSEUM OF PLAY RECOGNITION ACT"; AND H.R. 4141, TO PROVIDE THAT CERTAIN COMMUNICATIONS PROJECTS ARE NOT SUBJECT TO REQUIREMENTS TO PREPARE CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL OR HISTORICAL PRESERVATION REVIEWS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 2997, H.R. 3025, H.R. 3049,
H.R. 3250, AND H.R. 4141

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, June 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-42

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-649 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDSTOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

-----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, June 22, 2023..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2

Panel I:

Plaskett, Hon. Stacey E., a Delegate in Congress from the
Territory of the U.S. Virgin Islands.......................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Curtis, Hon. John R., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Utah..............................................     6
Boebert, Hon. Lauren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     8

Morelle, Hon. Joseph D., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, prepared statement of...............    40

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Culver, Hon. Nada Wolff, Principal Deputy Director, Bureau of
Land Management, Washington, DC............................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    15
McConkie, Michelle, Director, State of Utah School and
Institutional Trust Lands Administration, Salt Lake City,
Utah.......................................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Pugliese, Hon. Rose, Assistant Minority Leader, Colorado
House of Representatives, Colorado Springs, Colorado.......    21
Prepared statement of....................................    23

Stuart, John, President and CEO, MTE Communications, Midvale,
Idaho......................................................    24
Prepared statement of....................................    25

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

National Park Service, Statement for the Record on H.R. 3025
and H.R. 3250..............................................    41

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2997, TO DIRECT THE SECRETARY OF THE
INTERIOR TO CONVEY TO MESA COUNTY, COLORADO, CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND IN
COLORADO, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``CLIFTON OPPORTUNITIES NOW FOR
VIBRANT ECONOMIC YIELDS (CONVEY) ACT''; H.R. 3025, TO PROVIDE FOR NO
NET INCREASE IN THE TOTAL ACREAGE OF FEDERAL LAND IN THE VIRGIN ISLANDS
NATIONAL PARK ON ST. JOHN, UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS; H.R. 3049, TO
PROVIDE FOR THE EXCHANGE OF CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND AND STATE LAND IN THE
STATE OF UTAH, ``UTAH SCHOOL AND INSTITUTIONAL TRUST LANDS
ADMINISTRATION EXCHANGE ACT OF 2023''; H.R. 3250, TO RECOGNIZE THE
MARGARET WOODBURY STRONG MUSEUM IN ROCHESTER, NEW YORK, ``NATIONAL
MUSEUM OF PLAY RECOGNITION ACT''; AND H.R. 4141, TO PROVIDE THAT
CERTAIN COMMUNICATIONS PROJECTS ARE NOT SUBJECT TO REQUIREMENTS TO
PREPARE CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL OR HISTORICAL PRESERVATION REVIEWS, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES

----------

Thursday, June 22, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:17 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Tiffany, Fulcher, Stauber, Curtis,
Moylan; Neguse, Porter.
Also present: Representatives Boebert; Morelle, and
Plaskett.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee Chair is authorized to
declare a recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to consider five bills:
H.R. 2997, Representative Boebert's ``Clifton Opportunities Now
for Vibrant Economic Yields Act''; H.R. 3025, Delegate
Plaskett's bill to provide for no net increase in the total
acreage of Federal land in the Virgin Islands National Park on
St. John, United States Virgin Islands; H.R. 3049,
Representative Curtis' ``Utah School and Institutional Trust
Lands Administration Exchange Act of 2023''; H.R. 3250,
Representative Morelle's ``National Museum of Play Recognition
Act''; and H.R. 4141, Representative Fulcher's bill to provide
that certain communications projects are not subject to
requirements to prepare environmental or historical
preservation reviews, and for other purposes.
I ask unanimous consent that the following Members be
allowed to participate in today's hearing from the dais: the
gentlewoman from Colorado, Mrs. Boebert; the gentlewoman from
the Virgin Islands, Ms. Plaskett; and the gentleman from New
York, Mr. Morelle.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. Today, we continue our work of holding the
Federal Government accountable for managing America's land,
empowering local communities, and jump-starting rural economies
through innovative solutions. The bills before us today reduce
the Federal footprint, restore decision-making to local
communities, and cut bureaucratic red tape.
Poor management and lack of access to public lands leads to
stifled communities. The vast expanse of the Federal
Government's reach is felt particularly in the West, in states
like Colorado, where the Federal Government owns 36 percent of
the land, and Utah, where the Federal Government owns two-
thirds of the land. Two of the bills right-size the Federal
estate for these residents.
Representative Boebert's CONVEY Act, H.R. 2997, would
convey 31 acres from the Bureau of Land Management, or BLM, to
Mesa County, Colorado. This county is 72 percent Federal
ownership, and as the population continues to grow the county
is significantly limited in the land it has available to
develop. The land would be used for economic development to
support the local economy and residents. These expedited
conveyances are a win-win, as growing rural communities can
expand and develop, and the Federal Government can focus its
limited resources on managing more high-value lands.
I am also supportive of Representative Curtis' bill, H.R.
3049, the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration Exchange Act of 2023. During the expansion of
our country, many of our Western states set aside land to
support public schools and institutions commonly called trust
lands. Trust lands generate revenue for education and public
schools from energy and mineral leases, real estate development
and sales, and surface estate development.
Unfortunately, these trust lands have been subject to loss
of revenue as administrations and bureaucrats here in DC seek
to preserve and lock up land from use. This solutions-driven
bill coordinates efforts from the local, state, and national
level to exchange lands so the state of Utah is able to
generate funds from trust lands to support K-12 education.
Republicans are committed to right-sizing the Federal
estate, holding land managers accountable, and supporting local
communities. I am also pleased to consider two bills today from
Members across the aisle aimed to do just that.
Representative Plaskett's bill, H.R. 3025, would restrict
any net increase in the total acreage of Federal land in the
Virgin Islands National Park. The park already encompasses two-
thirds of St. John, the largest of the Virgin Islands. The
remaining land is becoming increasingly expensive, and a burden
to the local community.
Representative Morelle's bill, H.R. 3250, would recognize
the Margaret Woodbury Strong Museum as the National Museum of
Play. Recognition as a national museum does not create a unit
of the Federal Government to maintain or provide funding for.
This is a creative way to recognize a significant museum
without adding any burdens to the taxpayer.
Last week, during our legislative hearing on H.R. 3397,
which would require the BLM Director to withdraw a proposed
rule that would further limit access and lock up lands from the
public's use and enjoyment, Members on both sides of the dais
were concerned about the input their constituents would be able
to have on this proposed rule, given the lack of broadband
access to rural and remote residents. While the agency
continues to disregard this concern, since they have offered no
more in-person listening sessions on their so-called
conservation rule, Republicans of this Committee will not sit
idly by.
Representative Fulcher's bill, H.R. 4141, would streamline
the Federal permitting process for certain broadband projects.
Specifically, the bill would exempt deployments over certain
previously disturbed lands from NEPA and National Historic
Preservation Act reviews. The bill also enhances tribal review
processes and establishes streamlined processes for moving
forward with certain projects. These reforms build on the
momentum to address NEPA barriers that are exacerbating the
digital divide for rural communities across the country.
I would like to thank all the Members on both sides of the
dais for their leadership on the important bills before us
today.
I also want to thank all the witnesses for being here and
traveling long distances to provide your expert testimony. Your
work allows us to consider innovative and creative legislative
ideas to manage the Federal estate.
From rural Western towns to tropical territories, there is
a clear and overwhelming need to control the size of the
Federal estate to address skyrocketing deferred maintenance and
concerns from local stakeholders. I look forward to hearing
from each of you.
First, I would like to recognize Delegate Plaskett for 5
minutes on H.R. 3025.
You get to go first.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. STACEY E. PLASKETT, A DELEGATE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE TERRITORY OF THE U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS

Ms. Plaskett. Thank you so much, Chairman Tiffany. I really
appreciate the opportunity to be here with you all. Thank you
to the Committee members for the opportunity to present my
views on H.R. 3025, which is my bill to prohibit the net
increase of federally owned land in the Virgin Islands National
Park on St. John in my district of the U.S. Virgin Islands.
This bill solely relates to the Virgin Islands National
Park on St. John, and it is intended to address the specific
long-standing concerns of my constituents related to the growth
of the national park on this small island of the United States.
The Virgin Islands National Park boundary encompasses
nearly two-thirds of the island of St. John, which is only 9
miles long and 5 miles wide. The park includes over 7,000 acres
of that land, and more than 5,000 acres of submerged land.
Thus, this leaves a very finite amount of land for the people
of St. John, who are confronting housing shortages that
continue to escalate because of the park's continuing growth.
As land is donated and conveyed to the park, some pre-
existing landowners have found themselves landlocked by the
park and without easement, which can take a decade to receive
due to national park bureaucratic processes. The reduction of
privately owned and subsequently increases in property taxes
have made it nearly untenable to retain ancestral home in this
island of St. John.
The continual expansion of the park has also stymied the
government of the Virgin Islands' ability to create alternative
ways to traverse the island, which were vital during a
disaster, as were exampled and seen after the 2017 hurricanes.
Since the Virgin Islands National Park was established in
1956, when Laurence Rockefeller transferred nearly 5,000 acres
of St. John to the U.S. Government, private entities and
organizations have continued to purchase land with the
intention of conveying it to the park. I share the view that
the national park is a wonderful idea, and I am certainly not
against conservation practices. But the residents of St. John
have called the small island home for the last 3,000 years, and
the scope of the park cannot continue to increase.
My legislation addresses their unique needs. Under this
bill, individuals and entities would still be able to donate or
exchange land with the park. But if the park acquires any land,
an equal acreage must be conveyed out of Federal ownership
through a sale, exchange, or donation. This bill would not
change the park boundaries, but rather prevent an increase of
land owned by the park.
Legislation to address specific concerns about expansion of
Federal land owned by the National Park Service has happened
before. This is not unique legislation. In 1986, Public Law 99-
420 established a permanent boundary for the Acadia National
Park in Maine to ensure that the park could only grow to the
extent of the standing boundary and no further. In 2019, the
John Dingell, Jr. Conservation Management and Recreation Act
further clarified that the Secretary of the Interior does not
have the authority to adjust that boundary.
The Virgin Islands National Park Service has a
responsibility as a steward, as a partner to the Virgin
Islands, but that has not always been the case. Unfortunately,
often the park seems to be solely engaged in protecting land,
not the people who were the original inhabitants of that land,
nor those brought over as enslaved people who fought for their
freedom and were able to obtain land on St. John. Albeit
sometimes well intentioned on St. John, the Virgin Islands
National Park has effectively crowded out Native people in
furtherance of ideals acting under the assumption that local
people cannot care for the land themselves.
As we look at the history and future of the Virgin Islands
National Park, our decisions must be intentional to support St.
John and the entire Virgin Islands. With that in mind, I ask
for your support of H.R. 3025. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Plaskett follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Stacey E. Plaskett, a Delegate in
Congress from the Territory of the U.S. Virgin Islands
on H.R. 3025, To provide for no net increase in the total acreage of
Federal land in the Virgin Islands National Park on St. John, United
States Virgin Islands

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, thank you for the
opportunity to present my views on H.R. 3025, my bill to prohibit the
net increase of federally owned land in the Virgin Islands National
Park on St. John in my district, the U.S. Virgin Islands. This bill
solely relates to the Virgin Islands National Park on St. John, and it
is intended to address the specific, long-standing concerns of my
constituents related to the growth of the National Park on this small
island of the United States.
The Virgin Islands National Park boundary encompasses nearly two-
thirds of the island of St. John, which is only 9 miles long and 5
miles wide. The Park includes over seven thousand acres of that land
and more than five thousand acres of submerged lands. Thus, this leaves
a very finite amount of land for the people of St. John, who are
confronting housing shortages that continue to escalate because of the
Park's continuing growth. As land is donated and conveyed to the Park,
some pre-existing landowners have found themselves landlocked by the
Park and without easement, which can take a decade to receive due to
bureaucratic processes. The reduction of privately owned land and
subsequent increases in property taxes have made it nearly untenable to
retain ancestral homes. The continual expansion of the Park has stymied
the Government of the Virgin Islands' ability to create alternative
ways to traverse the island, which is vital during a disaster, as seen
after the 2017 hurricanes.
Since the Virgin Islands National Park was established in 1956,
when Laurence Rockefeller transferred nearly five thousand acres of St.
John to the U.S. government, private entities and organizations have
continued to purchase land with the intention of conveying it to the
Park. I share the view that National Parks generally are a wonderful
idea, and I am certainly not against conservation practices; but, for
the residents of St. John that have called this small island home for
the last 3,000 years, the scope of the Park cannot continue to
increase.
My legislation addresses their unique needs. Under this bill,
individuals and entities would still be able to donate or exchange land
with the Park; but if the Park acquires any land, an equal acreage must
be conveyed out of federal ownership through a sale, exchange, or
donation. This bill would not change the Park boundary, but rather
prevents an increase of land owned by the Park. Valid existing property
rights within the Park boundary are explicitly protected.
Legislation to address specific concerns about expansion of federal
land owned by the National Park Service has happened before under
similar circumstances. In 1986, Public Law 99-420 established a
permanent boundary for the Acadia National Park in Maine to ensure that
Park could only grow to the extent of the standing boundary, and no
further. In 2019, the John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management,
and Recreation Act further clarified that the Secretary of the Interior
does not have the authority to adjust the Acadia National Park's
permanent boundaries.
The Virgin Islands National Park Service has a responsibility as a
steward and as a partner to the Virgin Islands, but that has not always
been the case. Unfortunately, often the Park seems to be solely engaged
in protecting land; not the people who were the original inhabitants of
that land, nor those brought over as enslaved people who fought for
their freedom and through sweat and toil, were able to obtain land on
St. John. Albeit sometimes well-intentioned, on St. John, the Virgin
Islands National Park has effectively crowded out native people in
furtherance of neo-colonial bourgeois ideals acting under the
assumption that the local people cannot care for the land themselves.
It is not in the interest of the Virgin Islands, and is not the mandate
of the Park, for the Park to become an ever-expanding behemoth in a
small insular area of the U.S.
As we look at the history and the future of the Virgin Islands
National Park, our decisions must be intentional to support St. John,
and the entire Virgin Islands--the land, the people, the history, and
the culture. With that in mind, I ask for your support for H.R. 3025.
Thank you.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Plaskett. Your bill
sounds like it is grounded in common sense.
Next, I would like to recognize Mr. Curtis from Utah in
regards to H.R. 3049.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN R. CURTIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am really pleased to
be here and representing that bill. I am grateful for the
presence of Deputy Director Culver and Michelle McConkie, who
have both worked in a way that is exactly in line with, I
think, how we would like to see people work together.
Some of you know I can be very critical of Federal
agencies, but let me point out how well this has worked this
time, and how well we have worked for the interest of those in
my state bringing together stakeholders who are very difficult
to pull together. And I think this is a great example where
enough work and effort in bringing stakeholders together can
find some common ground.
I suspect it is fair to say not everybody is 100 percent
satisfied, but satisfied enough that we have come to the table
representing the Native tribes in the area, many of the
residents in the area that have been there for generations and
generations, and in a way that dramatically benefits
particularly the schoolchildren of Utah with these trust funds.
So, as we have an opportunity to dig into this in today's
hearing just a little bit, I am pleased, and just want to
express my appreciation to everybody that has been involved in
this. And I hope this will be a bill that my colleagues on all
sides should be supportive of and applaud the process.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Curtis. Next, I would like to
recognize the gentlelady from Colorado, Representative Boebert,
in regards to H.R. 2997, the CONVEY Act.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LAUREN BOEBERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to
testify in support of H.R. 2997, my Clifton Opportunities Now
for Vibrant Economic Yields, the CONVEY Act.
This common-sense bill directs the Secretary of the
Interior to convey 31.1 acres of land that the Federal
Government no longer wishes to manage to Mesa County for
economic development in Clifton, Colorado. Mesa County will
purchase the land at fair market value.
For over 5 years, Mesa County has been stuck in red tape as
they have been diligently pursuing the acquisition of this
parcel of land that is on the BLM disposal list. This land
holds immense value for Mesa County, as it presents a critical
opportunity for economic development in Clifton, an area of the
county that has struggled economically for quite some time.
Our witness today, Ms. Rose Pugliese, worked on this issue
back when she served as Mesa County Commissioner with BLM to
try to get this land exchange done administratively. I am happy
that she is here today to testify to help close the loop on
this issue, and finally move this common-sense land conveyance
forward.
I have worked closely with BLM, who supports this bill, and
the Mesa County commissioners to cut through the bureaucracy
and expedite this process for Mesa County.
The economic potential of this land will allow Mesa County
to attract job creators and foster an environment that
encourages economic prosperity for Clifton. Once Mesa County is
able to secure the land, they will establish an economic
development board to solicit input from local stakeholders.
My bill also ensures that the funds from the sale of this
land will be deposited into the Federal Land Disposal account,
established by the Federal Land Transaction Facility Act, and
retained by the Bureau of Land Management Colorado Office. So,
these funds will actually be used in Colorado.
More than 55 percent of my district and 73 percent of Mesa
County's land area is Federal land. As Mesa County continues to
grow, the county is significantly limited in the land it has
available to develop. These large Federal footprints often
stifle local communities that lack power in decision-making
over land in their own backyards from moving forward on
important developmental opportunities.
I am proud to empower local communities and jumpstart rural
economies through innovative solutions that reduce our Federal
footprint and cut bureaucratic red tape that is stifling
economic growth with the CONVEY Act. I urge the passage of my
bill through Committee.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

[The prepared statement of Mrs. Boebert follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Lauren Boebert, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Colorado
on H.R. 2997, Clifton Opportunities Now for Vibrant Economic Yields
(CONVEY) Act

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am proud to testify in support of H.R. 2997, my Clifton
Opportunities Now for Vibrant Economic Yields--the CONVEY Act.
This common-sense bill directs the Secretary of the Interior to
convey 31.1 acres of land, that the federal government no longer wishes
to manage to Mesa County for economic development in Clifton, Colorado.
Mesa County will purchase the land for fair market value.
For over five years, Mesa County has been stuck in red tape as they
have been diligently pursuing the acquisition of this parcel of land
that is on the BLM disposal list. This land holds immense value for
Mesa County as it presents a critical opportunity for economic
development in Clifton, an area of the county that has struggled
economically.
Our witness today Rose Pugliese worked on this issue back when she
served as a Mesa County Commissioner with BLM to try and get this land
exchange done administratively. I am happy she is here today to testify
to help close the loop on this issue and finally move this common-sense
land conveyance forward.
I have worked closely with BLM, who supports this bill, and the
Mesa County commissioners to cut through the bureaucracy and expedite
this process for Mesa County. The economic potential of this land will
allow Mesa County to attract job creators and foster an environment
that encourages economic prosperity for Clifton. Once Mesa County is
able to secure the land, they will establish an economic development
board to solicit input from local stakeholders.
My bill also ensures that the funds from the sale of this land will
be deposited into the Federal Land Disposal Account, established by the
Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act, and retained by the Bureau
of Land Management Colorado office, so these funds will actually be
used in Colorado.
More than 55% of my District, and 73% of Mesa County's land area is
federal land. As Mesa County continues to grow, the county is
significantly limited in the land it has available to develop. These
large federal footprints often stifle local communities that lack power
in decision-making over the land in their own backyards from moving
forward on important development opportunities.
I am proud to empower local communities and jumpstart rural
economies through innovative solutions that reduce our federal
footprint and cut bureaucratic red tape that is stifling economic
growth with the CONVEY Act.
I urge passage of my bill through committee and with that, I yield
back.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you to the gentlelady from Colorado.
Next, we are going to move on to our second panel. It is so
good to have you all here.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statement to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, press the ``on'' button on the
microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please wrap up your statement.
I would now like to introduce Ms. Nada Wolff Culver,
Principal Deputy Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
Deputy Director Culver, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. NADA WOLFF CULVER, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY
DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Culver. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, members of the Subcommittee. I am Nada Wolff Culver,
the BLM's Principal Deputy Director. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify on the three BLM-related bills on
today's agenda.
On behalf of the American people, the BLM manages
approximately 245 million acres of public lands, primarily in
12 Western states, as well as 700 million subsurface acres. The
multiple-use, sustained-yield mission established by the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act directs us to sustain
the health, diversity, and productivity of our public lands for
the long-term needs of future generations.
H.R. 2997, the CONVEY Act, directs the BLM to convey
approximately 31 acres of Federal land located near Clifton,
Colorado to Mesa County for fair market value. The bill
requires the conveyance to be made notwithstanding the previous
Secretarial Orders that withdrew the parcel for use by the
Bureau of Reclamation. Currently, the BLM is working toward a
conveyance of the parcel under existing authorities. It has
been identified in the current land use plan as potentially
suitable for disposal, should it return to public land status.
The BLM supports H.R. 2997.
H.R. 3049, the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration Exchange Act, would ratify a proposed land
exchange between the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration, or SITLA, and the BLM. Under the bill, the BLM
would acquire approximately 162,000 acres of land located
mostly within the boundaries of the Bears Ears National
Monument in exchange for approximately 167,000 acres of BLM-
managed public land in Utah. The BLM supports the bill.
The Bears Ears National Monument, located in San Juan
County, Utah, is managed by the BLM and the U.S. Forest
Service. The lands within the Monument are profoundly sacred to
many Tribal Nations, and contain evidence of thousands of years
of occupation by Indigenous peoples. The area is also prized by
recreationists. The bill will ensure the acquired lands are
managed to protect their cultural and natural resources, and
improve the BLM's ability to effectively manage the monument by
reducing the checkerboard effect from lands that SITLA is
statutorily required to manage for revenue generation.
The bill is consistent with the Presidential Proclamations
establishing and restoring the boundaries of the Monument
signed by Presidents Obama and Biden. Both proclamations direct
the Secretary of the Interior to explore entering into
Memorandum of Understanding with the state of Utah enabling
this land exchange.
In March of this year, the Department of the Interior, the
state of Utah, and SITLA entered into an MOU setting forth the
terms of a broad land exchange that is designed to promote
conservation and appropriate resource management. We appreciate
the good work and the good faith of SITLA and the state of Utah
in achieving our mutual interests in this exchange.
The BLM lands identified for conveyance to SITLA were
selected to maximize the potential for revenue generation to
benefit school children, while avoiding management conflicts
with cultural and natural resources, including endangered
species habitat, areas of critical environmental concern, and
recreation. The BLM supports H.R. 3049, and looks forward to
working with the sponsor, tribes, and Utah stakeholders on its
implementation if enacted.
H.R. 4141 would exempt eligible communication projects from
National Environmental Policy Act and National Historic
Preservation Act review. The bill would also limit the time
frame for tribes to respond and disclose tribal interests in
eligible communication projects to 45 days.
Federal lands provide a tremendous opportunity to provide
the public with access to wireless services through permitting
communication facilities. Each year, the BLM processes
thousands of applications for rights-of-way on public lands,
and currently administers over 4,200 authorized communications
facilities.
We share the sponsor's goal of expanding communication
networks, particularly broadband Internet in underserved and
rural communities. However, we believe the bill would limit
crucial public and tribal engagement by prohibiting critical
project analysis for a potentially overly broad set of
circumstances. We would appreciate the opportunity to work with
the sponsor on modifications that would help maintain the
integrity of the applicable laws governing environmental,
cultural, and historical reviews, including tribal input.
Information and feedback gained during the public review
process can help prevent delays in implementation by ensuring
agency decisions are robust and able to withstand scrutiny.
Finally, the National Park Service has submitted statements
for the record on H.R. 3025 and H.R. 3250.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present this
testimony. I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Culver follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nada Wolff Culver, Principal Deputy Director,
Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 2997, H.R. 3049, and H.R. 4141

H.R. 2997, Clifton Opportunities Now for Vibrant Economic Yields
(CONVEY) Act

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 2997, the Clifton
Opportunities Now for Vibrant Economic Yields (CONVEY) Act. This bill
directs the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to convey approximately 31
acres of Federal land located near Clifton, Colorado, to Mesa County,
Colorado.
As a matter of policy, the BLM supports working with states and
local governments to resolve land tenure and land transfer issues that
advance public policy objectives. H.R. 2997 directs the conveyance, for
fair market value, of a parcel that the BLM has determined to be
potentially suitable for disposal, and the BLM supports the bill.
Background

The BLM manages 245 million acres of public land primarily in the
west, of which 8.3 million acres are located in Colorado. Colorado's
public lands are a significant contributor to the state's economy, and
many Colorado communities depend on healthy public lands to sustain
their livelihoods. Mesa County, home to approximately 155,000 residents
and located near the Utah border in western Colorado, is no exception.
Federal lands make up 73 percent of the county's land area, with the
BLM managing the majority of the Federal acreage. The county seat of
Grand Junction lies near the confluence of the Colorado and Gunnison
Rivers in the heart of the Grand Valley. Clifton is bordered by
Interstate 70 to the north and Grand Junction to the west.
Grand Valley Reclamation Project

In 1907, the construction of the Grand Valley Reclamation Project
was approved by the Department of the Interior. The Bureau of
Reclamation (BOR), known as the United States Reclamation Service at
the time, was tasked with supplying irrigation water to the farmlands
and orchards in Grand Valley. The Grand Valley Reclamation Project was
one of the first six projects to have lands withdrawn from settlement
for project construction following the passage of the Reclamation Act
of June 17, 1902.
Since it first delivered water in 1917, the Grand Valley
Reclamation Project has provided irrigation water to approximately
33,368 acres and supplemental water to about 8,600 acres of fertile
land. The project's works include a diversion dam, a powerplant, two
pumping plants, and two canal systems totaling 90.1 miles.
Mesa County has requested to purchase from the United States an
approximately 31-acre parcel of land near Interstate 70 and 32 Road in
Clifton for economic development opportunities. The 31 acres are part
of an approximately 39-acre parcel currently withdrawn to BOR for the
Grand Valley Reclamation Project. On April 28, 2021, BOR's Upper
Colorado Regional Office submitted to the BLM Grand Junction Field
Office a Notice of Intent to relinquish the 31-acre portion of the
parcel, with the intent to retain approximately 8 acres of the
withdrawn parcel for project purposes. Currently, the BLM is working to
complete the remaining steps of the withdrawal revocation process for
the 31-acre parcel, which has been identified by the BLM as potentially
suitable for disposal if restored to public land status. The withdrawal
revocation process must be complete before the BLM is able to pursue a
direct sale of the parcel under existing authority.
Public Land Disposal Authority

A variety of statutes provide the BLM with the authorities
necessary to address various land tenure issues. Under the Federal Land
Policy and Management Act (FLPMA), public lands may be identified as
potentially available for disposal through the BLM's land use planning
process. Public lands that are identified as eligible for disposal in a
Resource Management Plan (RMP) generally require site-specific analysis
prior to disposal to identify special circumstances that may act as
impediments to disposal--such as the presence of threatened or
endangered species, cultural or historic resources, mining claims,
mineral leases, rights-of-way, hazardous materials, or grazing
permits--and must also be appraised before a decision on disposal can
be made. Furthermore, because land use plans may be decades old, public
lands identified as potentially available for disposal in an RMP may be
found to be unsuitable later because of new circumstances such as solar
or wind energy development, a new conservation designation, oil and gas
leasing, the listing of new threatened or endangered species, the
establishment of rights-of-way, or other encumbrances.
Under Section 203 of FLPMA, the BLM is authorized to transfer or
dispose of public lands that have been identified as potentially
suitable for disposal in an approved land use plan or through an
amendment to an existing plan. The proceeds from sales are deposited
into the General Fund of the Treasury. Typically, these sales are for
low value lands or lands that are difficult or uneconomic to manage,
such as isolated parcels surrounded by private land. Land sales
conducted under FLPMA occur to serve the national interest at the
discretion of the Secretary of the Interior and are made at fair market
value in accordance with Federal law.
In addition, the Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act (FLTFA)
allows the BLM to sell public lands identified for disposal through the
land use planning process and retain the proceeds from those sales in a
special account through the Treasury. These funds can then be used by
the United States to acquire lands with high conservation or recreation
value, or interests therein, from willing sellers.
H.R. 2997, the CONVEY Act

H.R. 2997 directs the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the
BLM Director, to convey all rights, title, and interest of the United
States in 31-acres of Federal land, referred to as the ``Clifton
Parcel'' in the bill, to Mesa County, Colorado. The bill requires the
conveyance to be made notwithstanding the Secretarial Orders that
withdrew the Clifton Parcel for the Grand Valley Reclamation Project,
dated August 26, 1902, and July 25, 1908. The bill further requires
that the conveyance be subject to valid existing rights and for not
less than fair market value.
To determine the fair market value of the Clifton Parcel, H.R. 2997
requires the Secretary to obtain an independent appraisal of the
parcel. Under the bill, the appraisal must be conducted in accordance
with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions and
the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice. The Secretary
is directed to pay all costs associated with the conveyance, while Mesa
County is responsible for all costs associated with any survey
conducted for the conveyance. The bill provides specific instruction
for the proceeds from the conveyance, requiring them to be deposited in
the Federal Land Disposal Account established by FLTFA, and made
available for expenditure under that Act.
Analysis

The BLM generally supports the conveyance of public lands when such
conveyances are in the public interest and consistent with publicly
approved land use plans. As the Clifton Parcel has already been
identified as potentially suitable for disposal should it return to
public land status, the BLM supports H.R. 2997 and the direct sale of
the parcel to Mesa County.
The BLM notes that the conveyance directed by the bill can be
achieved under the existing authorities provided by FLPMA. This process
is currently underway, as BOR has submitted a Notice of Intent to
relinquish the withdrawal of the Clifton Parcel. The BLM Grand Junction
Field Office continues to process revocation of the withdrawal with the
intent of pursuing a direct sale to Mesa County. The BLM also notes
that it is typical for the party requesting the purchase to cover the
conveyance costs and recommends the bill be amended accordingly.
Finally, a minor technical edit to the bill is needed to ensure it
refers to the date of the most recent version of the legislative map.
Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on H.R. 2997,
and I look forward to your questions.

H.R. 3049, Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration
Exchange Act

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 3049, the Utah
School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration Exchange Act. The
bill will would ratify a land exchange between the Department of the
Interior (DOI) and the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration (SITLA). Under the bill, the Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) would acquire approximately 162,000 acres of lands, and interests
in lands, managed by SITLA that are located largely within the Bears
Ears National Monument (the Monument), in exchange for a roughly
equivalent amount of public land and interests in land managed by the
BLM across the State of Utah. The bill includes a post-conveyance
appraisal and equalization process to ensure that the exchanged lands,
and interests in land, would be of equal value.
The bill is consistent with President Obama's 2016 Proclamation
establishing the Monument and President Biden's 2021 Proclamation
restoring the boundaries and management conditions of the Monument.
Both proclamations direct the Secretary of the Interior to explore
entering into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the State of
Utah that would set terms to exchange land owned by the State and
administered by SITLA within the boundary of the Monument for land of
approximately equal value managed by the BLM outside the Monument. The
BLM supports H.R. 3049 as it would promote conservation and appropriate
resource management, including the protection of invaluable cultural
resources and sacred sites within Bears Ears National Monument.
Background

The Bears Ears National Monument is located in San Juan County,
Utah, and is comprised of approximately 1.36 million acres of public
land administered by the BLM as part of the National Landscape
Conservation System and National Forest lands administered by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Forest Service. The Monument lands contain
evidence of more than 13,000 years of occupation by Indigenous peoples,
including petroglyphs and pictographs, large villages, ancient cliff
dwellings, ceremonial sites, and countless other objects that provide
an extraordinary archaeological and cultural record. These
archaeological and cultural resources were seminal to the passage of
the Antiquities Act more than a century ago. The lands of the monument
are profoundly sacred to many Tribal Nations, including the Ute
Mountain Ute Tribe, Navajo Nation, Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah and
Ouray Reservation, Hopi Nation, and the Pueblo of Zuni, who continue to
rely on these lands for religious, traditional, and ceremonial uses.

The Monument contains several geologic marvels including deep
sandstone canyons, desert mesas, the renowned Valley of the Gods, and
the namesake Bears Ears Buttes, as well as a rich paleontological
history that is only recently beginning to be understood. Areas within
the Monument are also used by local communities and Tribal members for
firewood gathering and livestock grazing. Beyond the vast cultural and
natural resources found within the Monument, the area is also
meaningful to recreationists who visit the Bears Ears region to
backpack, rock climb, and river raft, among other recreational
activities.

Proclamation 10285, issued by President Biden on October 8, 2021,
directed the Secretary of the Interior to explore entering into an MOU
with the State of Utah to exchange land administered by SITLA within
the boundary of the Monument for land of approximately equal value
managed by the BLM outside the boundary of the Monument in order to
further the protective purposes of the Monument. On March 17, 2023,
after more than a year of working closely to develop an agreement, the
Department, the State of Utah, and SITLA entered into the ``Memorandum
of Understanding--Exchange of Lands.''

The MOU sets forth the terms of a broad land exchange that is
designed to promote conservation and appropriate resource management by
exchanging SITLA inholdings within BLM-administered public lands,
including the Monument, for other BLM-administered public lands that
are more suitable for revenue generation located in 20 counties within
Utah that would further SITLA's statutory duties to benefit
schoolchildren and other trust beneficiaries in the state. The BLM-
administered public lands identified by SITLA for conveyance to SITLA
were identified to maximize the potential for revenue generation (per
the applicable statutory requirement) while avoiding management
conflicts from significant wildlife resources; endangered species
habitat; significant archaeological, cultural, and historic resources;
areas that are sacred or are traditionally, spiritually, or religiously
significant to Tribal Nations; lands within the boundaries of Indian
reservations; areas of critical environmental concern; coal resources
requiring surface mining; wilderness study areas; and significant
recreation areas; and to promote the objectives and legal mandates of
both the BLM and SITLA.

H.R. 3049

H.R. 3049, the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration Exchange Act, would ratify the terms of the MOU between
DOI, SITLA, and the State of Utah, thereby facilitating the exchange of
state-owned land, the majority of which is located within or proximate
to the Monument, for BLM-administered public lands throughout Utah.
Under the bill, the BLM would acquire approximately 162,510 acres of
lands administered by SITLA, including State inholdings within the Fish
Creek Canyon, Road Canyon, Butler Wash, Mancos Mesa, and Bridger Jack
Wilderness Study Areas. In return, SITLA would acquire approximately
167,012 acres of public lands currently managed by the BLM outside the
Monument.
H.R. 3049 requires that the exchange outlined in the MOU take place
within 45 days following enactment. To ensure that the exchange is of
equal value, the legislation further requires that SITLA and DOI
complete an appraisal of the exchanged lands within 18 months of the
exchange, using nationally recognized appraisal standards. If the
appraisal identifies a disparity in the total value of the exchange,
the value would be equalized through the conveyance of specific state
or federal land, as appropriate. These ``equalization parcels'' are
generally identified within the MOU.

The land exchange contemplated in the MOU would allow the BLM to
acquire lands containing important or sensitive resources, mostly
within or adjacent to the Monument, while transferring public lands
into State ownership for revenue generation that would further SITLA's
statutory duties to provide a benefit for Utah schoolchildren and other
trust beneficiaries. H.R. 3049 provides that the exchange of these
lands is in the public interest, and that the values of the lands, as
determined by the appraisal, are to be equal, consistent with land
exchanges that would occur under Section 206 of the Federal Land Policy
and Management Act (FLPMA). Like FLPMA, the land exchange provides
options for equalizing the value including adding or removing parcels
from the exchange.
Conclusion

The land exchange directed by this legislation would promote
conservation and appropriate resource management in a manner consistent
with the 2016 and 2021 presidential proclamations protecting the
Monument. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support
of H.R. 3049.

H.R. 4141, To provide that certain communications projects are not
subject to certain environmental and historical preservation reviews,
and for other purposes

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 4141, a bill ``to
provide that certain communications projects are not subject to certain
environmental or historical preservation reviews, and for other
purposes.'' Specifically, the bill would exempt eligible communications
projects from National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) review. The bill would also limit the
time frame for Tribes to respond and disclose Tribal interests in
communication projects to 45 days.
The Department of the Interior (Department) supports the goals of
the bill to expand access to electronic communications, including
across Federal lands. We believe that Federal lands provide a
tremendous opportunity to provide the public with access to wireless
services though the permitting of communication facilities. However,
the Department cannot support the bill as drafted, as it would limit
crucial public engagement, limit the ability of Tribes to engage in the
process, and prohibit the critical project-specific analysis provided
under NEPA and NHPA for a potentially broad set of circumstances. We
look forward to working with the Sponsor and Subcommittee on
modifications to the bill.
Background

The Department manages nearly one fifth of the surface acreage in
the United States, much of which encompasses rural areas, and therefore
can play an important role in permitting communication and broadband
infrastructure.
In 1976, with the passage of the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act (FLPMA), Congress directed the BLM to sustain the health,
diversity, and productivity of the public lands for the use and
enjoyment of present and future generations. Under FLPMA's multiple use
and sustained yield mandate, the BLM manages public lands for a broad
range of uses, such as renewable and conventional energy development,
livestock grazing, timber production, hunting and fishing, recreation,
and conservation--including protecting cultural and historic resources.
In addition, BLM-managed public lands provide vital habitat for more
than 3,000 species of wildlife and support fisheries of exceptional
regional and national value.
Rights-of-Way

Federal lands managed by the Department are crucial to facilitating
the deployment of wired and wireless broadband communications
infrastructure. These lands currently support a wide range of
communication facilities and related technologies (e.g., radio,
television, cellular, and microwave) on public lands through right-of-
way (ROW) grants.
A ROW is an authorization to use a specific piece of public lands
for a certain project. FLPMA ROWs are issued for a variety of uses,
including electrical power generation, transmission and distribution
systems, communications towers, highways, railroads, pipelines (other
than oil and gas pipelines), and other facilities or systems that are
in the public interest. Each year, the BLM processes thousands of
applications for ROWs on public lands. The BLM currently administers
over 4,200 facilities authorized by communication use ROWs on
approximately 1,500 multi-facility communications sites.
Furthermore, as the largest Federal land manager in the West, the
BLM plays a key role in planning for siting communication facilities
and broadband development. The BLM authorizes and administers ROWs and
leases for individual communication uses and develops and maintains
communications site management plans to proactively support orderly
deployment of new or additional communication uses.
H.R. 4141

H.R. 4141 would exempt certain communications projects and Federal
ROWs and other easements for communications facilities from NEPA and
NHPA review. The exemption would apply if a ROW or other easement had
previously been granted for a communications facility or utility
facility for the same Federal building or property, or if the ROW or
other easement is for a communication facility in a public ROW. The
bill would also amend the Middle-Class Tax Relief and Jobs Creation Act
of 2012 to exempt any modification of an existing communication site
ROW from NEPA or NHPA reviews. This would exempt agencies from needing
to complete NEPA or NHPA review when approving the colocation of new
transmission equipment, removal of transmission equipment from an
existing facility, or replacement of existing transmission equipment.
The bill also includes certain Tribal provisions in Section 3. It
would establish a presumption that, if a Tribe receives a complete FCC
form 620, then the Tribe has the necessary information to ascertain
whether historic properties of religious or cultural significance to
the Tribe may be affected by project. The Tribe then would have up to
45 days to respond and disclose any Tribal interests in the
communications project.
Analysis

The Department cannot support the bill as written because it limits
the ability of agencies to provide for appropriate environmental review
and public involvement in a potentially broad set of circumstances.
Environmental review and public involvement are critical components of
the Department's responsibilities in managing federal lands.
Environmental review can include the use of categorical exclusions, as
appropriate. Even when the Department uses a categorical exclusion,
however, it must still consider whether extraordinary circumstances
exist in which a normally excluded action may have a significant
effect. This provides the Department an opportunity to consider the
particular circumstances of a given proposal.
Further, we note that new information gained during the NEPA
process, including public engagement activities where appropriate,
routinely prevents delays in later stages of the project review process
by ensuring agency decisions are robust and able to withstand judicial
and other scrutiny.
Finally, the Department cannot support the provisions in the bill
that would restrict Tribal consultation by removing NHPA review
requirements and severely limiting a Tribe's ability to fully identify
and evaluate historical or cultural resources affected by a
communications project. The time frame in the bill is inconsistent with
Executive Order 13175 on Tribal consultation, which requires a 30-day
notice and a 30-day post-consultation period. The Department recommends
amending the bill to allow Tribes adequate time to review projects
potentially affecting Tribal interests.
Conclusion

The Department shares the goal of expanding communication networks,
particularly for broadband internet in underserved and rural
communities, and would appreciate the opportunity to work with the
Sponsor on modifications that would help achieve these goals while
maintaining the integrity of the NEPA and NHPA processes to conduct
environmental, cultural, and historical reviews. Thank you again for
the opportunity to provide testimony on H.R. 4141.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Nada Wolff Culver, Principal
Deputy Director, Bureau of Land Management

Ms. Wolff Culver did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva
Question 1. H.R. 4141 could impact tribal sovereignty by including
a provision that presumes that a tribe disclaims interest in a project
if they do not respond within 45 days of receiving an FCC Form. Not
only is this in bad faith, but it also fails to acknowledge the lack of
resources tribal governments often face due to lack of federal funding
from Congress.

1a) Do you believe the legislation is consistent with President
Biden's Memorandum on Uniform Standards for Tribal Consultation?

1b) How is BLM working with tribal governments to support tribes
and address barriers that may limit tribal engagement in the NEPA
process?

Question 2. While telecommunications infrastructure is critical for
rural and tribal communities, we need to ensure that such projects
don't adversely impact sacred sites or cultural resources.

2a) If H.R. 4141 waives environmental and historic preservation
reviews and presumes that a Tribe has no interest in an area if they
don't receive a response within 45 days, how can BLM appropriately
ensure such projects do not negatively impact sacred sites or cultural
resources?

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Deputy Director Culver. I would now
like to recognize Representative Curtis to introduce our next
witness.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I am delighted
to introduce Michelle McConkie, who serves as the Executive
Director of the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration in Utah, known as SITLA.
Michelle leads and directs all administrative and
operational functions of this independent state agency,
including oil, gas, mining, renewable energy surfaces,
resources, and real estate development projects. The Trust
Lands Administration manages over 3.4 million surface acres of
trust lands and 4.5 million acres of mineral estate. All
revenue generated from these lands benefit 12 state
institutions, the largest of which is our school children.
So, we frequently talk about their mission in terms of
providing income to our school kids. And it won't surprise
anybody to know that Utah has one of the largest, if not the
largest, per household size of children. And it is always a
struggle in our state to fund education, and this has been a
very important part of that.
Ms. McConkie has more than 20 years' experience in natural
resource and real estate development issues. As an attorney,
she worked for private law firms, and as Senior Legal Counsel
for the Trust Land Administration. She has also worked as the
Managing Director for the Trust Lands Administration Surface
Resource Group and the division responsible for managing and
generating revenue from nearly 3.4 million acres.
She holds a juris doctorate degree from S.J. Quinney
College of Law at the University of Utah and a Bachelor of Arts
degree in Political Science from the University of Utah.
Thank you, Ms. McConkie, for being here today.

Mr. Tiffany. You have 5 minutes, Ms. McConkie.

STATEMENT OF MICHELLE McCONKIE, DIRECTOR, STATE OF UTAH SCHOOL
AND INSTITUTIONAL TRUST LANDS ADMINISTRATION, SALT LAKE CITY,
UTAH

Ms. McConkie. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, and other members of the Committee for the opportunity
to testify today.
I would also like to thank Congressman Curtis and Senator
Lee, as well as the entire Utah Congressional Delegation for
their work in connection with the legislation now before the
Subcommittee.
As was said, my name is Michelle McConkie. I am the
Executive Director of the State of Utah School and
Institutional Trust Lands Administration, which is a state
agency that manages state trust lands that were granted by
Congress at statehood for the financial support of public
education and other state institutions.
SITLA manages approximately 3.4 million acres of state
trust lands and an additional 1 million acres of severed
mineral estate. Revenue from activities on these lands is
invested, and annual distributions are made to every public
school in the state to help with each school's most pressing
academic needs.
H.R. 3049 would ratify and authorize implementation of a
March 17, 2023 land exchange agreement between SITLA, Utah
Governor Spencer Cox, and Secretary of the Interior Deb
Haaland. That agreement is a product of over a year and a half
of discussions between state, Federal land managers, local
governments, and other interested stakeholders. The proposed
exchange is supported by rural county governments, various
stakeholders, Governor Cox, and the Utah State Legislature.
The fundamental problem addressed by this legislation is
the issue of scattered state land in-holdings embedded within
Federal conservation areas, such as national parks, and
associated land management conflicts. The designation of the
Bears Ears National Monument captured more than 200 scattered
tracts of state trust land within its outer boundaries,
totaling over 126,000 acres.
The state has been charged by Congress with managing these
school trust lands for the financial benefit of Utah's public
education system through revenue-generating activities. But
restrictions on the use of surrounding Federal lands through
establishment of the Monument will limit the utility of the in-
held state trust lands for economic development. And
development of school trust lands within national monuments and
other designations is directly at odds with the conservation
purposes for which the surrounding Federal lands were set
aside.
These conflicting mandates and the checkerboard pattern of
state trust lands in-holdings will make effective management of
both state trust lands and the Monument itself very difficult,
if not impossible. While the declaration of the Monument and
its large geographic scope are matters of significant
controversy and litigation between the state of Utah and the
United States, both governments agree that trading out state
land in-holdings is in everyone's best interest.
Land exchanges are an effective solution to the management
conflicts associated with in-holdings. In the last 25 years,
the state of Utah and the United States have worked
successfully to complete a series of large congressionally
authorized land exchanges. The hallmark of each of these
exchanges was their win-win nature. School trust lands with
significant environmental values were placed into Federal
ownership, while Federal lands with lesser environmental
values, but greater potential for revenue generation were
exchanged to the state.
H.R. 3049 authorizes a conveyance to the United States of
over 162,000 acres of Utah State school trust lands and
minerals within and near the Bears Ears National Monument, as
well as additional lands near the Bonneville Salt Flats of the
Great Salt Lake and other areas of the state where management
conflicts exist. In return, the state of Utah will receive
approximately 167,000 acres of Federal lands located in 20
counties throughout the state with lesser environmental
sensitivity, but greater potential for generating revenue for
Utah's public education system, which is, again, the purpose
for which Congress originally granted trust lands to Utah and
other Western states.
These lands have been targeted for oil and gas development,
mining, renewable energy projects, real estate development, and
land sales. The proposed land exchange will allow our agency to
do what it does best, make money for our public schools, while
allowing the Department of the Interior to implement unified
management of the Monument consistent with conservation goals.
I respectfully urge the Subcommittee and Congress to
approve H.R. 3049. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today.

[The prepared statement of Ms. McConkie follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michelle McConkie, Director, Utah School and
Institutional Trust Lands Administration
on H.R. 3049

Mr. Chairman, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. I would also like to thank Representative
Curtis and Senator Lee, and their colleagues in the Utah Congressional
delegation, for their work and assistance in connection with the
legislation now before the Subcommittee.
My name is Michelle McConkie, and I am the Director of the Utah
School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration (``SITLA''), an
independent state agency that manages state trust lands that were
granted by Congress at statehood for the financial support of public
education and other state institutions. In addition to public schools,
beneficiaries of Utah's trust lands grants include the University of
Utah, Utah State University, a hospital that provides healthcare to
disabled miners, and the state schools for the blind and deaf. SITLA
manages approximately 3.3 million acres of state trust lands, along
with an additional million acres of severed mineral estate. Revenue
from school trust lands--derived from oil and gas, mining, real estate
development, and other activities, is deposited in the Utah Permanent
School Fund, a perpetual endowment supporting public schools. The Utah
Permanent School Fund has a balance of approximately $3.2 billion.
Proceeds from the fund are distributed annually to every public school
in the state to help with that school's most pressing academic needs.
I encourage the Subcommittee, and Congress, to act favorably on
H.R. 3049, the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration
Exchange Act of 2023. This legislation would ratify, and provide
authority to implement, a March 17, 2023 land exchange agreement
between SITLA, Utah Governor Spencer Cox, and Secretary of the Interior
Deb Haaland. That agreement is the product of two years of discussions
between the State, federal land managers, local governments, and other
interested stakeholders. The proposed exchange is supported by rural
county governments, various environmental groups, Governor Cox and the
Utah legislature. We have worked hard to put together an exchange that
will be fair and transparent financially, workable in implementation,
and conducive to more effective land management by both the state and
federal governments. We believe that this legislation meets all of
these goals.
Management Conflicts Created by Federal Designations Surrounding State
Land Inholdings

The fundamental problem addressed by this legislation is the issue
of scattered state land inholdings embedded within federal conservation
areas such as national monuments and other designations, and associated
land management conflicts. The designation of the Bears Ears National
Monument captured more than 200 scattered tracts of state trust land
within its outer boundaries, totaling over 126,000 acres. The State has
been charged by Congress with managing these school trust lands for the
financial benefit of Utah's public education system. This is
accomplished through mineral and real estate development and other
revenue-generation activities. But restrictions on the use of
surrounding federal lands, through establishment of the Monument, will
limit the utility of the inheld state trust lands for economic
development. And development of school trust lands within national
monuments and other designations is directly at odds with the
conservation purposes for which the surrounding federal lands were set
aside. These conflicting mandates, and the checkerboard pattern of
state trust lands inholdings, will make effective management of both
state trust lands and the Monument itself very difficult if not
impossible.
While the declaration of the Monument, and its large geographic
scope, are matters of significant controversy, and litigation, between
the State of Utah and United States, both governments agree that
trading out state land inholdings is in everyone's best interest.
The History of Land Exchanges as an Effective Solution

Land exchanges are an effective solution to the management
conflicts associated with inholdings. Exchanges can allow each
government to manage consolidated lands as each party's land managers
deem most advisable, without interference. In the last twenty-five
years the State of Utah and the United States have worked successfully
to complete a series of large congressionally-authorized land
exchanges. These have included congressionally-mandated exchanges in
1998 concerning the Grand Staircase Escalante National Monument, in
2000 concerning federal wilderness in Utah's scenic West Desert, in
2009 concerning sensitive recreational lands within river corridors, in
2016 concerning the Utah Test and Training military range, and in 2019
concerning federal wilderness designations in the San Rafael Swell area
of central Utah.
The hallmark of each of these exchanges was their ``win-win''
nature: school trust lands with significant environmental values were
placed into federal ownership, while federal lands with lesser
environmental values but greater potential for revenue generation were
exchanged to the State, thus fulfilling the purpose of the school land
grants--providing financial support for public education.
The Proposed Land Exchange

H.R. 3049 authorizes the conveyance to the United States of
approximately 162,510.81 acres of Utah state school trust lands and
minerals within and near the Bears Ears National Monument, as well as
additional lands near the Bonneville Salt Flats of the Great Salt Lake
and other areas of the state where management conflicts exist. In
return, the State of Utah will receive approximately 167,012.69 acres
of federal lands located in 20 counties throughout the state with
lesser environmental sensitivity but greater potential for generating
revenue for Utah's public education system--again, the purpose for
which Congress originally granted trust lands to Utah and the other
western states. These lands have been targeted for oil and gas
development, mining, renewable energy projects, real estate development
and land sales. The proposed land exchange will allow our agency to do
what it does best--make money for our public schools--while allowing
the Department of Interior to implement unified management of the
Monument consistent with conservation goals.
A few specific features of the proposed exchange legislation about
which members of the Subcommittee may have questions warrant mention:
Timing of conveyances
Conveyances of the exchange lands by both governments are to be
made within 45 days of enactment of the legislation. This will
consolidate federal ownership within the Monument expeditiously to
protect sensitive lands, avoid management conflicts, and permit both
governments to achieve their goals.
Selection of Lands
Lands to be acquired by the State of Utah were selected by SITLA
for their revenue-generation potential with recognition of potential
environmental concerns and the values that may be placed on them by
Tribal Nations. The agency's internal experts combined their own
knowledge and decades of combined experience with that of local
governments and industry partners to select lands that will not only
provide millions of dollars in revenue to Utah's school trust but will
also provide economic development opportunities for rural communities.
The selection targets have been reviewed by BLM staff and other
stakeholders to assure that they avoid significant wildlife resources,
endangered species habitat, significant archaeological, cultural, and
historic resources, areas that are sacred or are traditionally,
spiritually, or religiously significant to Tribal Nations, areas of
critical environmental concern, coal resources requiring surface
mining, wilderness study areas, and significant recreation areas.
Land Valuation
Preliminary estimates indicate that the State and Federal exchange
lands are of approximately equal value. The MOU and ratifying
legislation, however, provide that all exchange lands will be subject
to independent appraisals using uniform appraisal standards and the
existing standards contained in the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act and its implementing regulations following conveyance. The
independent appraisals will be subject to review by each party
(including the Appraisal and Valuation Services Office (AVSO) for the
Department of the Interior). This will confirm that lands are conveyed
on an equal value basis.
If any disparity in the total value of lands to be exchanged is
found, an inventory of high-value state land, and federal land, has
been identified in southwestern Utah to be added to one side of the
exchange as necessary to achieve equalized values. The federal
equalization land the State would receive, if necessary, comprises real
estate development land of low environmental sensitivity in Warner
Valley, near St. George, Utah. The state equalization land the United
States would receive is important habitat for the threatened desert
tortoise in the area of the Red Cliffs NCA in southwestern Utah.
Protection of Rights Held Under Outstanding Leases, Permits, and Other
Grants
The MOU and legislation protect existing grazing permits,
associated preference and renewal opportunities, access, the use of
range improvements, and related rights on both the State and Federal
land to be exchanged.
Existing mineral leases, rights of way, and surface use agreements
on the State and Federal lands are also protected, as are any rights
found to be valid existing rights as of the date of conveyance.
Post-Exchange Land Management
The majority of the state trust lands to be acquired by the United
States are located within the exterior boundaries of the Bears Ears
National Monument, while other parcels lie within designated areas of
critical environmental concern, special recreation management areas, a
wilderness study area, and other environmentally sensitive areas. The
MOU and legislation provide that exchange lands acquired by the United
States that lie within the Monument will be managed for Monument
purposes. Similarly, any lands lying within federal wilderness areas,
or wilderness study areas, shall be managed consistent with those
designations.
All land acquired by the State in the exchange shall be managed as
state trust land pursuant to governing state law.
Conclusion

As President Biden stated in his October 8, 2021 Proclamation, an
agreement between the State of Utah and United States for the exchange
of trust land inholdings for development lands located elsewhere is in
the public interest. The March 17th MOU, as authorized and implemented
by H.R. 3049, fulfills that purpose in a manner that is fair to both
governments. It is the product of two years of discussions between
State and Federal land managers, with input from local governments and
other interested stakeholders, and has the support of Utah Governor
Spencer Cox and the Utah Legislature. I respectfully urge the
Subcommittee to approve it expeditiously.

Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you much, Director McConkie. Now, I
would like to recognize the good lady from Colorado to
introduce our next witness.
Representative Boebert, you are recognized.

Mrs. Boebert. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is my
honor to introduce Rose Pugliese, the Assistant Minority Leader
in the Colorado General Assembly.
When Rose moved to Mesa County, Colorado she did not know a
single person. Utilizing the entrepreneurial spirit she learned
from her parents, Rose took a chance and opened her own law
firm. Shortly after, she became active and engaged in the
community, and earned the trust of her clients.
Rose is what she calls an accidental politician. I am kind
of one of those, too, Rose, and it is almost your fault.
Rose actually inspired me with a state-led ballot
initiative to enshrine what our founders had the idea for in
our country. And we wanted to protect those ideals. And it
certainly inspired me to be where I am today.
In 2008, she went down to the local party's headquarters
for a yard sign and began to get more involved politically.
Years later, Rose was successful in her bid for Mesa County
Commissioner, and served Mesa County for 8 years very
diligently.
And thank you so much for that service.
She is here today to testify in favor of the CONVEY Act to
bring economic opportunities to Mesa County, Colorado through a
simple land conveyance, and actually worked on this issue back
when she served as a Mesa County Commissioner 5 years ago.
Rose, I am so happy to have you here in our Committee
today. Welcome to Washington, DC. Don't get stuck in the muck,
but the time is now yours. Thank you so much for being here.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROSE PUGLIESE, ASSISTANT MINORITY LEADER,
COLORADO HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, COLORADO SPRINGS, COLORADO

Ms. Pugliese. Thank you, Congresswoman Boebert, Chairman of
the Committee, Ranking Member Neguse, and all of the Committee
members for this opportunity to be here today to talk about
this very important issue which, while it is very specific to
one area of the country, I think affects probably all of your
districts at some point and at some level.
I also want to thank the Bureau of Land Management for
testifying in favor of this bill. We have had a continuing
partnership for years, and I am really excited for the
opportunity to see this project move forward because it is so
important for economic development, and alongside with the
support of Bureau of Land Management.
I also want to thank my Congressman, Congressman Lamborn,
and Congressman Buck for also helping sponsor this bill with
the good Congresswoman from Colorado.
The Clifton Opportunities Now for Vibrant Economic Yields
Act is incredibly important. Mesa County is a county with about
73 percent Federal land, which means that the Federal
Government basically controls any economic development
opportunities in that area because there is such a limit on
private land for development.
Mesa County, when you think of Colorado, you think of
Denver and the city center. Mesa County is a large county. It
is considered urban and rural, but it is the only large county
on the western side of the state, and actually borders our
friends in Utah.
So, because of those rural characteristics, as you all
know, rural communities consistently struggle with economic
development and those opportunities. And then, add on top of
that the immense and significant amount of Federal land, those
opportunities are even more limited.
So, we cannot rely on Payment In Lieu of Taxes, although
when I was a County Commissioner I came to DC often, and I
would be remiss if I missed an opportunity to ask for the long-
term and sustainable funding of PILT for these communities who
really don't have that opportunity for economic development in
the property tax, which counties depend on.
So, this particular project is incredibly important to me.
Clifton was in my district when I was a County Commissioner,
and we were looking for economic development opportunities. And
one of our staff had realized that there was this parcel of
land that was just below I-70, so a major thoroughfare across
the United States, and this property was on the BLM disposal
list. So, we are, like, great, BLM no longer wants to manage it
for the people of the United States. We could use that for
economic development opportunities. Clifton is a pretty
depressed area, and could really use some help in economic
development opportunities.
So, we had all sorts of ideas of grandeur of what this
property could be used for. At that time it was just over 40
acres. And BLM worked with us, and worked really well with us
to be able to start that process of disposing of this land to
the county so that we could use it for economic development
opportunities.
Then we found out, as the Bureau of Land Management was
investigating title, that the Bureau of Reclamation also had an
interest in this land. So, then we had to go through some more
bureaucratic red tape, which leads us to, literally, an Act of
Congress that it will take today to convey this land. But
Bureau of Reclamation was holding up any sort of transfer. And
that was incredibly frustrating, to be perfectly honest.
So, I was really happy, Mr. Chair, when you were talking
about the purpose of this Committee today, and what you are
looking at, because when the Federal Government controls your
economy and then stands in the way of economic development
opportunities, it is incredibly frustrating for those
communities, especially when nobody wanted this parcel of land.
Nobody. So, then the county says, hey, let's use it for
economic development, and they are like, oh, wait a second, the
Federal Government might want to use this for some purpose.
So, I do appreciate the opportunity and the hard work that
Congresswoman Boebert has done to get us where we are today,
which gives you all the opportunity to help not just Clifton,
this is bigger than just Clifton, but the opportunity to open
up potential economic development opportunities, especially
with lands like this, which are probably happening in your
communities, as well.
So, I think bringing this issue to light is incredibly
important to a Committee that actually has the power to do
something about it. Today, it is just about Clifton, Colorado,
and I implore you to support this legislation and move it
forward. But tomorrow it will be another parcel of land in any
one of your communities. So, I implore you to look at the
disposal process, and make it more streamlined, and cut back
the red tape so that communities like Mesa County, Colorado can
benefit, the whole state of Colorado can benefit, but all of
our nation can benefit because the productive use of Federal
land is incredibly important.
This is a good governance bill. It is an efficiency in
government bill, and I ask for your support to move it forward.
Thank you so much for this opportunity, and I look forward to
any questions you might have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Pugliese follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rose Pugliese, Assistant Minority Leader,
Colorado House of Representatives (District 14)
on H.R. 2997

Chairman and members of the committee: Thank you for the
opportunity to testify in support of the Clifton Opportunities Now for
Vibrant Economic Yields, known as ``the CONVEY Act.''
Today, I ask for your consideration of the importance of this
legislation and its potential to bring about significant economic
growth and opportunity to our community and our country as a whole.
Mesa County, Colorado, is located on the Western Slope of Colorado,
bordering Utah, and approximately four hours from Denver. While it is a
large county in population, it is located in a rural part of the state
and has both urban and rural challenges.
Rural areas of our country face difficult challenges related to
obtaining economic development opportunities, but that challenge is
elevated in areas of the country, especially in the Western United
States, where counties have limited private land. As you are aware in
your own communities, counties with significant amounts of federal land
are largely dependent on the federal government for economic
development opportunities. Mesa County, Colorado, for instance, is over
72% federal land. As you know, it is difficult for counties to rely on
Payment in Lieu of Taxes (``PILT'') from the federal government as it
has been consistently threatened. During my years as a Mesa County
Commissioner, I, along with County Commissioners from across Colorado
and the United States, advocated for the sustainability of PILT
funding.
For over five years, Mesa County has been diligently pursuing the
acquisition of a parcel of land that the Bureau of Land Management has
designated for disposal and no longer serves a purpose for the federal
government. This land holds immense value for Mesa County as it
presents a critical opportunity for economic development in Clifton, an
area of the county that has struggled economically and is in desperate
need of new opportunities.
By introducing the CONVEY Act, which directs the Secretary of the
Interior to convey 31.1 acres of land, that the federal government no
longer wishes to manage to Mesa County for economic development
purposes in Clifton, Congresswoman Lauren Boebert, Congressman Doug
Lamborn and Congressman Ken Buck are working toward a common-sense
solution to aid an underserved community in Colorado that deserves a
prosperous future. The bill ensures that Mesa County, Colorado, will
pay fair market value for the land, guaranteeing a fair transaction for
all parties involved.
The economic potential of this land cannot be understated. By
facilitating industry and business growth in Clifton, Mesa County can
attract job creators and foster an environment that encourages economic
prosperity and will directly and positively impact our community,
providing employment opportunities and enhancing our residents' overall
quality of life. It will also aid in putting this property back on the
property tax rolls.
The CONVEY Act also ensures that funds from the sale of this land
will be deposited into the Federal Land Disposal Account, established
by the Federal Land Transaction Facilitation Act, and retained by the
Bureau of Land Management Colorado office to be used within the state,
which means that the economic benefits of this transaction will extend
beyond Mesa County, Colorado and contribute to the overall welfare of
not just Colorado, but the whole country. It will also decrease costs
of management of this parcel of land by the Bureau of Land Management,
which will contribute to increased efficiency of our federal
government.
The Board of County Commissioners would like to express our deep
gratitude to Congresswoman Boebert for her tireless efforts to cut
through the bureaucratic red tape that has hindered Mesa County
Colorado's progress and the unwavering support of Congressman Lamborn
and Congressman Buck. If passed, it will have literally taken an act of
Congress to get this land that the federal government no longer wanted
off the disposal list and back into productive use.
The CONVEY Act presents a unique and invaluable opportunity for
Mesa County, Colorado, to promote economic development and create new
avenues of growth in Clifton in partnership and collaboration with the
federal government. I urge this committee to support this legislation
and allow the economic potential that lies within this land to be
realized.
Thank you for your time and consideration.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Representative Pugliese, we
appreciate it very much.
I would like to now recognize Representative Fulcher to
introduce our next witness.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to introduce a friend and a fellow Idahoan, John
Stuart.
John is President and CEO of MTE Communications, based in
Midvale, Idaho. MTE is a 114-year-old communications provider
that started out providing multi-party phone services to
farmers in Idaho. And today, MTE has upgraded to digital
switches and fiber home services, which can deliver gigabit
broadband speeds. MTE is 100 percent employee owned, and serves
over 2,000 square miles, including over 3,800 customers in
Idaho and Arizona.
Most importantly, John is very involved with family and
community. So, thank you, John, for coming all the way from
Idaho for this important hearing today.

STATEMENT OF JOHN STUART, PRESIDENT AND CEO, MTE
COMMUNICATIONS, MIDVALE, IDAHO

Mr. Stuart. Thank you, Congressman Fulcher, Chairman
Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you and testify in favor of H.R. 4141, the Broadband for
Americans Responsible Streamlining Act.
The legislation under consideration provides a measured and
reasonable streamlining of Federal permitting rules to ensure
that broadband can be deployed quickly to unserved and
underserved communities.
As Congressman Fulcher said, I am John Stuart. I am
President and CEO of MTE Communications. I am also testifying
on behalf of WTA Advocates for Rural Broadband, who I serve as
a Director. And I am also a Past President of the Idaho
Telephone Association.
I have made more than a few trips over my career to
Washington, DC. While there are many subjects that people
disagree on, I have noticed that most everyone is in agreement
that all Americans need to be connected to high-speed
broadband. It is vital for communication, public service,
public safety, commerce, health care, education, and more. I am
heartened that Congress and the Biden administration have made
it a priority to connect every American household to the
Internet within 4 to 5 years. This is a bold goal. It is a
correct one. However, the time it takes to acquire permits and
to use existing right-of-ways puts that goal in jeopardy.
Current interpretation and implementation of Federal,
environmental, and historic preservation laws impose
unreasonable and unnecessary delays and costs.
Regardless of the technology deployed, MTE and companies
like it always want to make use of existing right-of-ways to
co-locate their equipment in existing buildings, towers, and
other facilities. However, the networks built by small
providers that are supported by Federal broadband programs like
USDA's Reconnect or NTIA's coming BEAD program will
automatically trigger reviews by NEPA and NHPA, whether we
build on Federal lands or not.
It is common after filing a permit to expect waits of 18 to
24 months or longer to receive permission to start
construction. In states like Idaho, where construction seasons
are short, these delays have even greater impact because they
can push the start of construction for another 6 to 8 months.
The brunt of these delays are borne by Americans who wait years
longer than they would otherwise to get broadband service they
so desperately need.
In one instance, MTE recently had an RUS-funded fiber
project delayed for 3 years because of permitting. The route
would have gone within an existing road right-of-way that
crossed near an identified cultural site.
Time doesn't permit me to go into other examples, but there
are plenty of examples in my written testimony.
The bottom line is if right-of-ways have already been
established, and past construction of roads and existing
utilities have already required surveys on the disturbed
ground, it is inefficient to require additional reviews. Every
Federal dollar diverted to repeated permitting requirements is
dollars that are not invested in the networks. MTE and
companies like it serve rural America, and we want to ensure
our communities have the same communication connections that
people living in urban America.
We also care about our natural environment and historic
preservation. However, lacking reform, current implementation
of our environmental protection and historical preservation
laws threatens to delay and add cost to the goal of getting
broadband service to every American household.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify on this
important issue. I look forward to answering any questions that
the Committee may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stuart follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Stuart, President and CEO, MTE
Communications
on H.R. 4141

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you to
testify in favor of H.R. 4141, the Broadband for Americans Through
Responsible Streamlining Act and, more generally, about the need for
reforming the permitting process for broadband infrastructure projects
on federal lands and in existing rights-of-way. The legislation under
consideration provides measured and reasonable streamlining of federal
permitting rules to ensure broadband can be deployed quickly to
unserved and underserved communities.
Introduction

I am John Stuart, President and CEO of MTE Communications (MTE)
based in Midvale, Idaho. I am also testifying on behalf of WTA--
Advocates for Rural Broadband, on whose Board of Directors I serve. WTA
represents more than 370 small rural telecommunications providers from
across the county. I am also the former President of the Idaho Telecom
Alliance and currently serve as its Past-President. I have worked in
the telecommunications industry for my entire life while also being
involved in many community organizations including the City of Weiser's
Planning and Zoning Commission and two volunteer firefighter
departments.
MTE was started 114 years ago to mainly provide switchboard
telephone services to farmer owned multi-party telephone lines. In
1943, Verde and Charlette Williams, my grandparents through marriage,
purchased MTE and were active in the company until Verde's passing in
1991.
In 1977, my mother, Mary Williams, and her husband, Lane Williams,
moved back to Midvale to run the company. In 1987, I moved my family to
the area to join the company.
In the early 1980s, MTE acquired its first loan from USDA's Rural
Utilities Service (RUS), which was used to upgrade the outside plant to
enable single party telephone service and install our first digital
switch. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, our company made a concerted
effort to expand telephone service to the unserved areas of our
regulated service area. These efforts include expansion of MTE's
service territory to several unserved and underserved communities in
rural Arizona through greenfield builds and one acquisition. Over the
past decade, MTE's focus has been to upgrade our network to last-mile
fiber-optic facilities in order to provide the latest services over
broadband. Over the years, our network has been upgraded to where our
broadband now reaches Gigabit speeds via fiber facilities. In 2008, the
owners of MTE sold the company to the employees creating an Employee
Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP). The ESOP is now 100% owned by the employee
trust.
Today, MTE's combined regulated service area in Idaho and Arizona
is over 2000 square miles and includes over 3800 customers. MTE also
provides services in several areas competitively using copper, fiber,
and wireless technologies.
There are nearly 800 family-owned and cooperatively-owned rural
broadband providers, very similar to MTE, around the country. We serve
these rural communities because the large, regional and national
providers avoided them due to the lack of a business case for serving
such sparsely populated areas. We would not be able to provide the
level of service we do without the Federal Universal Service Fund,
which is administered by the Federal Communications Commission. We also
make use of various rural broadband programs run by the U.S. Department
of Agriculture, and many of my industry colleagues are looking forward
to participating in the historic Broadband Equity, Access, and
Deployment (BEAD) Program created by Congress in the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act.
Importance of Broadband

I've made more than a few trips to Washington, D.C. over my career.
While there are many subjects that people disagree on in this city, I
have noticed that one thing most everyone is in agreement on is that
all Americans need to be connected to high-speed broadband. It is vital
for communication, public safety, commerce, health care, education, and
more. I'm heartened that Congress and the Biden Administration have
made it a priority through various federal programs to connect every
American household to the Internet within the next four to five years.
This is a bold goal, and it's the right one. However, the time it takes
to acquire permits to cross federal lands puts this goal in jeopardy.
Current interpretation and implementation of federal environmental and
historic preservation laws impose unreasonable and unnecessary delays
and costs.
Permitting Reform is Needed

In general, when small broadband providers like MTE build networks,
we bury fiber underground to the extent we can. In some instances, we
string fiber along existing poles. In more remote, rugged areas, we
might use fixed wireless or even microwave technology. Regardless of
the technology deployed, we are nearly always making use of existing
rights-of-way or looking to co-locate equipment with existing
buildings, towers, and other facilities. Very rarely are we ever
digging trenches through previously undisturbed ground or looking to
put towers where there isn't any existing infrastructure.
Because of our location in the rural, mountain west, we often need
to cross federal land, usually administered and managed by the Forest
Service or the Bureau of Land Management, but also land administered by
other federal agencies. Even when federal land is not involved, the
networks built by small internet service providers (ISPs) that receive
support from federal broadband programs like USDA's ReConnect Program
or NTIA's BEAD Program will trigger reviews under the National
Environmental Protection Act (NEPA) and National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA).
These reviews greatly increase the length of time it takes to
complete projects and the cost of building our networks. In general,
after filing for permits, companies like MTE expect waits of 18 months
to two years, if not longer, to receive permission to start
construction. In states like Idaho, where the construction season is
short, these delays have an even greater impact because they can push
the start of construction off for another six to eight months. While
the delays and additional costs are frustrating for small ISPs and
should frustrate federal policymakers and taxpayers, the brunt of these
delays are borne by the Americans who wait years longer than they would
have otherwise to get the broadband they so desperately need.
Over the years that MTE has expanded service to unserved
communities, we have financed both environmental and cultural surveys
and studies of the rights-of-way where we have placed underground
facilities. All these activities add time and cost to the deployment of
service. Some added multiple construction seasons to the projects. Most
of the rights-of-way where our facilities have been placed mainly
contain non-native fill materials from the road construction. Routine
road maintenance often involves spraying herbicide to keep vegetation
back from the road.
In one instance, we were required to bore through subsurface rock
along a state highway within the right-of-way next to an active rock
quarry used by the Idaho Transportation Department. This was required
to avoid a reported Native American rock chipping site, even though the
entire area within the right-of-way has several feet of non-native fill
material. The study and review added more than a year to the project
completion.
Another more recent example is our Round II ReConnect award to
provide fiber-to-the-home service in four geographically diverse
service areas. Under RUS rules, environmental clearance must be
received for the entire award area before any final engineering can be
completed. In one of the service areas, the preliminary design
forecasted the underground facility to be placed along the edge of a
road on federally controlled land that homeowners use daily to access
their residences located on private land. The road crossed
approximately 400 feet of an identified cultural site outside the road
area. The review process not only added tens of thousands of dollars to
the cost of the deployment of service, but it also delayed the start of
the entire $10 million Reconnect package by two years in the other
service areas and has delayed the start of service deployment in the
impacted area by three years.
Unfortunately, MTE is not unique in this regard. Another small,
rural company in our industry reports that it took two years to get
permission to bury fiber along an existing power line corridor.
Another company, located in eastern Oregon in Congressman Bentz's
district, had a permit for existing conduit on federal land, but had to
file an additional permit to put new fiber through it. The company
applied in the fall of 2018, hoping to get the work completed by the
summer of 2019. The permit wasn't approved until October 2020, which,
because of the short construction season, delayed construction until
2021.
A third company applied for a permit to bury 120 feet of fiber in
February 2018 in previously disturbed ground. It did not receive the
permit until October 2019, some 20 months later.
Another company waited about 16 months to receive a federal permit
to string 150 yards of fiber on existing power lines.
In another example, a company applied to put a larger microwave
antenna on an existing tower. Neither the height nor the footprint of
the tower was going to change, but it took 12 months for the Forest
Service to approve this request.
This is, by no means, an exhaustive list.
Not only does the current permitting process delay access to much
needed service, it adds cost to network buildout. For MTE's ReConnect
project mentioned earlier, the additional costs amounted to over
$20,000.
Another family-owned company is in the process of completing a
project also funded by USDA's ReConnect Program. They are required to
hire an archeologist to survey various points along the 120 miles of
their project to ensure no artifacts are present despite the
construction being within state and county road rights-of-way. This
will likely add over $100,000 to the cost of the project. This ground
has presumably already been surveyed and disturbed during construction
of the roads.
If rights-of-way have already been established and past
construction of roads and existing utilities have already required
surveys and disturbed the ground, it is inefficient to require
additional reviews. Every federal dollar diverted to duplicative
permitting requirements is another dollar that is not invested in
networks. This constrains the reach and effectiveness of the broadband
programs that Congress authorized. For this reason, the rural broadband
industry I represent support the objectives of H.R. 4141, which
provides a streamlined process for environmental and archeological
reviews for broadband projects in previously permitted and disturbed
ground and existing rights-of-way.
Conclusion

In closing, I understand that if broadband providers are seeking to
bury fiber or construct infrastructure in untouched, undisturbed areas,
that it is proper to survey the area for historic preservation purposes
and potential environmental issues. But the vast majority of broadband
construction does not take place in pristine, untouched land. Roads and
other utilities have already been approved and permits granted.
MTE, and companies like it, serve rural America because the people
who work for them live there. We want to ensure our families, friends,
and neighbors have the same communications connections that people
living in urban America have. We also care about our natural
environment and historic preservation. However, lacking reform, current
implementation of our environmental protection and historical
preservation laws threatens to delay and add great cost to the goal of
getting broadband to every American household.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify on this important
issue. I look forward to answering any questions you might have for me.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Stuart, and I will now
recognize Members for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fulcher, you have 5 minutes for questions.

Mr. Fulcher. Mr. Stuart, thanks for coming today. I briefly
want to cover a few points in your line of business.
First, what need is there for Internet to be provided to
rural areas in the West? If you could just quantify that, why
the need for Internet in rural areas?
Mr. Stuart. I don't know that there is anything that
doesn't require the Internet anymore, whether it is education,
health care.
In our communities, you could have an hour's drive to the
nearest doctor. So, being able to do tele-medicine at a remote
location at somebody's home, if they are elderly or it is
difficult for them to get there, it is critical.
Education is the same way. During COVID, there were a lot
of people that were at home doing schooling and, of course,
work from home, as well.
So, I don't know of any part of our society or economy that
isn't built on the Internet anymore.
Mr. Fulcher. So, when you are expanding fiber, for example,
for a certain area, how careful are you in terms of the
environmental considerations, property rights, and the
historical aspects of the land when you do an expansion like
that?
Mr. Stuart. Many of the areas that we work in are our
communities. Our employees live in those areas. So, not only do
we have to do the construction there, but we have to live
there. So, if we disturb somebody's property, or a cultural
site, or something in the environment, we are not just going to
walk away and not be there in a few months. We have a vested
interest in those areas, as companies like ours that live and
work in those areas.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that.
When you are looking to expand broadband into a rural area,
you are already taking into consideration how delicate you need
to be when you are installing additional lines.
With that, what can the Federal Government do to make it
easier for broadband providers like yourself to install more
broadband access to areas that may include large amounts of
Federal lands?
Mr. Stuart. If it is pre-disturbed areas, a road has been
built, and understanding that roads rarely use the native
materials, that is usually not roadbed material to hold weight
and that sort of thing, especially state highways, not having
to do full reviews in those areas that have already been
reviewed, they have already been disturbed, there are no native
materials in many cases in those areas, being able to not
really bypass, but not have to comply with all of the
requirements of either NEPA or the National Preservation Act,
not having those triggers would be very helpful and speed us
up, in many cases, many years.
Mr. Fulcher. So, that is a conversation point we frequently
have on this Committee, Mr. Stuart. What you are saying is not
the first time we have heard that, you might imagine.
Just finally, can you speak to the increased benefits to
your customers in terms of their quality of life, their health,
job opportunities when they have access to actual broadband?
Mr. Stuart. It is probably the same answer as the first
question. It provides them the ability to do things that they
would have to travel a long ways to go do, whether it is
school, medical, or economic, being able to order something
through the Internet and have it delivered, rather than having
to drive 50, 60 miles to a store to pick something up. So,
there are great economic benefits to that.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you for that. Thank you for your
testimony. And we can relate to your colleague right next to
you there, Ms. Pugliese, if I pronounced that correctly.
You said there was 73 percent Federal land within your
county. And within our state it is close to that for the entire
state. So, we can relate, and thank you for that.
Mr. Stuart, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Fulcher. Next, I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First and foremost,
thank you for hosting this hearing, and my apologies for being
a little bit delayed, but grateful for your willingness to
consider the bills that this Committee is considering today. I
am certainly supportive of the bill that Mr. Curtis, my good
friend from Utah, has introduced, as well as Mr. Morelle, Ms.
Plaskett, whom I know we heard from a little while ago.
And, again, I am grateful that this Subcommittee continues
to be as engaging and, I think, adopting a robust portfolio of
policies, as was the case when I chaired the Subcommittee in
the last Congress. So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have quick questions about H.R. 2997. Building off a
point that our former Ranking Member, Mr. Fulcher, made, my
district in Colorado is 52, 53 percent Federal land. And, of
course, as many of you know, a number of counties in the
Western Slope, we struggle and have had obstacles in terms of
interactions with the BLM on land exchanges. So, that is
certainly an area that I think is ripe for further improvement.
As Ms. Pugliese, I hope I pronounced it right, my last name
is a tough name to pronounce, so I will apologize in advance.
But as you have, I think, suggested, there is some real room
for reform, in my view, that is substantive and structural.
I guess one issue I am trying to resolve in H.R. 2997, and
the question could go to our witness from the BLM, is how this
legislation would work in practice. As I read the text of the
bill, it essentially directs the BLM to convey this land, I
think the phrase is ``as soon as practicable.'' But I don't
read any time period or prescriptive requirement that the BLM
do this on a particular timetable. Am I misreading that?
If this bill were to be signed into law, let's say, a year-
and-a-half from now by President Biden, would this enable you
to skip or disregard the sort of existing procedures that are
in place for disposal of property? I am just trying to get a
better sense of how this would work in practice.
Ms. Culver. Thank you, Representative Neguse.
The main difference that would happen from the bill is
there is not a timeline. We would follow normal procedures for
appraisal and exchange. The challenge----
Mr. Neguse. But aren't you doing that now?
Ms. Culver. We are. With this particular parcel, the
challenge is that originally this parcel was conveyed to the
Bureau of Reclamation as part of the Grand Valley Reclamation
Project. So, this would allow us to skip the ongoing step we
have underway to have that land returned to the Bureau of Land
Management's management, so that we can convey it to Mesa
County.
Mr. Neguse. And what does that step entail? Or why is that
step taking particularly long?
Ms. Culver. It requires the issuance of separate public
land orders for the withdrawal to be revoked, sorry to use many
technical terms here that may not convey accurately, but,
basically, through our process the land was conveyed to the use
of the Bureau of Reclamation for an irrigation project.
Mr. Neguse. Sure. But I guess I am trying to understand.
Why wouldn't the Secretary just simply do that now?
Ms. Culver. We are underway, and have been working toward
that, and we think we are making good progress.
Mr. Neguse. OK, let me ask this a different way, because,
obviously, this bill, this is a legislative hearing. So, this
is step 1 of 12 steps, or however many steps it takes to get to
the President's desk. How long do you anticipate that process
taking right now, absent this legislation?
Ms. Culver. I think we believe the process would speed up
somewhat from skipping that step, but it would not change the
effort that would be required to exchange the lands.
Mr. Neguse. OK. Maybe I am asking this a different way, and
maybe I am misunderstanding it. What is it about that step, as
a technical matter, what does that step entail? Is it
convincing the Secretary of the Interior to issue a reversal
order?
Ms. Culver. I don't think we would have to convince the
Secretary of the Interior. So, thank you for that question. We
are supportive of the process, and are underway in completing
these documents. It requires surveys, it requires preparation
of documents so that the Bureau of Reclamation can essentially
give back their jurisdiction over the land as part of this
irrigation project.
Mr. Neguse. OK. Well, I guess what I would say--and I
recognize I am out of time.
Mr. Tiffany. I am going to give you a couple----
Mr. Neguse. You will indulge me, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Neguse. I guess what I would say is I am a little bit
more confused now than I was at the outset of the hearing,
because it is not clear to me why that step is taking so long,
and why the legislation--it sounds like, essentially, the
position of the BLM is that this legislation would enable you
to skip the step, which you support. But if that is the case,
is there no way for you to, as an agency, expedite that step
internally?
And if you don't have the existing authority, then I think
it goes to the point that Ms. Pugliese was noting, that we
ought to think about how we reform the process in and of
itself, statutorily, so that you don't have to go through this
exercise for these land exchanges that the agency agrees with,
and that the local county government agrees with.
And I am happy to give you an opportunity to respond, but
maybe I am just getting too technical about this one step, of
understanding why that is taking a longer period of time.
Ms. Culver. Thank you. I appreciate your point. I know that
our local BLM has been working hard with the Bureau of
Reclamation, and we feel we are making progress.
We also support the bill. We will get this done. We are
committed to getting it done, one way or another, and I am
happy to provide more specific information on the process that
has occurred to date.
Mr. Neguse. If the bill--and now I know you are really
indulging me--but let's say clearly the BLM does not believe
that that process is necessary, because it supports the bill
waiving the process. Does the BLM have existing authority under
the law to do that, absent this bill?
Ms. Culver. If I understand your question, we do not have
the authority to waive the step that we are currently, we
believe, close to completing of transferring the land back from
the Bureau of Reclamation.
Mr. Neguse. OK. So, I think what I would suggest is perhaps
we should have a larger conversation as a Committee as to
whether or not there should be legislation that gives the BLM
Director--of course, exercised through his or her deputies at
the regional level--to waive that step of the process if they
deem it in the best interests of the agency and the land being
conveyed, because this is a long process.
So, notwithstanding this legislation that we are
considering, it is an Act of Congress, and it is going to have
to go through a pretty extended process to get through the
Senate and the House, and so on and so forth. So, that seems
like maybe a more time-effective way of achieving that.
But in any event, thank you for your testimony. I thank all
the witnesses, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Once again, you can't waive the process, to
the question that the Ranking Member was asking.
Ms. Culver. We cannot currently waive the process to revoke
the existing withdrawal to the Bureau of Reclamation.
Mr. Tiffany. OK, thank you. Next, I would like to recognize
Mr. Curtis for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I said in my opening remarks, I am happy to see this
legislation before us today. I appreciate the Committee's
effort to bring this forward.
Ms. McConkie, to oversimplify the SITLA's mission, you own
land throughout the state. I wish we could actually hold up a
map and show people. If you could picture in your mind a
checkerboard, and then randomly select checkers, boxes, it is
not like it is an organized checkerboard, it is these random
boxes. These could be on the side of a mountain, they could be
in the midst of a sacred, ancient Native American site, they
could be in all of these random places. And your mission is to
maximize these parcels for revenue, and as we mentioned, among
other things, for the schoolchildren.
And what we have before us today is a solution that goes
into the designated Bears Ears Monument area, consolidates
these and moves them out, thus protecting the areas within the
Monument.
Before I go on, there are few issues more controversial in
my state than public lands, and Bears Ears is among those, very
controversial. And I want to point out that this legislation
does not codify the Bears Ears Monument. It simply is a totally
separate issue. And I just think that is important for my folks
back home for me to put on the record, that this isn't an
acknowledgment that that discussion is over, but this is a
separate issue.
Also, Ms. McConkie, let me start with you. This is a win-
win if you put it in the perspective, I think, of the public
lands in the state of Utah. But one of the problems you dealt
with as this matured was that some of these lands moved outside
the County of San Juan. And in a perfect world, we would be
able to do all of these exchanges within San Juan County
because there is potential revenue coming from these exchanges
that San Juan is sending off to other counties.
Could you just touch on that, and the work that you went
through to try to deal with that the best you could?
Ms. McConkie. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, thank you for
the opportunity to talk about this issue.
San Juan County has been in a really difficult situation
for many years because 6 percent of the land is private. The
rest is either state land or overwhelmingly Federal land. And
we have worked really hard with the County Commission. We have
worked with different levels of different local government. We
have had open houses. We have had a lot of feedback and really
listened. We took their suggestions, we looked at the maps. BLM
has been wonderful, and has really worked hard with us to find
solutions that would work.
And we have been able to keep a third of the land in San
Juan County. And I do realize that a third is not a whole, but
the third that they are getting is going to be consolidated
into areas that have critical mineral development potential,
oil and gas potential, real estate development potential. It
has economic development potential that the scattered lands
within what is now a national monument do not have.
It was always difficult for us to make money off of these
lands. We have made about $80,000 a year, typically, on
grazing, historically. This allows us to be able to have
economic development through all of these different industry
uses. We have already had door knocks from industry on some of
these lands. And it also allows us to make money for school
children.
Mr. Curtis. I think it is important to hone in for just a
minute that two-thirds of this land is going outside of San
Juan County, and that San Juan County in some ways is taking
one for the team of the state of Utah, if that makes sense. And
I think it is important to acknowledge that, in a perfect
world, we would have been able to keep all of that in San Juan
County, and recognizing as a state we need to do all we can to
help those in San Juan County. Imagine trying to run a county
with 6 percent of that land available for revenue. So, thank
you for that.
Deputy Director, we often talk in this hearing about Native
American tribes. Could you just touch on how this impacts the
Native American tribes in the area, and the efforts to reach
out to them, and also their level of support for this?
Ms. Culver. Thank you, Congressman Curtis. Yes, this area,
the Bears Ears National Monument area and much of the
surrounding area, is incredibly dense in both sacred sites and
other examples of history. And there are many tribes that have
ties to this region, in particular, as recognized in the
monument proclamation, there are five tribes that make up the
Bears Ears Commission.
We worked hard to keep them updated as we worked on these
maps. And also they have submitted, the Bears Ears Commission,
signed by all five tribal members, a letter of support for this
exchange.
Mr. Curtis. I know I am out of time. If you would indulge
me just a minute, Mr. Chairman, that is a big deal. These are
five tribes, different geographic locations, different
interests. And it is rare when they actually come together as a
unified group and speak out. So, I want to acknowledge how
important that is, that they have spoken out in support of
this, and how that is no small accomplishment.
I wish I had more time for both of you to talk about this.
Thank you for making the journey out, Ms. McConkie.
Thank you for being here, Deputy Director.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield my time.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, I am being particularly generous today to
you gentlemen. Next, I would like to recognize Representative
Stauber.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I often hear from my constituents back home in northern
Minnesota about how Washington gets it wrong. Without a clear
understanding of how policies, often one-size-fits-all,
actually affect our constituents back home, we are going to
continue to miss the mark.
I would like to thank my colleague, Congressman Fulcher,
for his leadership on H.R. 4141, which streamlines the
permitting process for broadband projects, especially in rural
districts like the one I represent.
I find it fascinating that, yet again, we are coming back
to permitting reform. The challenges we face in regard to rural
broadband access is just another example where burdensome and
slow permitting processes are holding our communities back.
Mr. Stuart, the challenges you outlined in your testimony
are very similar to those my constituents faced in northern
Minnesota. As you shared, due to the difficult NEPA process,
rural broadband projects can take years to get through, and
most of the timeline is eaten up by permitting long before a
single shovel is even in the ground or any real work done. What
kind of impacts do these delays have on the local communities
and the communities that you serve?
Mr. Stuart. It just delays the availability of services.
And a lot of the bill does talk to a wireless provider, and
we should remember that ground fiber or underground fiber feeds
those towers. So, it may be wireless service from the tower to
your device, but that tower is fed by fiber. And in many cases,
that is the local company that is providing that, and we do
that, as well, in very remote areas.
So, permitting being slow to get additional bandwidth to
those towers, as well as the local residents being delayed,
just drives up costs. And as I spoke to, those costs just take
away dollars from us deploying additional network.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Ms. Culver, it is good to see you again. In your written
testimony, you shared that the Bureau of Land Management cannot
support this legislation, and effectively argue that we need to
allow the time-consuming NEPA process to play out.
We are through COVID now. We saw the devastation of the
lack of broadband to rural constituents across this nation,
what students had to do, what parents had to do. Does the
Bureau of Land Management consider the impacts that not moving
forward with a rural broadband project or another
infrastructure project will have on a community and its local
economy, similar to what Mr. Stuart just shared with us?
Ms. Culver. Thank you for the opportunity to address that
issue.
I think it is also in my testimony, we strongly support the
ability of Federal rights-of-way to bring broadband to rural
communities. We are working on a broadband rule that would help
to streamline that. We have categorical exclusions from the
reviews that allow us to site in existing rights-of-way, as
well. And we would love to work with the sponsor on the bill so
we can support it.
Mr. Stauber. Just specific to my question, does the Bureau
of Land Management look at the potential negative effects of
not moving forward with the project in a timely manner?
Ms. Culver. When we conduct our analysis of a project, we
look at the costs and benefits of the proposed project.
Mr. Stauber. But do you look at the negative benefits of
delaying a project coming into a community, like Mr. Stuart?
Ms. Culver. Certainly, we look at the importance of
achieving the purpose of those projects.
Mr. Stauber. Here is what I am hearing back home:
Washington, DC bureaucrats do not think rural America matters.
Agencies actively work to hinder projects that would propel our
constituents forward and make them more successful, all because
they think our communities are their playgrounds.
Northern Minnesota is where I live, I work, I raise my
family, and I recreate. This is, unfortunately, another example
where we are held back from doing the right thing due to the
one-size-fits-all policies developed here in Washington, DC.
The existing permitting policies don't consider our
constituents. They are holding us back from making progress in
our communities for no good reason. Rural America matters.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize Mr. Moylan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just like to
have further discussion with the Deputy Director regarding the
bill by Virgin Islands on H.R. 3025, which you are disagreeing
with.
Can you further clarify the amount of park land that BLM
oversees, what is the percentage of that land compared to the
total land mass? How much park land is there?
Ms. Culver. Thanks for the question, Congressman. The
National Park Service manages national park lands, so I don't
have those figures at my fingertips. The Bureau of Land
Management doesn't manage----
Mr. Moylan. That is fine. But we heard a statement from the
delegate here that it is a majority of the land there. Right?
And the National Park Service is struggling to maintain that
land. And the total land mass of St. Johns in the Virgin
Islands is 19.6 miles. It is a very small area with less than
4,000 people. The price of land is really high there, and I am
understanding from the report provided by our Natural Resources
here that housing is in a crisis. And there was an attempt
there to do some exchange for land to build a pre-K to 12th
grade public school, which was turned down. Is that correct?
Ms. Culver. The National Park Service has submitted
testimony for the record. It is my understanding that they are
in discussions, and they certainly share the concerns of the
Congresswoman with supporting the local community.
Mr. Moylan. Is BLM in favor of the Congresswoman's concern?
Ms. Culver. The Bureau of Land Management doesn't have a
position on that bill.
Mr. Moylan. I would hope that the Bureau of Land Management
can support that, because it sounds like a relationship based
on this property here is not in good terms with the residents
of the Virgin Islands.
I also understand that there is $82 million in deferred
maintenance costs for the residents of St. John's. Again, you
are going to reference that to the other Service, is that
correct?
Ms. Culver. Again, the National Park Service manages that
land, so if there are questions I would be happy to ensure that
they can be responded to by the Park Service.
Mr. Moylan. So, is BLM in favor of this measure, H.R. 3025.
Your statement was in favor of this measure offered by the
Delegate?
Ms. Culver. The Bureau of Land Management has not taken a
position on the bill about the national park in the Virgin
Islands.
Mr. Moylan. OK. Well, I hope you can work with them kindly
to give your interest in support of what the Delegate is
asking, please.
Ms. Culver. I think the National Park Service would work to
respond to questions that you all have, certainly.
Mr. Moylan. I appreciate it. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back my time.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Next, I would like to
recognize for 5 minutes the gentlelady from Colorado.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Assistant Minority Leader Pugliese, I know that you
mentioned this in your testimony, but when did you first start
trying to make this conveyance happen in Mesa County?
Ms. Pugliese. Thank you, Congresswoman. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, for this opportunity to answer the question.
I know it says more than 5 years, because before it even
got through this BLM process we had started working on it. I
spent basically my whole second term working on this project,
which is 4 years.
And 2 years after I had termed out, I am here today to
implore you all to pass this CONVEY Act so that this parcel of
land can be conveyed to Mesa County, a partner government
agency with the Federal Government, because we all live in the
same community. So, economic development opportunities benefit
all of us, regardless of whether you live in Mesa County or in
this particular area of Clifton, or in your respective
communities.
And I also just want to say I really do, at least in the
experience I had, I really do appreciate the Bureau of Land
Management because they did help us try to navigate this
process. Where I believe it got derailed was when the Bureau of
Reclamation came into play.
And I also want to put on the record that they are
withholding 8.5 acres of this land for their own Bureau of
Reclamation project. So, that other 31.1 acres will be conveyed
by the BLM to Mesa County for that economic opportunity. I
think you can have both. And the Congresswoman has worked very
well with both agencies to make this happen, but the fact that
legitimately it is going to take an Act of Congress to get this
land conveyed that nobody wanted before we raised our hands and
said, ``Hey, we will take it and use it for the benefit of all
of us,'' again, I think we can do better.
Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question.
Mrs. Boebert. Yes. And even in my first term here I brought
this issue up, and I was told by the agencies that it would not
require an Act of Congress, that they were taking care of it,
and that it would get done. But I saw that this was still being
slow-rolled, and dug in deeper to see what we could do to
actually help.
And I know that you had countless calls, e-mails, meetings,
and discussions with Federal agencies. So, thank you so much
for your diligence, and really just being so steadfast on this
issue. You truly are one of the great leaders for Mesa County.
I know you are not in Mesa County anymore, but you left a
legacy there, and there is so much that you have done for that
community.
And thanks to your leadership and County Commissioner Cody
Davis, it seems like we are finally making progress here,
especially given the Deputy Director's statement. I think that
you would agree with that.
And I would like to give a big thank you to the Bureau of
Land Management and their staff for working closely with us on
this bill over the past year. Principal Deputy Director Wolff
Culver, Colorado BLM State Director Doug Vilsack, Carol Lee,
and the two Gregs from Grand Junction, as we refer to them back
home, they were all super helpful in providing this.
Representative Pugliese, you testified that the economic
potential of this land cannot be understated. Can you further
discuss why this is so important for Clifton and Mesa County?
Ms. Pugliese. Thank you, Congresswoman. Thank you,
Chairman, for the time.
Why it is so important for this particular area is this is
a depressed area. It is an area we have been trying to get
economic development going because that area has struggled. It
has struggled for decades.
And the problem that we run into, as we talked about, was
that 73 percent of Mesa County is Federal land, more than half
of that is in BLM. So, there are such limited opportunities for
private land. When you have a property that is on the disposal
list in a depressed area that could really contribute to
economic vitality for that whole community, and that whole
county and the state as a whole, I think tying it up in
bureaucratic red tape is not the way we should be working in
partnership with our county governments at the Federal level,
especially when so much of that land is in BLM, at least for
Mesa County.
And I also want to note for the record that the Federal
Land Disposal Account, when that property is finally
transferred, we all, the people of the United States, will all
benefit from it because Mesa County will pay fair market value,
that money will go into this account that will be used by the
BLM in Colorado.
But as one of the Congressmen said, we all recreate in
Colorado, and we have so much to offer. So, being able to
really strengthen that economic opportunity is really important
for us. So, thank you.
Mrs. Boebert. Absolutely. And that was actually my next
question. But also the Bureau of Land Management in Colorado,
in that office will be used within the state for that funding,
as well.
And our time is expired, so thank you so much for being
here with us and testifying and supporting the CONVEY Act.
Thank you.
Ms. Pugliese. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. Representative Boebert, I am indulging our
Members today. Do you have any additional questions you would
like to ask?
Mrs. Boebert. I do not have an additional question. Thank
you so much for your generosity, Mr. Chairman. But I do just
again want to thank the Deputy Director, Ms. Wolff Culver, so
much for your support on this, and your work in getting this
done. This is going to benefit Clifton, Colorado greatly,
economically, and it is just a very straightforward process
that I am glad that we are finally getting this done. So, thank
you so much for your help in this.
Mr. Tiffany. To any of the Members that are here around the
dais, if you have additional questions, you may ask them.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. That would be me.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Curtis. And I don't have a question, but I would feel
bad if I missed this opportunity, Deputy Director, to give a
shout out to your local BLM folks on the ground, Greg Sheehan
and team, great people. We enjoy working with them, have a
great relationship. So, a big shout out from Utah to your
people on the ground.
Thank you. And Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, thank you. Thank you both for your
questions.
Ms. Pugliese, I think about my home county, where there is
a squabble going on in regards to 80,000 acres that the state
wants to buy through their stewardship program. And,
oftentimes, this land gets shut down, and the county is really
talking about having affordable housing. Is this one of the
issues that you are having, is being able to have enough land
for affordable housing in a community like the one you are
referencing and where you live?
Ms. Pugliese. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the question.
Affordable housing, at least when I was a County Commissioner,
wasn't the issue that we dealt with as much as commerce,
businesses being able to relocate in the state or outside of
the state into this particular area.
We had talked about a lot of different opportunities, but
it was more for employment opportunities because they would
have to go into Grand Junction, which is only about 20 minutes
away, but most of the people in that community really wanted to
stay in that community, and there really are just no employment
opportunities, very limited businesses out there. So, this 31
acres will open up the possibility for a developer to come in
and put some businesses that would actually employ people. And
that was really important for being able to lift up this
community and make it a stronger, economically.
Mr. Tiffany. Obviously, you have worked diligently with
these processes all the way, local to Federal. Do you have a
couple of suggestions of one or two things that you are, like,
``You guys really should change this process,'' and what would
that be, if there is?
Ms. Pugliese. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Oh, that is a question
I have been wanting people to ask me for years.
I am sitting next to my friend here, who was talking about
the NEPA process, and I have actually written articles about
how we have to continue to streamline the NEPA process, because
that also helps to delay any sort of economic development
opportunities in communities that have significant amounts of
Federal land. So, I would implore you to continue to look at
those processes, and see where you can streamline.
Second, for this particular----
Mr. Tiffany. So, that is in regards to NEPA, is that
correct?
Ms. Pugliese. In regards to NEPA, which could also have
potential impacts on this property in Clifton.
And then, with this conveyance, the county in kind donated
services like surveys and all sorts of other services that were
needed in order to help alleviate the burden on BLM to expedite
this process. And like I said, BLM really did a great job.
I think some more work needs to be done with Bureau of
Reclamation, to be to be perfectly honest. They are already
going to retain 8.5 acres of this property that nobody wanted
for a potential future water project that may or may not
happen, and I am fine with that because water, obviously, in
the West is such an important issue. And having those services
and those resources are incredibly important. So, I have no
problem with that.
But the fact that it takes an Act of Congress to get Bureau
of Reclamation to step back and let the Bureau of Land
Management do their job to convey this land to a county that,
literally, this has been going on for way over 5 years. I think
we can do better. So, personally, I would say looking at Bureau
of Reclamation processes and, in fairness, while I appreciate
all of the partnership with BLM, the fact that BLM didn't know
before they put it on the disposal list that this property had
an interest in Bureau of Reclamation also created problems
because for 2 years we were working with BLM, and thought that
this was going to happen, and then Bureau of Reclamation came
in and then I felt like it restarted the process.
So, I think that there are definitely some opportunities
there.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Culver, do you think NEPA should be
reformed?
Ms. Culver. That is a very broad question, Representative.
I think there is always room for improvement in how we
implement that law.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Stuart, once again, you are in Idaho,
correct?
Mr. Stuart. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Could the state manage more land if the
Federal Government was to dispose of it?
Mr. Stuart. Thank you for the question, but that is
probably a question for the state. I don't know what their
management capabilities are.
Mr. Tiffany. I appreciate that. Do you also have to get
state permits for the work that you do?
Mr. Stuart. Yes, if we cross state land, and a lot of it is
controlled by right-of-way. So, even if we cross Federal ground
that is a state highway, we have to get not only Federal,
state, but also county permits to be along that right-of-way.
Mr. Tiffany. And do you consult with all interested
parties?
Mr. Stuart. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Ms. McConkie, could the state of Utah manage
more land if it was transferred to them?
Ms. McConkie. We manage 3.4 million acres with a crew of
about 70. So, I think we could. We have been very efficient. I
am sure we could manage more land if it was in our portfolio.
Mr. Tiffany. Well, I appreciate that very much.
I don't know if any of you had questions here over the last
half hour or so that you wanted to share any additional
information. You are welcome to do that now. Otherwise, I am
going to close this hearing. Go ahead if you have anything else
that you would really like to add.

With that, I would like to thank all of you for your
testimony, and Members for your questions.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you, and we will ask that you respond to these in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Subcommittee
must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Tuesday, June 27, 2023. The hearing record will be held open
for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:37 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Prepared Statement of the Hon. Joseph D. Morelle, a Representative in
Congress from the State of New York
on H.R. 3250, National Museum of Play Recognition Act

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and distinguished Members
of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you on my
bill, H.R. 3250 the National Museum of Play Recognition Act.

My bill the National Museum of Play Recognition Act identifies that
the Margaret Woodbury Strong Museum, DBA Strong Museum, located in my
district Rochester, New York, is the only museum of its kind that
exists for the exclusive purpose of exploring the ways in which play
encourages learning, creativity, and discovery, and how it illuminates
cultural history. Furthermore, it officially designates the Margaret
Woodbury Strong Museum as the National Museum of Play.

The Strong Museum is a unique facility with over 100,000 square
feet dedicated to educational, dynamic, and innovative exhibit spaces.

Including the World Video Game Hall of Fame at which highlights
electronic games of all types that have enjoyed popularity over a
sustained period and have exerted influence on the video game industry
or on popular culture and society in general.

The Strong museum has recently announced its 90,000 square foot
expansion. This expansion will feature the world's largest, playable
Donkey Kong arcade game, standing nearly 20 feet tall.

Due to hard work of its staff the Strong Museum has remained a
museum of national importance year after year. I am incredibly proud to
lead this legislation to officially grant this exceptional museum with
the recognition it deserves.

I thank this Subcommittee for the opportunity to speak in support
of this bill and the Strong National Museum of Play.

______

Statement for the Record
National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 3025 and H.R. 3250

H.R. 3025, To provide for no net increase in the total acreage of
Federal land in the Virgin Islands National Park on St. John, United
States Virgin Islands

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the Department
of the Interior's views on H.R. 3025, a bill to provide for no net
increase in the total acreage of Federal land in the Virgin Islands
National Park on St. John, United States Virgin Islands.
The Department understands the land use realities the residents and
the Government of the U.S. Virgin Islands face on the Island of St.
John and is committed to working with the Government and its residents
to address the community's land use needs. However, the Department does
not support the approach taken by H.R. 3025 to try to address land use
issues. The Department prioritizes seeking solutions to quality of life
and resource protection matters in partnership with residents and their
elected officials and would welcome the opportunity to have further
discussions with the bill sponsor and the Committee on these matters.
H.R. 3025 would prohibit Virgin Islands National Park (park) from
acquiring any land that would increase the total amount of acreage
owned by the Federal government in the park, unless the park conveyed
out of Federal ownership an equal or greater amount of acreage of land
by sale, exchange, or donation. The bill would further require that
when the park elects to sell Federal land to avoid an increase in net
acreage, it must offer the land for sale within a year at fair market
value. If the land is not under contract or sold six months after it is
first offered for sale, the bill would require that the park reduce the
price of the land by ten percent each month thereafter.
Fundamentally, the Department disagrees with the concept of
requiring the Federal government to dispose of an amount of land equal
to an amount of land that it acquires in a given situation simply to
keep the number of acres of land owned by the Federal government the
same. Federal lands are an asset that belongs to all Americans and
should not be disposed of without a compelling public interest. When
Federal lands are conveyed to other entities, it is generally for an
identified public benefit, and in many cases the conveyance is
accompanied by a reverter clause that assures the land is used for the
purpose intended.
Under H.R. 3025, not only would the National Park Service (NPS) be
required to sell, exchange, or donate lands as Virgin Islands National
Park acquired other lands, it would be compelled to do so even if that
meant selling at prices below fair market value. The required
conveyance of lands from Virgin Islands National Park under H.R. 3025
could result in less land available for the benefit of the residents
and the public, and more land for private individuals and entities with
the means and resources to take advantage of artificially depressed
real estate prices. It would also threaten the protection of natural
and cultural resources that are not found anywhere else in the Virgin
Islands that are of deep importance to many Virgin Islanders and their
elected officials.
To complicate matters, within the congressionally established
boundaries of Virgin Islands National Park there are multiple
properties with life estates established decades ago that are due to
transfer completely to the NPS. Additionally, the original 5,000 acres
of land donated to create Virgin Islands National Park can only be
reverted to the original donor--an entity that is now defunct. Other
such deed restrictions, reversionary clauses, or easements exist on
park holdings. The complexity of landownership within the boundaries of
the Virgin Islands National Park would make implementation of this
legislation extraordinarily burdensome.
Through the use of existing authorities, the Department is
committed to working with the Government of the U.S. Virgin Islands and
its residents to address the community's land use needs, as we are
doing in our current effort to complete a land exchange between the
National Park Service and Government of the U.S. Virgin Islands to
build a school on St. John. In this effort, the Department's Office of
Insular Affairs (OIA) has been instrumental. The OIA serves critical
needs in the U.S. Virgin Islands by providing technical assistance and
financial support to a broad spectrum of territorial agencies as
requested through the territory's executive branch. Through the OIA,
the Department hears firsthand the critical territorial needs
pertaining to infrastructure, health, education, tourism, disaster
recovery and disaster preparation.
In 2017, hurricanes Irma and Maria devasted the island of St. John
and destroyed its public school. The Virgin Islands Department of
Education (VIDE) determined that the site of the severely damaged
elementary and middle school would not meet their redevelopment and
future needs. In order to access post-disaster hurricane funds from the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the construction of a
new school, VIDE would need to seek suitable land. Based upon new
curriculum standards and updated education building design standards,
VIDE identified a parcel of land within Virgin Islands National Park
that would be suitable to construct--for the first time on St. John--a
pre-K through 12th grade school.
For this exchange, the Government of the U.S. Virgin Islands, on
behalf of VIDE, worked the Department to exchange an uninhabited cay
within the park's legislative boundary which would enable the park to
undertake a more cohesive management and protection approach for the
adjacent beaches and waters. Understanding the needs of VIDE and the
requirements of the NPS, the territory selected these parcels for a
mutually beneficial exchange. Together, all of the parties have broken
through long-standing barriers to solve a critical need for the
residents: a new public school located on St. John that has the
potential to positively improve the educational outcomes and the
quality of life on St. John for generations to come.
Although conducting an exchange of Federal lands in the U.S. Virgin
Islands admittedly is a rare, expensive, and time-consuming endeavor,
this exchange serves as an example of how current authorities can be
used to address these needs when there is a strong commitment to
solutions to address quality of life and resource protection matters in
partnership with residents and their elected officials. Going forward,
the Department is committed to pursuing opportunities for collaboration
to find solutions to critical needs of the territory for unforeseen
events in the future, provide equitable solutions, and protect
conservation principles and covenants.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this statement for the
record.

H.R. 3250, National Museum of Play Recognition Act

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the Department
of the Interior's views on H.R. 3250, the National Museum of Play
Recognition Act.
H.R. 3250, the National Museum of Play Recognition Act, would
recognize the Margaret Woodbury Strong Museum in Rochester, New York,
and officially designate the Margaret Woodbury Strong Museum as the
National Museum of Play.
The Department does not have a position on H.R. 3250, as the museum
would not be located at a site that is under the jurisdiction of the
Department of the Interior.
This legislation explicitly states that this Museum is not a unit
of the National Park System, and that designation shall not be
construed to require or permit Federal funds to be expended for any
purpose related to the Museum.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this statement for the
record.

[all]
