- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ADVANCING TRIBAL SELF-DETERMINATION: EXAMINING. THE OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES OF THE 477 PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING TRIBAL SELF-
DETERMINATION:
EXAMINING THE OPPORTUNITIES AND
CHALLENGES OF THE 477 PROGRAM

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-106

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-273 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, March 20, 2024........................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     2

Statement of Witnesses:

Newland, Hon. Bryan, Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, DC............     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Friend, Hon. Billy, Chief, Wyandotte Nation, Wyandotte,
Oklahoma...................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10

Spoonhunter, Hon. Lee, Co-Chair, Northern Arapaho Tribe
Business Council, Ethete, Wyoming..........................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13

Zientek, Margaret, Co-Chair, P.L. 102-477 Tribal Work Group,
Shawnee, Oklahoma..........................................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Cook Inlet Tribal Council, Gloria O'Neill, President and
CEO, Statement for the Record..........................    27
U.S. Department of Justice, Assistant Attorney General
Carlos Uriarte, Letter to Chair Hageman................    32

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection
Fund, Statement for the Record.........................    33

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ADVANCING TRIBAL SELF-DETERMINATION: EXAMINING.
THE OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
OF THE 477 PROGRAM

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:28 p.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, Carl, LaMalfa; and Leger
Fernandez.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare a recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Advancing Tribal Self-Determination: Examining the
Opportunities and Challenges of the 477 Program. Under
Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at hearings
are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority Member. I
therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Today, the Subcommittee will hear testimony on
Advancing Tribal Self-Determination: Examining the
Opportunities and Challenges of the 477 Program. This continues
the Subcommittee's focus on tribal autonomy and the ways
Congress can support tribal self-determination, which has been
one of the priorities that we have pursued over the last year
since I have been Chairman of this Subcommittee.
In 1992, the Indian Employment Training and Related
Services Demonstration Act was signed into law. The Act
authorized a demonstration program that enables tribes to
coordinate and integrate multiple Federal programs focused on
employment and related support services into one program with
one budget and one annual report. We now know this program as
the 477 Program, referencing the public law number that
established it.
Over the past three decades, the 477 Program has been
highly successful. Current statistics show 78 active 477 Plans
across 38 Federal programs representing approximately 300
tribes. Tribes continue to use and integrate new Federal
programs into their tribal 477 Plans citing the benefits of
budget flexibility, reduced inefficiencies, and ability to
prioritize the programs that best help their tribal members.
When a tribe seeks to establish a 477 Program, tribal
members seeking to gain job skills or find better employment
can often fill out one form and go through one process rather
than needing to apply to multiple programs and to fill out
multiple forms. This flexibility and streamlined reporting
allows these 477 Programs to focus more on providing assistance
and guidance to tribal members rather than spending those
resources on multiple burdensome reporting requirements.
In 2017, Congress passed the Indian Employment Training and
Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017, which made the 477
Program permanent, expanded the number of eligible secretarial
departments to 12, and cemented the Bureau of Indian Affairs'
role as the lead agency for the 477 Program through the
Division of Workforce Development. The 2017 amendments also
required a Memorandum of Agreement, or MOA, to be completed by
all 12 secretarial departments outlining how the law would be
implemented.
However, the first MOA released in 2018 was released and
signed by all parties without any tribal consultation. It was
also criticized by both tribes and the Members of Congress as
something that did not follow the intent and letter of the 2017
amendments. A new MOA was written and finalized with tribal
input in 2022 and all 12 secretarial departments signed the new
MOA and the BIA and tribes are now in the process of
implementing and operating under it.
This Subcommittee has heard concerns from tribes related to
the implementation of the 2022 MOA, particularly with adding
new programs to a tribal 477 Program and ongoing challenges of
477 Program funds not being released to the tribes in a timely
manner. I will also mention that the American Indian Population
and Labor Force Report has not been published biannually, as
required by law, since the responsibility was moved by the 2017
amendments from the BIA to the Department of Labor.
I look forward to a robust discussion today about some of
the challenges the tribes have encountered when they seek to
expand their 477 Programs. I want to thank the witnesses for
being with us today and look forward to continuing the
conversation on improving tools that are available to support
tribal self-determination.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for
her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for
holding this hearing, and thank you to each of our witnesses
for coming to DC, I traveled with some of you, to share your
stories and experience because it is essential that we hear
directly by those who are most impacted about both the
obstacles and what it means when those obstacles are removed.
Public Law 102-477 really allows tribes to work with the
Department of the Interior to consolidate Federal funding and
programs for employment and training across 12 separate
agencies and manage under one 477 Plan. We have heard
repeatedly how important this is because we should not limit
ourselves just to the Department of the Interior or IHS. There
are so many other ways in which tribes interact with the
Federal Government and we must incorporate them and encourage
tribes to take over this because they know best how to handle
issues on their own reservations and for the people that are
their constituents.
In this Subcommittee, we often hear about the
administrative burdens tribes face in accessing those Federal
programs and funding. The 477 Program is one of those key
programs to address that issue of accessing Federal programs
and it can considerably lower the administrative burden tribes
face and simplify the reporting process. The program gives
tribes the authority to design and implement workforce
development and job training programs that can address critical
workforce needs in the communities and ultimately support
tribal self-determination.
The program's track record of success has led to the
Department of the Interior overseeing 78 477 Plans representing
298 federally recognized tribes. Over half of all federally
recognized tribes are using this program. In my home state of
New Mexico, the Pueblo Laguna was one of the first tribes in
the state to use the 477 Program, and I know of its success
there. They have used it to provide work experience
opportunities to youth, train and certify more teachers, and
support vocational rehabilitation services for their community.
In 2022, the Biden administration renegotiated the
interagency Memorandum of Agreement on the implementation of
the program. This new MOA resulted in an increase in proposals
for the 477 Program. The 2022 MOA streamlined plan approvals
and reaffirmed the authority of the Secretary of the Interior
to approve those 477 Plans. And most importantly, the agencies
worked directly with tribes and incorporated feedback from the
tribes themselves, which sounds like it would be a no brainer
to do that, right? This is about providing you with the funds
you need to carry out this workforce training. Unfortunately,
as the Chair noted, the prior administration had not
incorporated and conducted this consultation when that was
negotiated in the 477 in 2018.
I look forward to hearing from the tribal witnesses here
today regarding the impact of the program and success stories
we can build on. I also know there have been issues with
certain agencies following the intent of the law and that there
have been delays and that those delays directly impact tribes
trying to provide these services. I want to make sure that we
engage and are honest about those challenges and how things
like actually talking about it out loud can sometimes unstick
things, right? I say in my office that we are the WD-40 for
Federal agencies and that WD-40 should be applied liberally
because too many things get stuck, don't they, Madam Chair?
So, the 477 Program should be a model to follow across all
agencies to ensure programs work efficiently for tribes and
that we are indeed supporting economic development and tribal
self-determination throughout Indian Country.
Thank you again to all the witnesses and thank you for
holding this hearing, Madam Chair.
I yield back.

Ms. Hageman. Thank you very much. And now I will introduce
the witnesses for our panel. The Honorable Bryan Newland,
Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, Department of the
Interior, Washington, DC. You probably sometimes feel like you
live here. Maybe there is a sleeping bag under the desk up
here. But thank you for coming back and keeping us informed of
what is going on with your agency.
The Honorable Billy Friend, Chief, Wyandotte Nation,
Wyandotte, Oklahoma. Thank you for being here.
The Honorable Lee Spoonhunter, Co-Chair, Northern Arapaho
Business Council, Ethete, Wyoming. It is always wonderful to
have you testifying before our Committee.
And Margaret Zientek, Co-Chair, P.L. 102-477 Tribal Work
Group, Shawnee, Oklahoma. Welcome. We appreciate you being here
and look forward to hearing your testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record. To begin
your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button on the
microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the light
will turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will
turn yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement. I
will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify before
Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Bryan Newland for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRYAN NEWLAND, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
INDIAN AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good afternoon, Chair
Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee.
My name is Bryan Newland. I have the privilege of serving
as the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs at the Department
of the Interior, and I appreciate the opportunity to share the
Department's views on Public Law 477 today.
As you know, Madam Chair, this law allows tribes to
consolidate Federal funding from 12 agencies across the Federal
Government for employment, training, and related services. This
law empowers tribes to provide holistic services to clients
through a one-stop shop model that is consistent with self-
determination. Tribes with approved plans under Public Law 477
have reported a significant reduction in their administrative
burdens which allows them to focus on service delivery.
The Department is proud of the success we have had working
with Federal partners and tribal leaders to advance self-
determination under this law. In October 2022, each of the
Federal partners signed an interagency Memorandum of Agreement
that conforms to the statute and reflects the Administration's
commitment to supporting tribal sovereignty. We work to ensure
that tribes participated in the development of that MOA.
This new agreement streamlines plan approval procedures and
reaffirms the Secretary of the Interior's authority to approve
tribal plans under Public Law 477. This approach supports
tribal sovereignty and self-determination, it helps reduce
joblessness in Indian Country, it streamlines service delivery,
and it improves Federal customer service. After renegotiation
of that agreement, the Department has facilitated an agreement
now on 26 new 477 Plans, and as of today, the Department
oversees 78 477 Plans from 298 tribes, more than half of all
federally recognized tribes in the country.
Following the renegotiation of the MOA, tribes have
integrated programs from 7 of the 12 eligible Federal agencies
into 477 Plans. This law is beneficial for tribes because it
consolidates funding streams to a single point of access at the
Department as well as reporting requirements from each of the
Federal programs included in the tribal plan. Tribes with 477
Plans submit a single report under use of integrated funds
rather than multiple reports to multiple agencies for multiple
programs. This reduces the duplication of services and allows
for the central valuation of programs.
The 477 model of consolidated funds and streamlining
reporting has been a success. Participating tribes have stated
that it is the best delivery system for those programs, meets
their unique needs, while also allowing for appropriate
oversight. And, Madam Chair, as you noted at this
Subcommittee's recent hearing, the last time I was here a
couple of weeks ago, this principle of self-determination
allows tribes to engage in economic development in a way that
meets their basic and best interests.
While the Department is proud of the success that the
Federal partners have achieved in implementing this law, we
have identified the areas for potential growth and refining of
Public Law 477. First, under the law, the Department expects
Federal partners to transfer funds within 30 days of approval
of their 477 Plan. A delay in transferring funds may hamper
tribes' ability to deliver services to their citizens.
Second, the number of Federal programs integrated in the
477 Plans has grown significantly. As the lead agency under
Public Law 477, the Department is responsible for helping
Federal partners implement this law. Just this year, we are
providing technical assistance to 29 tribes and we are engaged
in discussions with two new agencies regarding integration of
their programs into Public Law 477, and it is a challenge to
keep pace with the significant growth in this program.
Finally, Public Law 477 is limited in scope. Only programs
implemented for certain purposes related to employment,
training, and related services may be integrated into Public
Law 477. One of the biggest challenges we face in implementing
this law is determining whether a program is eligible. Public
Law 477 empowers tribes to improve the effectiveness of their
programs, it reduces joblessness in Indian Country, and it
serves tribal goals consistent with the policy of self-
determination, and it does all of this while reducing
administrative, reporting, and accounting costs.
Madam Chair, Ranking Member, members of the Subcommittee, I
want to thank you again for the invitation to be here, it is
always a pleasure, and I look forward to answering any
questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Newland follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bryan Newland, Assistant Secretary for Indian
Affairs, United States Department of the Interior

Aanii (Hello)! Good afternoon, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Bryan Newland,
and I am the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs at the U.S.
Department of the Interior (Department or DOI). Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss opportunities and challenges of Public Law 102-
477 as amended (PL 477).
Background on PL 477

PL 477 allows Tribes to consolidate Federal funding from any of
twelve agencies for employment, training, and related services programs
based on a showing that a Tribe is implementing the funding for that
purpose. PL 477 empowers Tribes to provide holistic service to clients
through a ``one-stop shop'' model, a model especially poignant for
clients who would benefit from assistance to support their continued
employment, training, and self-sufficiency goals. Tribes with approved
plans under PL 477 (477 plans) have reported a significant reduction of
their administrative burden due to the consolidated funding streams and
reporting requirements, which allows them to focus more on direct
service delivery.
In passing Public Law 102-477 in 1992 (1992 Act), Congress intended
to reduce unemployment in Tribal communities by creating employment
opportunities consistent with the principle of Tribal self-
determination. The 1992 Act was also intended to increase the
effectiveness of employment and training programs by reducing and
streamlining administrative requirements through the consolidation of
budgeting, reporting, and auditing systems. However, the 1992 Act was
only a demonstration project and applied only to programs of the
Departments of the Interior, Labor, Education, and Health and Human
Services.
In 2000, Congress amended the 1992 Act to allow Tribes and Tribal
organizations more flexibility to use their funds for employment
creation and to provide clarity on waiver requests in Tribal plans. In
2017, Congress again amended the law in the Indian Employment, Training
and Related Services Consolidation Act of 2017 (P.L. 115-93) (2017
amendments). Congress made clear that the purpose of PL 477 is to
facilitate the ability of federally recognized Tribes and Tribal
organizations to integrate the eligible employment, training, and
related services they provide from different Federal sources, and is
aimed at reducing administrative, reporting, and accounting costs.
Congress also directed that the Department deliver any integrated PL
477 funding to a Tribe under contracting or compacting mechanisms
established by the Indian Self-Determination Education and Assistance
Act (P.L. 93-638) (ISDEAA).
Most notably in the 2017 amendments, Congress made the
demonstration project permanent, and expanded PL 477 to include
eligible programs from the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce,
Energy, Homeland Security, Housing and Urban Development,
Transportation, Veterans Affairs, and Justice. Today, there are twelve
Federal Departments that are authorized to participate in PL 477
(Federal partners).
Interagency Memorandum of Agreement

The 2017 amendments directed the Federal partners to enter into a
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) that governed implementation of PL 477.
In the last Administration, the Federal partners signed an MOA that was
written without Tribal consultation and was signed over the objection
of Tribes. Tribal governments sought renegotiation of the MOA for
several years thereafter.
In response, in October 2021, Vice President Harris committed that
the Biden Administration would ``renegotiate this agreement to support
Tribal sovereignty.'' After months of coordination with Tribes and
Federal partners, in October 2022, each of the Federal partners signed
an updated MOA that conforms closely to the statute and reflects the
Administration's commitment to supporting Tribal sovereignty.
The new MOA streamlines plan approval procedures and re-affirms the
decisional authority of the Secretary of the Interior regarding Tribal
PL 477 plan approval. This approach serves Tribal needs and furthers
key Administration policies, such as encouraging Tribal sovereignty and
self-determination to reduce joblessness in Indian Country,
streamlining service delivery, and improving Federal customer service.
At present, the Department is working with Federal partners and
Tribes to update the annual reporting form that Tribes use after they
have integrated their programs through PL 477. The Department looks
forward to sharing more information upon completion of a consensus
draft.
PL 477 Implementation and Successes

The Department is proud of the success we and our Federal partners
have achieved by promoting Tribal self-determination under PL 477.
Executive Order 14112 (EO) builds on this success and furthers it by
directing us to ensure that Federal programs provide Tribal Nations
flexibility to improve economic growth, address the specific needs of
their communities, and realize their vision for the future. The EO's
policies and directives will continue to guide the Department as we
implement PL 477.
As of March 2024, the Department oversees seventy-eight 477 plans.
Those plans represent 298 federally recognized Tribes, which is over
half of all federally recognized Tribes. Following the renegotiated
MOA, Tribes have integrated programs from seven of the twelve eligible
Federal agencies into PL 477 plans: the Departments of the Interior,
Health and Human Services, Labor, Commerce, Education, Housing and
Urban Development, and Justice.
The Department observed a significant increase in Tribal proposals
to integrate new Federal programs following the renegotiation of the
MOA. Prior to 2023, there were just 18 programs integrated. After
renegotiation of the MOA, Tribes proposed, and the Department
facilitated agreement on, 26 new programs. These include programs from
agencies participating in PL 477 for the first time--such as the
Department of Commerce's American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native
Hawaiian Projects, and the Department of Housing and Urban
Development's Indian Housing Block Grant--and programs from agencies
with a longer history in the PL 477 program--the Department of
Education's American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services program,
the Department of Labor's CAREER National Dislocated Worker Grants, and
the Department of Health and Human Services' Stephanie Tubbs Jones
Child Welfare Services Program. From these programs, the Department
facilitated the transfer of almost $316 million to PL 477-participating
Tribes and Tribal organizations in FY 23 and approximately $242 million
in FY 24 to date.
PL 477 is beneficial for Tribes because, in addition to
consolidating funding streams to a single point of access at the
Department, it also serves to consolidate reporting requirements from
each of the Federal programs. Tribes with 477 plans submit a single
report on their use of integrated funds, rather than multiple reports
for each program. Consolidation of multiple budgets to a single budget
reduces the duplication of services across programs, allows Tribes to
better use those funds, and allows for the centralized evaluation of
programs and operations. Tribes with integrated funds in PL 477
participate in annual A-133 financial audits, reviewed by the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA), and on-site monitoring reviews to ensure
compliance with the approved 477 plan. The BIA has not found any
significant incidents of non-compliance with 477 plans. The 477 model
of consolidating funds and streamlining reporting has been a success--
participating Tribes have stated that it is the best delivery system
for those programs and meets their unique needs while also allowing for
appropriate oversight of Federal funds.
The Department fosters collaboration with Federal partners by
coordinating monthly and annual meetings on the implementation of PL
477 with all twelve Federal agencies and the Tribes and Tribal
organizations that have approved PL 477 plans. These meetings serve as
a forum to discuss programmatic questions about integrating Federal
funding, reporting requirements, and implementation of administrative
rules and program instructions that impact participating Tribes. The
Department also provides technical assistance on request to Tribes
interested in PL 477 and to Federal partners about integration. This
takes a variety of forms, including regional and national technical
assistance with participating Federal agencies and Tribes,
participation in joint technical assistance with each of the
participating Federal agencies, or joint technical assistance with the
Department and other Federal partners to 477 Tribes at regional and
national trainings on PL 477-related topics. The Department works to
ensure that participating Tribes comply with statutory and regulatory
requirements.
Finally, at this Subcommittee's March 6, 2024 hearing, Chair
Hageman referenced the ISDEAA as a mechanism for economic development
that Tribes may use to do what they deem to be in their best interests.
The ISDEAA certainly allows for this goal and, with the additional
flexibilities of PL 477, Tribes have access to another economic
development tool--in some circumstances they can reallocate funds for
job-creation activities. Participating Tribes are aware of this and
have included economic development and job-creation activities in their
PL 477 plans. Economic development activities may include micro-loan
programs, coffee shops, language revitalization technology, support for
software and video game development, capital investments in businesses,
and childcare facilities. Job-creation activities include certification
of traditional language teachers, cultural and historic tourism,
licensed childcare providers, work experience, partnering post-
secondary and vocational technology institutions with science,
technology, engineering, arts and mathematics fields, and cultural or
traditional arts and crafts.
PL 477 Areas for Continued Growth

While the Department is proud of the successes that the Federal
partners have achieved in implementing PL 477, the Department has
identified areas for potential growth and refining of the PL 477
process.
First, under PL 477, DOI expects Federal partners to transfer funds
to the Department 30 days after DOI's integration decision. Given the
variety of funding systems in use across the Federal Government, the
need to close out agency grants mid-project period, and the creation of
different financial accounts for each transferring program, Federal
partners may not complete transfers within 30 days, which may be a
potential issue to further examine within the Federal Government. A
delay in transferring funds may hamper Tribes' ability to deliver
integrated services to Tribal citizens who are eligible for those
services. The Department is confident in carrying out its
responsibility to foster cooperation and a positive working
relationship among Federal partners in delivering funding to Tribes and
will work toward streamlining the process.
Second, as previously discussed, the number of Federal programs
integrated into 477 plans has grown significantly. The Department, as
the lead agency under PL 477, is responsible in helping Federal
partners implement PL 477, as it is an important tool for Tribes.
Furthermore, in 2024 alone, the Department is providing technical
assistance to 29 Tribes and is engaged in discussions with two new
agencies regarding potential integration into PL 477. It is challenging
for Department staff to keep pace with the significant growth in this
hugely successful program.
Finally, PL 477 is limited in scope, in that only programs
implemented for certain purposes related to employment, training, and
related services may be integrated into PL 477. One of the biggest
challenges agencies face in implementing PL 477 is determining whether
a program is eligible for integration. Once that determination is made,
Tribes may integrate programs and reallocate funds among the integrated
programs. From there, the Department can ensure performance of the
programmatic obligations, and Tribes can use the cost savings to
further advance integrated program goals. Because Tribes know their
communities and their needs better than the Department or other Federal
partners, this model works well.

Conclusion

PL 477 is a successful model for Tribes to provide employment,
training, and related services using multiple Federal resources. PL 477
empowers Tribes to improve the effectiveness of those services, reduce
joblessness in Indian communities, and serve Tribally determined goals
consistent with the policy of Tribal self-determination, while reducing
administrative, reporting, and accounting costs.

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the Department's
views.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Newland, for your testimony.

The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Billy Friend for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BILLY FRIEND, CHIEF, WYANDOTTE NATION,
WYANDOTTE, OKLAHOMA

Mr. Friend. Good afternoon, honorable members of the
Subcommittee. I thank you for inviting me here today to discuss
the 477 Program, a program whose principles could revolutionize
the way the United States delivers on its trust and treaty
obligations to Tribal Nations.
The bedrock principle of the 477 Program is to enable
tribes to exercise our inherent sovereignty in our use of our
Federal funds. The 477 Program accomplishes this by
streamlining and doing away with the administrative roadblocks
and putting more decision making in the hands of Tribal
Nations. Under the 477 Program, a tribe may combine Federal
funding from programs operated across the 12 Federal agencies
into one 477 Plan by the tribe to weave together the services
associated with the integrated programs. The tribe pulls all of
the integrated funding and can reallocate it across the
services provided in the 477 Plan.
Through our 477 Plan, we can best support our struggling
community members' efforts to become self-sufficient. Despite
the statutory mandates, some Federal agencies have tried to
maintain control over the decision-making and monitoring
processes within the 477 Program. To address these problems, we
secured an amendment to the 477 statute in 2017. Yet, in 2018,
the Federal agencies released an MOA that undid much of this
work and contradicted the 477 statute. We were forced to
wrestle with the government until securing a new MOA in 2022.
Since then, the Department of the Interior has applied the
477 eligibility criteria as directed by the 477 statute and
approved many new programs for integration, yet issues remain.
We believe these issues tie back to Federal agency concerns
about losing control over the programs that they operate. Many
are not accustomed to deferring to tribal sovereignty and
relying on tribes to do what is best for our own people.
Recently, we submitted a 477 Plan amendment to integrate
new programs, including two programs that are operated by the
Department of Justice. On February 26, DOI approved these
programs' integration. Prior to DOI's approval, the DOJ
representatives told us that they believed the programs were
not eligible. They also said that they had separate legal
authority allowing them to refuse to transfer program funding
into our 477 Plan.
We believe that they were taking the faulty and restrictive
position that only programs authorized specifically for
employment or training are eligible for inclusion in the 477
Plan. The narrow interpretation is not new. Congress set out to
make clear that supportive services are covered when it is
amended in the statute in 2017, and this restrictive
interpretation was an important problem fixed in the MOA. The
lived reality is that achieving stability and self-sufficiency
often requires wrap-around supportive services and Congress
recognized that.
But even the bigger program with the assertion the DOJ had
was that they had independent legal authority to refuse
transfer funding for a program approved by DOI. Again, Congress
made clear that DOI has the exclusive authority to decide a
program's 477 eligibility, and protecting the DOI's authority
to do this was an important issue addressed in the fixed MOA.
Further, the 477 statute makes clear that once DOI approves a
program, a Federal partner agency is required to transfer
program funds to DOI for integration within a set deadline.
In closing, we believe there is a significant momentum
towards a new way of thinking about expenditure of Federal
funds by Tribal Nations. We see the evidence of this in
Executive Order 14112 designed to reform Federal funding and
promote the next era of tribal self-determination. We believe
the foundational principles of the 477 Program can serve as a
blueprint for this reform.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Friend follows:]
Prepared Statement of Billy Friend, Chief, Wyandotte Nation

Good afternoon, honorable members of the Subcommittee. I thank you
for inviting me here today to talk about the important 477 Program--a
program whose principles could revolutionize the way the United States
delivers on its trust and treaty obligations to Tribal Nations.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The 477 Program was authorized under the Indian Employment,
Training, and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992, Public Law
102-477, which was amended in 2000, Public Law 106-568, and again in
2017, Public Law 115-93. The 477 Program is codified at 25 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 3401-3417.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benefits of 477 Program

The bedrock principle of the 477 Program is to enable Tribal
Nations to exercise our inherent sovereignty in our use of federal
funds. The 477 Program accomplishes this by streamlining and doing away
with administrative roadblocks and putting more decision making in the
hands of Tribal Nations.
Under the 477 Program, a Tribal Nation may combine federal funding
from programs operated across 12 federal agencies into one 477 plan.
The 477 plan is designed by the Tribal Nation to weave together the
services associated with the integrated programs to best support Tribal
community members in their efforts to achieve self-sufficiency.
The 477 Program strips away all other reporting requirements tied
to integrated programs, instead requiring one comprehensive annual
report on implementation of the 477 plan.\2\ It also allows Tribal
Nations to pool and reallocate federal funding integrated into a 477
plan across the services provided through the 477 plan.\3\ Integrated
funds that are not obligated or expended remain available without
fiscal year limitation.\4\ These are only a few of the 477 Program's
functions, all of which are designed to put more decision-making power
in the hands of Tribal Nations so that we can better respond to the
needs of our communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3410(a)(2)(A), (b).
\3\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 3413(a)(l)(A), (a)(2), 3410(b)(3).
\4\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3413(b)(l).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 477 statute sets forth three criteria that a program must
satisfy to be eligible for integration into a 477 plan. First, the
program must be operated by one of 12 covered federal agencies.\5\
Second, the program must be implemented for one of the enumerated and
broad covered purposes--one of which is ``encouraging self-
sufficiency.'' \6\ Third, in order for a program to be eligible for
integration into a 477 plan, it must receive a covered type of
funding.\7\ When a program meets these three eligibility criteria, as
determined by the Department of the Interior (DOI),\8\ it is eligible
for integration into a 477 plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(b).
\6\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(a)(l)(A).
\7\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(a)(l)(B), (a)(2).
\8\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3407(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Previous Implementation Issues and Steps Toward Resolution

Despite these statutory mandates, some federal agency partners have
taken steps to maintain control over the decision-making processes
within the 477 Program as well as monitoring of approved 477 plans. For
this reason, and to expand the 477 Program, Tribal Nations sought and
secured an amendment to the 477 statute in 2017. Among other
clarifications, Congress clarified that DOI is the decision-maker
regarding program eligibility and that the covered program purposes are
broad.
Yet, the next year, the federal agencies released a Memorandum of
Agreement (MOA) that undid much of this work and contradicted the 477
statute.\9\ After Tribal Nations and Congress called for this MOA to be
fixed, and Vice President Harris committed to addressing the issue, DOI
in 2022 issued a new MOA signed by the federal partner agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Letter from Tara Sweeney, Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs,
Dep't of Interior, to Tribal Leaders (Dec. 20, 2018) (transmitting
Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Consolidation Act of
2017 Interagency Memorandum of Agreement).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since then, DOI has applied the 477 program eligibility criteria as
directed by the 477 statute and approved many new programs for
integration.
Remaining Issues

Despite these important steps, issues remain.

For example, one federal partner took the position that some
funding associated with a program recently approved for integration
into our 477 plan could not be integrated. They claimed that, although
we still have this funding and only recently received it from the
federal agency, it was not eligible because it was tied to Fiscal Year
2023.
In another example, a federal partner took so long to approve our
request for a no-cost extension that we were required to halt spending
on that money and transfer costs to a different funding stream.
Further, we are aware that one federal partner is still requiring
quarterly reports on its integrated program despite the 477 Program's
mandate that all underlying reporting requirements fall away. And some
federal partners still require us to seek approval from them for
specific expenditures.
We believe these issues tie back to federal agency concerns about
losing control over the programs they operate. Many are not accustomed
to deferring to Tribal sovereignty and relying on Tribal Nations to do
what is best for our people.
DOJ Statements Regarding Program Eligibility and Transfer of Funds

Recently, we submitted a 477 plan amendment to integrate new
programs, including two programs operated by the Department of Justice
(DOJ): the Office for Victims of Crime Tribal Victim Services Set-Aside
Program; and the Office on Violence Against Women Tribal Governments
Program. On February 26, 2024, DOI approved these programs' integration
into our 477 plan through a written record of decision.
Prior to DOI's approval, during a virtual meeting that included
many officials from DOJ and DOI, DOJ representatives told us they
believed the programs were not eligible. Their position appeared to be
based on the faulty and restrictive position that only programs
authorized specifically for employment or training are eligible for
inclusion in a 477 plan. The DOJ representatives also told us they
believed they had separate legal authority that would allow them to
refuse to transfer program funding from DOJ to DOI for integration into
a 477 plan. They did not share the source of the legal authority they
referenced.
DOJ's narrow interpretation of covered 477 purposes was not new.
Congress set out to make clear that supportive services are covered
when it amended the statute in 2017, and this restrictive
interpretation was an important problem fixed in the MOA. The lived
reality is that achieving stability and self-sufficiency often requires
wraparound supportive services to get community members up on their
feet first.
But the even bigger problem was DOJ's position that it had
independent legal authority to refuse to transfer funding. This could
lead to other federal partner agencies making this claim when they want
to maintain control over a program. Again, Congress made clear that DOI
has the exclusive authority to apply the 477 program eligibility
criteria to approve or deny integration of a program. And protecting
DOI's authority to do this was an important issue addressed in the MOA.
The 477 statute also makes clear that, once a program is approved
for integration, a federal partner agency is required to transfer
program funds to DOI for integration into the 477 plan within a set
deadline. A federal partner not later than 30 days after the date of
apportionment must transfer the funding to DOI.\10\ And DOI must
distribute funds to the Tribal Nation through its 477 plan by not later
than 45 days after the date of receipt of the funds from the federal
partner.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3412(a).
\11\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3410(a)(2)(D)(ii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

We believe there is significant momentum towards a new way of
thinking about expenditure of federal funds by Tribal Nations. We see
evidence of this in Executive Order 14112, designed to reform federal
funding and promote the next era of Tribal self-determination.\12\ We
believe the foundational principles of the 477 Program can serve as a
blueprint for this reform.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Exec. Order 14112, Reforming Federal Funding and Support for
Tribal Nations To Better Embrace Our Trust Responsibilities and Promote
the Next Era of Tribal Self-Determination (Jan. 22, 2024).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Friend, for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Lee Spoonhunter for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LEE SPOONHUNTER, CO-CHAIR, NORTHERN
ARAPAHO TRIBE BUSINESS COUNCIL, ETHETE, WYOMING

Mr. Spoonhunter. Madam Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to speak on behalf of the Northern Arapaho Tribe.
My name is Lee Spoonhunter. I have been Co-Chairman of the
Tribe's Business Council since 2016 and had the pleasure of
serving as the Council's Chairman from 2018 to 2020. For over
20 years, I have dedicated my career to public service and was
a director of the Tribe's TANF and child support programs and
served as the Northern Arapaho Sky People Higher Education
Director. I also sit on HUD's Tribal Advisor Committee, HHS
Secretary's Tribal Advisory Committee, and the National Indian
Health Board, and I have consulted for other tribes, helping
with their social programs as well, so I understand how these
initiatives can impact our members.
Public Law 102-477 has been an important step towards
tribal self-governance. It has allowed for greater exercises of
sovereignty in managing Federal programs, it has increased
budget flexibility, reduced program inefficiencies, and allows
us to prioritize programs that help our people build
sustainable lives for themselves and their families.
Tribal governments are tasked with fostering the right
environment for our people to earn sustainable wages, provide
for their household, and establish strong economic communities,
and we must do this while staying true to embracing our
cultural heritage. In that spirit, the Northern Arapaho Tribe
leverages 477 programming to reduce joblessness, assist and
support individual family efforts to become self-sufficient,
encourage and support youth academic success, and to encourage
healthy lifestyles and cultural appreciation. We offer TANF
cash assistance, employment and training programs, work
experience programs, and assistance with childcare, and to date
we have had much success.
The Tribe has leveraged resources to help individuals
identify and remove barriers to work, gain work experience,
obtain and retain full-time employment, and advance in their
careers. Some participants have obtained a GED, others have
received CDLs, heavy equipment operator training, medical
assistance training, electrician apprenticeships, construction
experience, and more. We have been able to assist students
attending Central Wyoming College with their tuition, fees,
book purchases, and supplies. We have paid for substitute
teaching certifications as the demand for substitute teachers
following the pandemic remains high.
We have also leveraged resources in other ways including to
install playgrounds, provide language and culture camping kits
to use during tribal ceremonies, and provide backpacks filled
with school supplies. These are just some of the ways that we
have been able to benefit our people and encourage self-
sustainable and culturally-enriched lifestyles. We are proud of
our successes.
We must remain committed to improving 477. As this
Subcommittee is aware, government institutions do not always
operate with the utmost speed. Issues arise quickly and delays
stemming from red tape can create unnecessary hardships.
Meeting the challenges of our people requires flexible budgets
and agile government processes, and as the boots on the ground
and the governing body most familiar with the daily challenges
facing the Northern Arapaho people, we are the best positioned
to address these needs.
We look forward to working with this Subcommittee and other
government agencies to reduce any inefficiencies where possible
and appreciate the cooperative efforts of all agencies
involved. The sustainability of our culture and our economy is
dependent on the people that make up our communities. If we
want to ensure a long-time, self-sustainable future for
tomorrow, then we must make strategic investments in those
individuals and their families today. We remain committed to
harvesting the full potential of 477 to deliver effective
solutions to our people.
Thank you and I look forward to answering your questions
during this hearing.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Spoonhunter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lee Spoonhunter, Northern Arapaho
Business Council

I. Introduction

Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak on behalf of the
Northern Arapaho Tribe.

My name is Lee Spoonhunter. I am an enrolled member of the Northern
Arapaho Tribe and have been Co-Chairman of the Tribe's Business Council
since 2016 and served as Chairman from 2018 to 2020.

For over 20 years, I have dedicated my career to public service. I
had the pleasure of working for the Northern Arapaho Tribe's Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program for almost a decade. I
then went on to help build and improve the Northern Arapaho child
support program. Prior to being elected to the Business Council, I
served as the Northern Arapaho Sky People Higher Education Director.

In addition to my work for the Tribe, I serve on the Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Tribal Intergovernmental Advisory
Committee and have also worked as a consultant to several other tribes
to help with their respective TANF and Child Support programs. So, I
have seen, first-hand and for several decades, the needs of the
Northern Arapaho people and native people at-large.

Though not without its faults, Public Law 102-477 (``477'') has
been an important step towards tribal self-governance and sovereignty
in managing federal programs that affect our members. 477 has allowed
for increased budget flexibility, reduced program inefficiencies, and
allows the Northern Arapaho Tribe to prioritize programs that help our
people build sustainable lives for themselves and their families. This
testimony will discuss both the feats of, as well as key areas for
improvement for, 477.
II. Overview of Services

I will start by giving a general overview about how the Tribe
leverages 477 programs to empower Northern Arapaho tribal members and
adjacent native people.
As a government entity, our Business Council is tasked with
fostering an environment conducive to our people earning sustainable
wages, providing for their families, and establishing a strong
community. And we must do this while staying true to, and embracing,
our ever-important cultural heritage.
To that end, the Northern Arapaho Tribe leverages 477 to create
consolidated programming approved by the Business Council to achieve
the following goals: (1) to reduce joblessness; (2) to assist and
support individual and family efforts to become self-sufficient; (3) to
encourage and support youth academic success; (4) to encourage healthy
lifestyles and cultural appreciation; and (5) to strengthen the Tribe's
ability to reach tribally determined goals consistent with our status
as a sovereign entity.

477 programs are grouped into 5 main categories, including: (1)
TANF cash assistance programs, (2) employment and training programs,
(3) work experience programs, (4) childcare programs, and we also
provide programming for (5) general assistance. Most programs are
available to individuals that live on the Wind River Reservation, as
well as those residing in Fremont and Hot Springs Counties so long as
the household contains one or more Northern Arapaho child or
descendant.

Cash assistance. Our Tribe provides temporary cash
assistance services to participant families, with or
without children. Participants must meet certain
requirements, including developing and complying with an
Individual Self-Sufficiency Plan (ISP) or Family Self-
Sufficiency Plan (FSSP) as well as engaging in approved
work activities to strengthen the participant's employment
capabilities.

Employment and Training. We provide employment and
training services to participants that are members of a
federally recognized tribe and live either on the Wind
River Reservation or in Fremont or Hot Springs Counties.
Additionally, programs like the Native Employment Works
(NEW) program are designed to aid individuals who are
under-employed or unemployed on a one-time basis. The NEW
program has primarily provided services to individuals and
students attending the Wind River Job Corps.

Work Experience Programs. The work experience programming
has placed several workers in tribal departments, including
Enrollment, Senior Wood Program, Utilities, Senior
Citizen's Program, Housing, TERO, and childcare. Many of
these individuals were hired into permanent full-time
positions. Even for those who are not immediately hired, we
sometimes extend participants' hours until the employer has
capacity to hire them.

Childcare Programs. Through childcare programming, our
Tribe provides subsidized childcare assistance to low-
income families engaged in an approved work, education, or
job search activity. Childcare services are important to
nurture and strengthen families to become self-sufficient.

III. Success Stories

Implementing programming pursuant to 477 has been largely
successful and is helping the Tribe better assist individuals on the
reservation and in adjacent counties with moving towards personal
economic self-sufficiency.

The Northern Arapaho Tribe has used 477 programming to help
individuals identify and remove barriers to employment, gain work
experience, obtain and retain full-time paid employment, advance in the
workforce, and make steady forward movements to achieve unsubsidized
employment. Through leveraging our programs, some participants have
obtained a GED/HiSET. Others have received Commercial Driver Licenses,
Heavy Equipment Operators licenses, medical assistance training,
electrician apprenticeships, construction experience, and more.

The Tribe has also assisted students attending Central Wyoming
College with education costs, including tuition, fees, books and
supplies. And we have also paid for substitute teaching certifications
as the demand for substitute teachers following the pandemic has
remained high.
Other examples of ways we have been able to successfully leverage
477 include:

Installing playgrounds within our communities.

Providing Language and Culture Camping kits for home
providers to use during our tribal ceremonies. Kits
included first aid materials, flashlights, books, sunblock,
mosquito spray, an umbrella, face masks, hand sanitizer,
and other helpful materials.

Providing backpacks filled with school supplies.

Providing Halloween safety handouts and goody bags to
children.

Providing arts and craft kits during the winter holiday
months.

These are just some of the ways, both big and small, that we have
been able to leverage 477 programming to benefit individuals and
encourage economically self-sustainable, healthy, lifestyles.
IV. Challenges

While there have certainly been positive impacts resulting from 477
programming, the Northern Arapaho Tribe and the federal government can,
and must, continue to make improvements and increase efficiencies where
they are most beneficial.
As the Committee is well aware, government institutions are not
always the most expeditious entities. Often, issues arise at a pace
exceeding the speed of even our tribal government. Additional delays
stemming from multi-government processes, and accounting for agency
action, creates unnecessary hardships for our members. Meeting the
challenges of our people requires flexible budgets and agile government
processes. And as both the boots on the ground and the sovereign
governing body most familiar with the daily challenges facing the
Northern Arapaho people, we are best positioned to address these needs.
Of course, the Tribe appreciates the cooperative efforts of all
agencies. And we look forward to working with this Committee and other
government agencies reduce bureaucratic inefficiencies where possible.
V. Conclusion

The sustainability of our culture and economy is deeply dependent
on the people that compose our communities. If we want to ensure long-
term self-sustainability for tomorrow, then it is necessary that we
make strategic investments in those individuals and their families
today. Thus, we remain committed to harnessing the full potential of
477 to deliver increasingly effective solutions and meet the needs of
our people as it relates to employment, education, training, and
childcare. This is essential for the Tribe as a whole, as well as its
individual parts.

Thank you and I look forward to answering your questions during the
hearing.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Spoonhunter, for your
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Margaret Zientek for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARGARET ZIENTEK, CO-CHAIR, P.L. 102-477 TRIBAL
WORK GROUP, SHAWNEE, OKLAHOMA

Ms. Zientek. [Speaking Native language.] Hello, I am
Margaret Zientek. I am Co-Chair for Public Law 102-477. I have
served with my Tribe for 27 years and since the year 2000 have
been Co-Chair for the Tribal Work Group.
One of the key statements made earlier, when allowed to
function as Congress intended, the 477 Program has been a model
of success that we hope will be emulated and expanded across
Federal programs. There are some issues. There are some
successes. I hope to briefly tell you both.
Opportunities. The expansion of self-determination and
administrative flexibility. President Biden's Executive Order
14112 on reforming Federal funding and support for Tribal
Nations to better embrace our trust responsibilities and
promote the next era of tribal self-determination, we applaud
that step.
We also want to recognize the Department of the Interior
and the Division of Workforce Development has over the last
couple years stepped fully into its role as lead agency under
the 477 statute, as amended, and the best examples if the 2023
MOA, the modification of the MOA to correct it. They have
supported tribes, and as you heard Bryan Newland, Assistant
Secretary, state, they have very limited staff and are facing a
lot of interest. They need help. I am hoping that through the
Appropriations Committee we can help them.
The Work Group is also pleased to note that more programs
have been included, you have heard those already. There is a
reduction in reporting burden, which is a positive, if those 44
programs we operated were held outside of 477, that is 153
separate reports down to one. One three-part report.
It is a simplified grant process, renewal, we are still
working on that. We do have some that have used that well.
WIOA, Department of Labor, HHS Community Services Block Grant,
and I hope most recently working with Title 4B, we will get
there. We have challenges.
Unlawful holding of funds by DOJ. You have heard that
already spelled out, and threatening that they believe they
have authority to not move those funds.
Delayed funds transfer. There has been a significant
problem with certain agencies and programs transferring funds
to BIA. We understand one tribal organization right now is
waiting for almost 2 years for the Department of Commerce
Minority Business Development Agency to move those funds. Other
tribes seem to have issues with Bureau of Indian Education
funds. In your home state of New Mexico, Laguna Pueblo, was one
who suffered from that in 2000 at the height of the pandemic.
Two years of funds had been held. Sent to central but never
sent to the tribe.
There was a failure to reallocate PEAF, Pandemic Emergency
Assistance Programs. First, DHHS TANF said you can't put that
in 477, then tribes advocated why. They put it in 477. Then
they wanted separate reporting. We advocated and explained you
can't do that, that is contrary to 477. And then because they
couldn't identify what funds might be available for
reauthorization, again against 477 law, tribes were not allowed
to participate in the reauthorization or the distribution of
those funds.
Unlawful meddling in tribal hires. Citing 2 CFR 200,
Uniform Guidance regulations, some Federal agencies, including
the Department of Education, have been requiring Federal
approval for personnel decisions made by tribes and tribal
organizations operating pursuant to Public Law 102-477 Plan.
This is contrary to the letter and spirit of the 477 statute
and nothing in Part 200 Regulation allows or requires.
There is an inconsistent compliance supplement. The May
2023 OMB Compliance Supplement has detailed requirements
regarding the investment of 477 funds. However, 25 U.S.C.
3413(g)(2) requires that only those funds are managed in
accordance with the prudent investment standard. We are asking
OMB to correct that immediately.
Failure to provide a labor force report. That was in the
law in 2017. We have yet to see one and we need that. It is
potentially affecting funding for tribes.
In conclusion, I thank you for that chance. I do want to
restate something that Assistant Secretary Bryan Newland
stated. He referred to it as limited in scope. Tribes determine
what is related to determining eligibility, so tribes determine
employment training and what is a related service. It is up to
tribes to make that. And I thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Zientek follows:]

Prepared Statement of Margaret Zientek, Co-Chair, 477 Tribal Work Group

Chair Hageman and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony during this important hearing on the
477 Program. My name is Margaret Zientek, and I appear today as Co-
Chair of the 477 Tribal Work Group. The Work Group represents the
approximately 300 federally recognized Tribes and Tribal Organizations
that are served through the 78 current 477 Plans, as well as Tribes and
Tribal organizations that are currently interested in joining the 477
Program. I am also the Director for the Workforce and Social Services
Department for the Citizen Potawatomi Nation, of which I am an enrolled
citizen. The Citizen Potawatomi Nation has operated a 477 program for
almost three decades, and I have served in my national capacity for
almost two of those decades, including serving as a Tribal
representative on the Pub. L. 102-477 Administrative Flexibility
Workgroup leading up to the 2017 amendments, a Tribal representative
during the negotiations that led to the 2023 Interdepartmental
Memorandum of Agreement implementing the 477 statute as amended, and
currently on the federal/Tribal work group developing an updated 477
reporting form.

The 477 Program is a critical federal initiative designed to reduce
administrative burdens and support Tribal self-determination by
allowing Tribes and Tribal Organizations to integrate multiple
federally supported Tribal programs into a single program governed by a
single 477 Plan approved by the Department of the Interior (DOI). In
turn, the Tribe or Tribal Organization reports back on an annual basis
using a single consolidated reporting form. I am pleased to report to
the Committee that, when allowed to function as Congress intended, the
477 Program has been a model of success that we hope will be emulated
and expanded across federal programs. However, there are still a few
issues in implementation that must be noted for the Committee.

Opportunities

Expansion of Self Determination and Administrative Flexibility: The
477 Tribal Workgroup has been heartened to see President Biden's
Executive Order 14112 on ``Reforming Federal Funding and Support for
Tribal Nations to Better Embrace Our Trust Responsibilities and Promote
the Next Era of Tribal Self Determination'' and its emphasis on
increasing flexibility in Tribal Nations' use of federal funding to
better promote tribal self-determination. The 477 Program fits exactly
into that role, and we have been pleased to see some federal agencies
truly embrace that mission.

For example, DOI, and its Division of Workforce Development (DWD),
has over the last year or so stepped fully into its role as Lead Agency
under the 477 statute, as amended, and the 2023 MOA. DWD has supported
Tribes and Tribal Organizations through the Plan approval and amendment
processes as more Tribes join the Program and more programs are
integrated, interfaced appropriately with the other federal agencies,
and stood up for implementation of the 477 law as written and intended
by Congress. Unfortunately, there is more work for that Office to do
than can be done with the current resources available. The Work Group
urges the Committee to work with its colleagues on the Appropriations
Committee to provide additional resources to be used toward these
goals.

In addition, the Work Group is pleased to see the integration of
more and more programs integrated under 477 Plans, including recently
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Family Violence
Prevention and Services Program (FVPSA), and the Department of Justice
(DOJ) Victims of Crime Act Tribal Victims Services Set-Aside Program
(TVSSA) and Office on Violence Against Women Grants to Tribal
Governments Program (GTG). Integration of these programs into 477 Plans
will allow Tribes and Tribal Organizations to provide comprehensive
services that supports the goals of both the underlying programs and
the 477 Program as a whole.

Reduction in Reporting Burdens: Another positive development has
been the overall reduction in reporting burden imposed on Tribes and
Tribal organizations that are operating 477 Programs. If a Tribe were
to operate each of the 44 federal programs currently integrated under a
477 Plan independently, for example, that Tribe would be required to
provide at least 153 different individual reports. Under the 477
Program, that burden is reduced to a single three-component annual
report and the resources that would have otherwise gone to developing
each of those individual reports can instead be used to provide
services to the community. The current 477 annual report form will
expire in November, 2024 and a federal/Tribal work group is currently
working on a simplified cumulative report. The Work Group appreciates
all of the affected federal agencies' participation and forward
thinking during that process.

Simplified Grant Renewal Processes: On a similar note, the Work
Group has been pleased to see some agencies embracing a simplified
grant renewal process for programs that have been integrated under a
477 Plan. Tribal grantees understand that to include a grant within 477
Plan, the Tribe must apply for that grant. Certain agencies have
acknowledged possible inclusion in a 477 Plan and provide specific
instructions or even a simplified path for Tribes or Tribal
Organizations to move forward as they apply to renew their grants. Some
examples include the Department of Labor's Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act (WIOA) Program, and HHS' Community Services Block Grant
(CSBG) Program.
Challenges

Unlawful Holding of Funds by DOJ: As noted earlier, following the
477 statute, BIA recently approved a Tribe's 477 Plan amendment to
integrate DOJ's TVSSA and GTG programs. This should have been
straightforward, as those programs are clearly able to be integrated
because the Tribe proposed to implement those programs ``for the
purpose of job training, [job] skill development, assisting Indian
youth and adults to succeed in the workforce, and encouraging self-
sufficiency,'' as well as ``services related to th[ose] activities''
under 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(a)(1). During the plan review process, DOJ
disagreed with the integration of these programs, under the view that
Tribes may only integrate programs that are specifically authorized for
employment and training. Congress specifically rejected that view in
developing the 2017 amendments to the 477 statute (in fact, that was
one of the main purposes of the 2017 amendments), and the affected
federal agencies did as well in the 2023 MOA. The Work Group
understands that DOJ is now taking the position that it can refuse to
transfer the funds even though the plan amendment has been approved.
This is flatly contrary to the 477 statute's funds transfer
requirements,\1\ and if allowed to stand, would undermine both the 477
Program and this Committee's work in developing those funds transfer
requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3411(a)(2) and 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3413(a)(1)(B).

Delayed Funds Transfers: There also remains a significant problem
with certain agencies and programs transferring funds to BIA to be
passed on to Tribes and Tribal Organizations operating 477 Programs.
The Work Group understands that one Tribal Organization has been
waiting for funds from the Department of Commerce's Minority Business
Development Agency for more than a year. Similarly Tribes and Tribal
Organizations have been waiting for Bureau of Indian Education funds
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
have been delayed by nearly two years.

Failure to Reallocate PEAF Funds: Another major issue was the HHS
and Administration for Children and Families (ACF) implementation of
the Pandemic Emergency Assistance Fund (PEAF) with regard to 477 Tribes
and Tribal Organizations. PEAF authorized $1 billion in spending to
states, Tribes, and territories to assist families impacted by the
COVID-19 Pandemic.\2\ The statute instructs governments managing PEAF
funding to spend the emergency funds by the end of the fiscal year
2022.\3\ ``All funds . . . that are unused'' were then to be reallotted
to the ``States and Indian tribes eligible for funds under this
subsection'' that used all of their PEAF funding.\4\ From the outset,
ACF demonstrated a resistance to--and fundamental misunderstanding of--
the 477 program. ACF initially did not intend to allow Tribes to
integrate PEAF funding into the Tribes' 477 funds.\5\ After tribal
consultation, ACF transferred PEAF funds for Tribes that integrate
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families funds under a 477 Plan to the
BIA.\6\ However, ACF included instructions that tribes must track and
report on PEAF funds separately within the Tribes' 477 plans. ACF later
acknowledged that those instructions were contrary to the 477 law.\7\
Later, ACF issued an information memorandum that once again violated
the text and purpose of 477 statute. Without any Tribal consultation,
ACF decided not to reallot PEAF funding to 477 Tribes. According to
ACF, because 477 Tribes report in a single reporting form, the agency
could not determine whether the 477 Tribes had ``unspent'' PEAF funds
to be collected and reallocated. Therefore, it left 477 Tribes out of
distribution of unspent PEAF funds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 603(c)(1).
\3\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 603(c)(6)(D).
\4\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 603(c)(4)(b)(i).
\5\ Off. of Family Assistance, TANF-ACF-PI-2021-04, The Pandemic
Emergency Assistance Fund (2021).
\6\ Id.
\7\ Off. of Family Assistance, TANF-ACF-IM-2023-01, Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families Information Memorandum (2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This was wrong on several levels. First, at the most fundamental
level, once federal grant funds are transferred to a 477 Tribe and
integrated into a Tribal 477 Program under a Plan, they become 477
funds and are administered under the Plan ``notwithstanding any other
provision of law.'' In other words, there was no such thing as
``unspent'' PEAF funds to be recaptured. And under the plain words of
the American Rescue Plan statute, 477 Tribes were clearly eligible to
receive reallocated funds.
Not only was leaving 477 Tribes out of PEAF reallocation unlawful
under the American Rescue Plan, it was unlawful under the 477 statute.
The statute says: ``In no case shall the amount of Federal funds
available to an Indian tribe that has in place an approved plan under
this chapter be reduced as a result of . . . the enactment of this
chapter; or . . . the approval or implementation of a plan of an Indian
tribe under this chapter.'' \8\ By excluding Tribes with 477 plans from
the PEAF reallotment, ACF reduced the amount of federal funding
available to 477 Tribes simply because they are 477 Tribes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3411(a).

Unlawful Meddling in Tribal Hires: Citing to the 2 CFR Part 200
Uniform Guidance regulations, some federal agencies, including the
Department of Education, have been requiring federal approval for
personnel decisions made by Tribes and Tribal organizations operating
pursuant to a 477 Plan. This is contrary to both the letter and spirit
of the 477 statute, and nothing in the Part 200 regulations allows or
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
requires this action.

Inconsistent Compliance Supplement. The May 2023 OMB Compliance
Supplement has detailed requirements regarding the investment of 477
funds. However, 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3413(g)(2) requires only that those
funds are ``managed in accordance with the prudent investment
standard.'' OMB should update the compliance report to be consistent
with the statute.

Failure to Provide a Labor Force Report: In the 2017 amendments to
the 477 Statute, Congress required the Department of Labor to provide a
Labor Force Report. DOL never developed such a report, and in 2022,
transferred that responsibility to the Census Bureau. In September
2022, the Census Bureau provided an update to the Tribal Workgroup, but
has since provided no additional information--despite the Work Group's
requests for update. No Labor Force Report has been issued.

Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Ms. Zientek, for your testimony.
The Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes of
questioning beginning with myself.
Several witness statements have mentioned that tribes have
encountered issues with other departments and agencies outside
of the Department of the Interior while implementing their 477
Plans.
Mr. Newland, how does the BIA work with a tribe to resolve
these issues and has the BIA found that agencies are generally
helpful in resolving these types of situations?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Madam Chair. We have been working
very hard under the interagency agreement that I think every
witness mentioned in their testimony. The law itself
contemplates that agencies are going to disagree at times about
the scope of 477, and I think you have heard some of that from
some of the witnesses today. We have been working to make sure,
along with our agency partners, that we are meeting the terms
of the law as Congress has intended, and we know that Congress
has amended Public Law 477 several times to make it clear to
Federal agencies that Congress means what it says, that tribes
can bundle these programs together and integrate them into a
single plan.
So, the new MOA is less than 2 years old at this point, and
I think we have had success on the whole with implementing it.
But as you heard from Ms. Zientek just now, there have been
some challenges. We are trying to work through them, but again,
in all of our conversations with our agency partners, we
emphasize that it is the 50-year policy of the United States,
as embodied by Congress, as reaffirmed by the President, as
affirmed by the Secretary and all the other cabinet secretaries
who have signed this MOA, that we should be guided by self-
determination in allowing tribes to set the agenda on how these
funds are used.
Ms. Hageman. I appreciate that, and I do want to note for
the record that today we received a letter from the Department
of Justice, DOJ, and it relates to the Wyandotte situation with
the Department indicating that these programs or these grants
will be expedited and moving forward quickly. We appreciate
that information and we appreciate you continuing to work with
the agencies and tribes themselves to make sure that we can
address these and carry out the intent of Section 477.
Your written statement mentioned that the Department is
working with partners and tribes to update the annual reporting
form for the 477 Program. What necessitated the update to this
form and what other data is useful to capture in the annual
reporting?
Mr. Newland. I am sorry, Madam Chair, would you repeat the
first part of your question?
Ms. Hageman. Yes. What necessitated the updating of this
form, why was it necessary to do so, and what other data would
be useful to capture in the annual reporting?
Mr. Newland. One of the reasons we need to update the form
is to make sure that there is consistency and simplicity, which
again is what Public Law 477 envisions and we want to make sure
that tribes are not having to use all manner of different forms
depending on what programs they are integrating into their 477
Plan, so that is really the impetus behind this.
In terms of additional information that might be useful, I
would have to offer to get back to you on that one, Madam
Chair, because I want to be inclusive to aid the Committee in
any solutions you may be considering.
Ms. Hageman. OK, I appreciate that.
Mr. Spoonhunter, in your written statement you mentioned
that bureaucratic inefficiency should be reduced where
possible, and I wholeheartedly agree with that and, in fact,
this morning had a Judiciary Subcommittee hearing dealing
specifically with administrative and bureaucratic issues. Could
you elaborate further on where Northern Arapaho has seen these
inefficiencies in the 477 Program and what changes would
improve these inefficiencies. What do you recommend that we do?
Mr. Spoonhunter. Thank you for the question, Madam Chair.
Under the 477 law, it was developed, a single program with
simple reporting requirements, as stated. There are some
reports, though, from different agencies that fit under the 477
umbrella that still require separate reporting, duplicating
reporting on behalf of staff. You have a tribe of 10,600 in
Northern Arapaho, you have 27 staff members there who can work
on these reports. But you have tribes that are anywhere from
100 to 500 people and there are only two or three people within
that program. So, having to duplicate these reports, you are
taking staff time away from the staff that can work on the
needs and services of the tribal people.
And also, with the TANF program, for example, the other
programs that the funding awards which are transferred over to
the Department of the Interior to put under the 477 umbrella,
those funds come in a single award at the beginning of the
fiscal year. Unfortunately, you have the TANF program which
does not do this. The TANF program under HHS ACF does not give
the full funding award at the beginning of the fiscal year, so
you compromise the services that are able to be met by the
program to the clients and to the tribal members by the lack of
funding that is received from TANF.
Ms. Hageman. Just very quickly, do you believe that these
are changes that could be done administratively or do you
believe that the law itself needs to be changed?
Mr. Spoonhunter. These are program administrative changes
that can be done within the agencies. And if we can move them
that way, that provides better services and more effectively
and to and in country for the tribal people.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member for her 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much for the summary of
the things that are working right. It sounds like with the 2022
renegotiated memorandum that the Biden administration did make
huge gains. It sounds like, because you are the ones who worked
really hard to get those 2017 amendments in, so it must have
been incredibly frustrating when in 2018 there was an MOA that
you were left out of the process. So, what I heard was 2022,
you liked that, you liked the Biden administration Executive
Order because that has moved forward.
But one of my concerns is the fact that we have had these
delays even with the new MOA, even with the new law of the
funding, and I think it is really important to have the
Subcommittee here so that the Assistant Secretary can go back,
you don't understand, this is what it means when you don't move
quickly, right, because you in many ways have to take those
voices and educate, and in a very nice way I know, your fellow
agencies.
But if I could hear from the perspective of the Northern
Arapaho and the Wyandotte, share with us what happens when
there are these delays. If you could real quickly just say what
does it mean to your tribe when there is this delay in getting
this funding forward. Mr. Spoonhunter, we will start with you.
Mr. Spoonhunter. With the 477 Program, as you know, it is
designed to meet the needs of our tribal people, specific needs
of Indian Country that states, they follow a universal pattern
is where you can't do the cookie cutter approach with tribes.
So, the specific needs that tribes have, the funding that they
receive is very vital that these program funds come in at the
beginning of the fiscal year. Again, I talk about the services
that are provided to our children and to our families that are
served under 477.
Now, we compromise those services by these delays when
these funds aren't delivered over to the Department of the
Interior in a timely manner. So, working together, I believe
that if we can have agencies come on board to be giving the
funding award to the Department of the Interior in a timely
manner, we better serve our community, we make success for
future generations to come, and that is what it is all about.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you. And, Chief Friend, could
you share with us real quickly what it means when a tribe
doesn't get these funds through that you had been expecting.
Mr. Friend. Thank you. It is a larger issue, especially
when it comes to the reporting aspect because it takes a lot of
our time away from our staff that could be serving the clients
in our program, when they are burdened down with a lot of
different reports, whether it is quarterly reports, the
different agencies that are part of that, it reduces the
administrative burdens that we can spend more money on
providing those direct services to the clients that are in
need.
So, instead of the staff consumed with reporting
requirements, they actually are freed up to help those in the
community that are actually in need, whether it be in
workforce, whether it be childcare, whether it be educational
services, the reduced administrative time means more time spent
with our clients.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you. And for the last question,
I want to move in a forward-looking basis. So, Ms. Zientek, if
you could quickly say, one of the issues is right now, I am
saddened that not more agencies actually participate, right,
that not all the agencies are eligible to participate. Thank
you very much, your written testimony was great laying out the
things.
Where do you think we should push so that there is more
participation, that you think would make a big difference? And
if you can be quick because I also want to hear from Mr.
Newland on that issue.
Ms. Zientek. Each tribe determines what is best for them,
so if we could get past this dance that we do with agencies and
educate them and educate how to work together. We have offered
to work with the Department of the Interior Staff Division of
Workforce Development and train these agencies, educate them on
this. I understand the issue with DOJ and the letter just
received today, they finally got in their head, yes, we do have
to move the money. So, that education piece could help.
But it is going to depend on tribes. As you heard earlier,
it is not cookie cutter. We each make our own decision of what
works for us in our area and no two tribes' programs will be
the same.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. And we have run out of time, so
I would love to hear your thoughts and response in writing to
the questions because I have run out of time.
With that, I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
Representative from California, Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me, kind of a
sidebar with Secretary Newland for a moment. Just wanted to
point out or remind, up in my general area, the Coquille Tribe
up north of my district, the Oregon side, we have where two
dozen Representatives and Senators from California and Oregon,
they represent over 60 tribes and they have written to express
that the Coquille Tribe's proposal to build a new casino 170
miles from their own existing lands, that the casino doesn't
really fit within the spirit or actually comply with the law,
harms other tribes, and should be rejected by the Department.
So, I hope you have had a chance to take heed of this guidance
and this request and that maybe the Department will be informed
on this that they have decided to reject the project.
So, if the Department is indeed going to stick with its own
regulations, its own requirements, then its responsibility is
to all the tribes across the board. I just wanted to put that
out, and I know you have that ongoing, and I think that is
still a strong opinion in the neighborhood, so thank you.
I am going to turn to Chief Friend here. We have heard
about examples of Federal agencies which are not properly
implementing the 477 Program. In the one example, the agency
has told the tribe to continue issuing quarterly reports even
though that requirement supposedly had been rescinded. And then
in another example, the agency is insisting that it must sign
off and approve specific expenditures that the tribe would be
making.
So, of course, with the title of the hearing being about
self-determination and tribal autonomy, how do examples like
that fit with the rechanneling of the 477 Programs? Have you
had a chance to bring up these disputes with the BIA and have
they taken any actions to correct the over-reach in those
areas?
Mr. Friend. As far as the DOJ, which is one of the examples
that we gave, we hope that this situation is going to be
resolved. We have been working closely with DOI, and DOI has
greatly supported us and the BIA in this matter. The
flexibility to use those funds, applying the 477 Program
eligibility across these programs for DOJ with regards to
ensuring DOJ transfers the approved funds, DOI has set up a
meeting, in fact, for later this week I believe with the
Wyandotte and the DOJ. This, of course, is before we were made
aware of the letter that was issued today by the Department of
Justice.
And just to say we did have the opportunity to glance at
that letter that was submitted to the hearing. It appears to
maintain the position that DOJ can refuse to transfer dollars
in other situations. I think that was the last paragraph. So,
while we feel like the letter did state that they would
transfer the funds, I think there probably is a need for some
clarification with what they mean by in other situations.
But some of the examples that we gave, for example, LIHEAP
requires a separate report, TANF have long required a quarterly
report, despite significant pushback from tribes with the DOJ
prior to integration of our new program in the 477, DOJ was
requiring approvals for costs that are already covered by the
grant, so we hope that it can be made clear to all Federal
partners, agencies, and staff that their independent oversight
automatically falls away once a program is integrated into 477.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Chief Friend?
Mr. Friend. We hope that they realize that those reporting
requirements are dropped.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. Let me direct that also to
Secretary Newland, that again with imposing these new
requirements in the 477, which is against congressional intent
and the Department's implementation for the program, shouldn't
the Secretary be stepping in to uphold the integrity of the
program and not have it continue this way?
Mr. Newland. Thank you, Congressman. We are attempting to
do just that. I think when we look back at the adoption of the
Self-Determination Act 50 years ago, we saw a lot of resistance
in different Federal agencies to tribal control over Federal
programs in tribal communities. And I think we have a similar
experience here in some pockets of the Federal Government with
retrograde paternalistic views when it comes to tribes, but my
view is Congress has made its intent clear with Public Law 477.
The President and the cabinet have subscribed to that view
of self-determination and we are going to work through it and
make sure that we are fulfilling Congress' intent, empowering
tribes and not leaving these decisions in the hands of small
offices and different Federal agencies.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chairman now recognizes
Representative Carl.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mr. Spoonhunter, it is always a pleasure to see you, sir.
You always have that smile on your face and I appreciate it.
I know I sound like a broken record, but it is worth
emphasizing that only those who live it, truly understand it.
The bureaucratic agencies in Washington, who do not see the
real time impact, must take steps back and prioritize the
voices of those directly affected. The Indian Employment
Training and Related Services Act of 1972, or the 477 Program,
is instrumental in empowering the tribal communities through
self-determination by simplifying access to critical services
and reducing administrative burdens.
With that in mind, I would like to hear your perspective on
two important aspects, and I will give them to you separately.
Given the challenges and opportunities of highlighting during
this hearing, what recommendations do you propose we impose on
implementing the 477 Program and further enhancing its
effectiveness in supporting the tribal community?
Mr. Spoonhunter. Thank you for the question, Representative
Carl. It is always good to see you also.
As Ms. Zientek said earlier, we do a song and dance with
all these agencies all the time. We are trying to educate and
convince at some point to some agencies why these programs
should be under 477. With the resiliency of tribes as we have
worked together with our government the best way that we can,
there are a lot of programs that need to go under 477, we could
be here all day to talk about them.
But again, as you have seen time and time again as a
Committee that the 638 self-determination, self-governance and
477 Programs work together. I think the agencies need to sit
down with the Department of the Interior and need to be
educated on why tribes are seeking funding and putting these
programs under 477. They need to come to Indian Country and see
why each tribe is very unique in their situation and why they
want to do this program under 477.
Mr. Carl. My second question, can you share some success
stories or key achievements your tribe has experienced as a
result of participating in the 477 Program and how it has
contributed to advancing the tribal's self-determination?
Mr. Spoonhunter. On the Wind River Reservation, we have
about a 74 percent unemployment rate, which is very high at
Wind River, and at one point one of our elders told our Tribal
Council that the bridge out of poverty is education. So,
through traditional education, cultural-based education, we
have moved to enhance our work with traditional higher
education and also vocational training, but also to think
outside the box, and that is what this program is all about is
thinking outside the box, is how do we educate and train our
tribal members to go to work, to be culturally-based, self-
sufficient, and self-sustainable, healthy families.
Mr. Carl. And you and I have talked about this before, but
we are in need of about 6,000 to 8,000 welders, pipe fitters,
and CDL drivers, and I heard you talk about CDL earlier,
drivers in the Mobile, South Alabama area, and any one you want
to send us, we will take them. So, thank you again. Thank you
to the entire group for coming and speaking to us.
Madam, I return my time.
Ms. Hageman. I want to thank the witnesses for your
valuable testimony today. I think that any time we have a new
program that goes into place, it is important to have a look
back and understand what is working and what is not and then
working with either the agency or Congress itself to make the
changes that are going to make it work better. It has been a
priority of myself and I know Ms. Leger Fernandez as well to
make sure that we do have the autonomy and the sovereignty, and
when I hear things like about the unemployment rate within the
Northern Arapaho Tribe, it makes me that much more intent on
trying to address that and provide the services, the training
necessary, and the education so that we can bring these folks
out of poverty and make them a very functioning member of
society.
So, we really do appreciate your involvement today. We have
had a lot of hearings over the last couple of days because we
are just getting ready to go back into a recess on Friday, so I
know some of our other Members are in other hearings right now
or they would have been here. They know that this is an
important issue. This has been a very bipartisan Subcommittee I
believe throughout the last 14 months in attempting to address
and resolve these issues and bring people in to better educate
us on the issues that need to be addressed in Indian Country.
So, I wish that we had a bit more participation today, but
again I believe it is in part because of the other hearings
that are going on and people getting ready to head back to
their districts.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask for you to respond
to these in writing. I believe there is one question at least
directed at you, Mr. Newland, and if you could provide us that
information, I think it would be very helpful.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Subcommittee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on Monday,
March 25, 2024, and the hearing record will be open for 10
business days for your responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:22 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Westerman

Statement for the Record
Gloria O'Neill
President and CEO
Cook Inlet Tribal Council
Anchorage, Alaska

Chair Hageman and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony for this important hearing on the 477
Program. I have had the privilege to serve as President and CEO of Cook
Inlet Tribal Council (CITC) for 30 years, during the entirety of which
CITC has successfully operated a 477 Plan integrating our employment
and training and supportive services with our holistic, wraparound
comprehensive services that connect individuals and families to life-
changing self-determination.

CITC BACKGROUND:

CITC serves as the primary education and workforce development
center for Alaska Native and American Indian (AN/AI) people in the
Anchorage area. Approximately 70,000 AN/AI people--more than 40% of
Alaska's total AN/AI population--live in the Cook Inlet region. In
Anchorage alone, the Native population is almost 40,000. CITC serves
any AN/AI person looking for services, regardless of their Tribal
affiliation or original home areas.
Currently, CITC provides services to its participants via five core
departments: Alaska's People (AKP), Child and Family Services (CFS)
(child welfare social services), Employment and Training Services
Department (ETSD), Recovery and Reentry Services (RS), and Youth
Empowerment Services (YES) (including K-12 education support, after
school and summer programs and workforce development). Additionally,
two CITC affiliates contribute significantly to CITC's mission: Clare
Swan Early Learning Center, providing Early Head Start/child care, and
the Alaska Native Justice Center, which provides legal representation
and advocacy for victims and survivors of sexual assault, domestic
violence, human trafficking, and other crime and offers Tribal justice
assistance, represents Tribes in ICWA cases being heard in Southcentral
Alaska state courts and training and technical assistance for Tribal
ICWA Workers.
As one of the nation's preeminent culturally responsive social
service organizations, CITC offers programs that serve approximately
12,000 AN/AI people yearly, many of whom have come to recognize CITC as
a community locus for assistance, support, and connection. A vital
component of those services is CITC's role as the sole Tribal TANF
provider in Anchorage and the Mat-Su Valley, which has been a
tremendous success in moving people from cash assistance to work
largely because it is incorporated into the Employment and Training
Services Department and CITC's 477 Plan.

Employment and Training Services Department (ETSD)

Under CITC's 477 Plan, the Employment and Training Services
Department (ETSD) assists Alaska Native and American Indian (AN/AI)
participants in achieving self-sufficiency and finding meaningful,
sustainable employment. As part of its comprehensive, wraparound Tribal
TANF services incorporated in CITC's 477 Plan, CITC provides life
skills development, access to education and treatment, childcare
support, and case management between CITC and other service agencies.

Because TANF is a component of CITC's 477 Plan, fully integrated
training services lead participants to vocational development and
apprenticeship programs in various industries for highly skilled and
in-demand occupations, including healthcare. Specifically, CITC's 477
Plan offers services that include:

Adult Financial Assistance: temporary cash assistance and
case management to Alaska Native/American Indian
individuals and their families for paying bills, buying
food, and making rent/mortgage payments, among other
household expenses;

Family Cash Assistance (TANF): temporary cash assistance
for Native families with children. Qualifying families
participate in career planning, training, and educational
services, including the support services they need in their
journey to self-sufficiency: childcare, transportation
assistance, interview practice, and required funds for work
clothes, tools, and other related supplies;

Employment Assistance: support and resources designed to
provide job seekers with the help needed to overcome
challenges, improve their well-being, and achieve
professional goals, including transportation assistance,
interview and work clothing, tools, and other related
expenses associated with obtaining, maintaining, and
advancing their careers);

Adult Education: fundamental math, reading, and writing
skills while preparing for GED testing. Paired with CITC's
GED Preparation program, individuals can improve and
refresh their academic skills with tutoring support while
earning a high school diploma, leading to better employment
and increased wages. ETSD also offers workshops on life
skills and workplace competencies. For many skills gained,
participants earn digital badges, a recognized validation
of training that can be included on resumes and job
applications;

Supported Employment: participants gain work and volunteer
experience to increase their marketable job skills, build
resumes and cover letters, and obtain full-time, non-
subsidized employment after an initial training period;

Vocational Rehabilitation: the program assists AN/AI
individuals with disabilities to gain and maintain
meaningful employment;

Vocational Training Grants: multiple grants to help
individuals pursuing training in various industries,
including transportation, construction, automotive
maintenance, welding, administration, healthcare,
information technology, childcare, and more;

Childcare Assistance: financial support for families
needing childcare services for children under 13 while
parents participate in employment, training, or educational
activities. For parents visiting CITC's Nat'uh service
center, the Nahtsahda Childcare Center offers on-site,
drop-in care, which allows parents to concentrate on
employment, education, or treatment activities while on the
CITC campus;

Youth Services: support with academics, life skills
classes, case management, finding employment, and
developing leadership skills for young Alaskans ages 14-24.
The team also supports youth ages 12 and under with social
and cultural activities and referrals for other needs;

For work-ready people, CITC offers employment placement
and referrals, career and job counseling, recruitment
services for partner organizations, and access to a full-
service career development center and staffed computer lab.

Other supportive services such as the Community Services Block
Grant and Low Income Heating and Energy Assistance assist CITC's 477
participants in achieving their long term self-sufficiency goals.
Additionally, the Tribal Training Grant helps fund short-term
vocational training for needed job enhancement or to gain employment,
and Native American Career & Technical Education Program (NACTEP)
provides short-term vocational training for highly skilled and in-
demand occupations. CITC also offers opportunities in quickly growing
fields such as the health profession in meaningful career ladder
progress.
FY 23 Impacts:

Assisted 633 participants with personal and professional
life skills classes.

Enrolled 154 individuals in vocational and healthcare
training.

Provided childcare assistance to 199 families to support
employment and education-related activities and served 306
children.

Served 299 participants with utility assistance and six
households with weatherization support.

Served 347 youth with case management, supported
employment, and supportive services with 95 subsidized
youth employment placements and 69 youth entered
unsubsidized employment.

Met yearly successful participant closure rates for
employment services for individuals with disabilities.

Provided supportive services to support participants in
employment to 786 individuals.

Increased average hourly wage of participants by $12.86.

OVERALL 477 PROGRAM BENEFITS:

The 477 Program is a critical federal initiative designed to reduce
administrative burdens and support Tribal Self-Determination by
allowing Tribes and Tribal Organizations to integrate multiple
federally-supported Tribal programs into a single program governed by a
single 477 Plan approved by the Department of the Interior (DOI). In
turn, the Tribe or Tribal Organization reports back on an annual basis
using a single consolidated reporting form. When allowed to function as
Congress intended, the 477 Program has been a model of success that we
hope will be emulated and expanded across federal programs. In
particular, 11 of 12 regions in Alaska and several federally Recognized
Tribes account for nearly half of the 477 Tribe and Tribal organization
plans, and provide significant opportunity to leverage federal
resources and programs in this very remote and hard to serve region.
However, there are still a few issues in implementation that must be
noted for the Committee.

OPPORTUNITIES

Expansion of Self Determination and Administrative Flexibility:
DOI, and its Division of Workforce Development (DWD), has over the last
year or so stepped fully into its role as Lead Agency under the 477
statute, as amended, and the more recently finalized 2023 MOA. DWD has
supported Tribes and Tribal Organizations through the Plan approval and
amendment processes as more Tribes join the Program and more programs
are integrated, interfaced appropriately with the other federal
agencies, and stood up for implementation of the 477 law as written and
intended by Congress. Unfortunately, there is more work for that Office
to do than can be done with the current resources available. CITC urges
the Committee to work with its colleagues on the Appropriations
Committee to provide additional resources to be used toward these
goals.
In addition, CITC is happy to inform the Committee that, after
many, many years of effort, its Tribal Vocational Rehabilitation and
other Education programs as well as Low Income Heat and Energy Program
have finally been integrated into its 477 Plan. In addition, more and
more programs have been integrated under other Tribes' and Tribal
organizations' 477 Plans, including recently the Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS) Family Violence Prevention and Services
Program (FVPSA), and the Department of Justice (DOJ) Victims of Crime
Act Tribal Victims Services Set-Aside Program (TVSSA) and Office on
Violence Against Women Grants to Tribal Governments Program (GTG).
Integration of these programs into 477 Plans will allow Tribes and
Tribal Organizations to provide comprehensive services that support the
goals of both the underlying programs and the 477 Initiative as a
whole.
As a final note, CITC calls the Committee's attention to ``The Way
Forward: Report of the Alyce Spotted Bear and Walter Soboleff
Commission on Native Children,'' for which CITC's CEO and President
served as Chair. Recommendations throughout the report reference the
importance and success of braiding and consolidating funding and
programs to benefit Native children and youth and improve their
outcomes. In particular, Recommendation 25 specifically addresses the
benefits of 477 and the importance of expanding its reach, and calls
for increased funding to accomplish these goals.

Reduction in Reporting Burdens: Another positive development has
been the overall reduction in reporting burden imposed on Tribes and
Tribal organizations that are operating 477 Plans. If a Tribe were to
operate each of the 44 federal programs currently integrated under a
477 Plan independently, for example, that Tribe would be required to
provide at least 153 different individual reports. Under 477, that
burden is reduced to a single three-component annual report and the
resources that would have otherwise gone to developing each of those
individual reports can instead be used to provide services to the
community. The current 477 annual report form will expire in November,
2024 and a federal/Tribal work group is currently working on a
simplified cumulative report. CITC supports the Federal/Tribal work
group in that process, which worked very well the last time the
reporting forms were modified.

Simplified Grant Renewal Processes: On a similar note, some
agencies have embraced a simplified grant renewal process for programs
that have been integrated under a 477 Plan. Tribal grantees understand
that to include a grant within 477 Plan, the Tribe must apply for that
grant. Certain agencies have acknowledged possible inclusion in a 477
Plan and provide specific instructions or even a simplified path for
Tribes or Tribal Organizations to move forward as they apply to renew
their grants. Some examples include the Department of Labor's Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA) Program, and HHS' Community
Services Block Grant (CSBG) Program. CITC supports these efforts and
hopes that other agencies will consistently apply this flexibility.

CHALLENGES

Unlawful Holding of Funds by DOJ: As noted earlier, following the
477 statute, BIA recently approved a Tribe's 477 Plan amendment to
integrate DOJ's TVSSA and GTG programs. This should have been
straightforward, as those programs are clearly able to be integrated
because the Tribe proposed to implement those programs ``for the
purpose of job training, [job] skill development, assisting Indian
youth and adults to succeed in the workforce, and encouraging self-
sufficiency,'' as well as ``services related to th[ose] activities''
under 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(a)(1). During the plan review process, DOJ
disagreed with the integration of these programs, under the view that
Tribes may only integrate programs that are specifically authorized for
employment and training. Congress explicitly rejected that view in
developing the 2017 amendments to the 477 statute (in fact, that was
one of the main purposes of the 2017 amendments), and the affected
federal agencies did as well in the 2023 MOA. DOJ then took the
position (happily reversed prior to the legislative hearing) that it
can refuse to transfer the funds even though the plan amendment has
been approved. This is flatly contrary to the 477 statute's funds
transfer requirements,\1\ and if allowed to stand, would undermine both
the 477 Program and this Committee's work in developing those funds
transfer requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3411(a)(2) and 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3413(a)(1)(B).

Delayed Funds Transfers: There also remains a significant problem
with certain agencies and programs transferring funds to BIA to be
passed on to Tribes and Tribal Organizations operating 477 Programs.
For example, one Tribal Organization has been waiting for funds from
the Department of Commerce's Minority Business Development Agency for
more than a year. Similarly, Tribes and Tribal Organizations waiting
for Bureau of Indian Education funds have been delayed by nearly two
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
years.

Frequency of TANF reporting: The Office of Family Assistance (OFA)
has insisted on a quarterly reporting requirement for Tribes and Tribal
organizations receiving TANF funds through their 477 Plans, though it
is clear that 477, as amended, requires only one consolidated annual
report for all programs; therefore, TANF data should be included when
the tribal program does its annual reporting, whether on the federal
fiscal year or in line with the period cycle. It appears that OFA may
have decided to allow for annual reporting, and CITC looks forward to
that change. If not, this has been a serious and recurring issue for
Tribes and Tribal organizations that include TANF in their 477 Plans,
and OFA should be instructed to require only one annual report as
required by the legislation. In fact, no waiver is required because the
language of the 477 amendment makes clear that only one report is
required.
CITC strongly urges the Committee to ensure that the TANF program
continues to receive reports in the integrated statistical report
developed by the federal agencies in conjunction with the 477 Tribal
Workgroup. That report contains all of the necessary information and
keeps TANF in alignment with the requirements of the 477 legislation as
amended. As OFA is aware, that statute provides that ``Notwithstanding
any other provision of law,'' only one report is required, and separate
accounting of individual programs within a 477 Plan is not consistent
with that Congressional direction.
CITC has the evidence as described above to show that the fully
integrated approach is the most successful way to move people from cash
assistance to unsubsidized work, reflecting the eloquent comment made
at the consultation, ``these are 477 clients, not TANF clients.'' OFA
and Tribal TANF programs have the same goal: helping people to become
self-sufficient, and the integration of services and braided funding
that 477 allows makes that a reality.
Misunderstanding of the Waiver Process and Opportunity: Requests
for waiver under the 477 legislation as amended allow the federal
departments to waive both regulatory and statutory provisions as long
as they are not in opposition to the underlying program requirements.
Therefore, merely stating that a law requires quarterly reporting, for
example, does not follow the opportunity of the 477 waiver process (and
in fact, as described above, waiver should not even be necessary for
reporting beyond the annual report per the legislation)--the analysis
must be more open to lessening of administrative burden contemplated by
the law; agency interpretation of allowable waivers must be more
flexible in order to fulfill the statutory requirement to grant waivers
unless in opposition to the underlying program goals and purpose.

Unlawful Meddling in Tribal Hires: Citing to the 2 CFR Part 200
Uniform Guidance regulations, some federal agencies, such as the
Department of Education, have been requiring federal approval for
personnel decisions made by Tribes and Tribal organizations operating
pursuant to a 477 Plan. This is contrary to both the letter and spirit
of the 477 statute, and nothing in the Part 200 regulations allows or
requires this action.

Inconsistent Compliance Supplement. The May 2023 OMB Compliance
Supplement has detailed requirements regarding the investment of 477
funds. However, 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3413(g)(2) requires only that those
funds are ``managed in accordance with the prudent investment
standard.'' OMB should update the compliance report to be consistent
with the statute and remove any additional requirements.

CONCLUSION

If its full potential is realized, PL 102-477 provides an
unparalleled opportunity to streamline funding and programs for the
maximum benefit to American Indian and Alaska Native people. Thank you
for your oversight and attention to making this possibility a reality,
and for the opportunity to provide this testimony.

______

U.S. Department of Justice

Office of Legislative Affairs

Hon. Harriet Hageman, Chair
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chair Hageman:

In advance of the Subcommittee's oversight hearing titled
``Advancing Tribal Self-Determination: Examining the Opportunities and
Challenges of the 477 Program,'' scheduled to take place later today,
we are sharing relevant information regarding the Department of
Justice's (Department) recent activity under the 477 Program. We hope
this information aids the Subcommittee in its oversight.
The Department is fully committed to promoting and supporting
Tribal sovereignty and self-determination, including through the full
implementation of the Indian Employment, Training, and Related Services
Demonstration Act as amended, also known as Public Law 102-477 (P.L.
477). The Department has previously supported integration of its grants
under P.L. 477, including those funding prisoner reentry programs.
The Department's commitment to and support for Tribal sovereignty
extends beyond P.L. 477. Our grantmaking components, which include the
Office of Justice Programs (OJP), the Office of Community Oriented
Policing Services, and the Office on Violence Against Women, engage
with Tribes to ensure that all Department grants and other resources
are as accessible and impose as few administrative burdens as possible.
To aid in our efforts to achieve that goal, the Department has hired
additional staff who bring deep expertise from different Tribal
communities. The Department's grantmaking components are also engaged
in efforts to increase outreach, support Tribes applying for funds
through technical assistance, and make the application process less
burdensome overall. Several new initiatives are underway to further
ease administrative burdens on Tribal grantees. This includes the
Office on Violence Against Women's piloting of reduced performance
reporting for Tribal grantees and OJP's Office for Victims of Crime's
substantive changes to how its Tribal Victim Services Set-Aside (TVSSA)
program operates, answering Tribes' calls to administer the Tribal Set-
Aside as a formula program.
We understand the Subcommittee may have questions regarding the
Department's legal interpretation of the 2017 amendments to P.L. 477 as
relevant to the Wyandotte Nation's 477 Plan. The Wyandotte Nation's
plan proposed the integration of two discretionary grant programs that
Congress authorized in the TVSSA in Section 510 of the Commerce,
Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2023, and
the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA). These programs were created to
support Tribes and other entities in providing specific services to
victims of crime and to support law enforcement in responding to sexual
assault and domestic violence. Congress has placed significant
restrictions and requirements on this funding, including various
prohibitions on grant recipients, such as barring the sharing of
personally identifiable information about victims served with VAWA
funds in order to protect their privacy and safety. Congress also
requires the Department to provide extensive reporting on victims
served by service providers and other aspects of our grant programs.
The issue of whether grants awarded for the purpose of providing
victims' services pursuant to the TVSSA and VAWA qualify for
integration under P.L. 477's enumerated statutory purposes related to
employment and job training presents complex questions of statutory
interpretation.
The Department is committed to supporting Tribal sovereignty and
self-determination, including through the lawful implementation of P.L.
477. After careful legal analysis and the decision by the Secretary of
the Interior to integrate the Wyandotte Nation's 477 Plan, the
Department has concluded it may, in this circumstance, lawfully
transfer to Interior funds under two discretionary grant programs and
is moving quickly to do so.
We hope this information is helpful. Please do not hesitate to
contact this office if we may provide additional assistance regarding
this or any other matter.

Sincerely,

Carlos Uriarte,
Assistant Attorney General

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

Statement for the Record
United South and Eastern Tribes
Sovereignty Protection Fund

The United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund
(USET SPF) is pleased to submit testimony for the record of the House
Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Indian and Insular
Affairs oversight hearing titled ``Advancing Tribal Self-Determination:
Examining the opportunities and challenges of the 477 Program'' to urge
full implementation of the PL 477 Program and expansion of its funding
model into other areas. It is time to step into the next era of federal
Indian law and policy--an era based in diplomacy, where the United
States fully respects Tribal Nations' inherent rights and authorities
and fulfills its trust and treaty obligations. One important aspect of
this new era is reshaping how the United States delivers federal
funding to Tribal Nations, and the PL 477 Program is a key tool in that
endeavor.
USET SPF is a non-profit, inter-tribal organization advocating on
behalf of thirty-three (33) federally recognized Tribal Nations from
the Northeastern Woodlands to the Everglades and across the Gulf of
Mexico.\1\ USET SPF is dedicated to promoting, protecting, and
advancing the inherent sovereign rights and authorities of Tribal
Nations and assisting its membership in dealing effectively with public
policy issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ USET SPF member Tribal Nations include: Alabama-Coushatta Tribe
of Texas (TX), Catawba Indian Nation (SC), Cayuga Nation (NY),
Chickahominy Indian Tribe (VA), Chickahominy Indian Tribe-Eastern
Division (VA), Chitimacha Tribe of Louisiana (LA), Coushatta Tribe of
Louisiana (LA), Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians (NC), Houlton Band of
Maliseet Indians (ME), Jena Band of Choctaw Indians (LA), Mashantucket
Pequot Indian Tribe (CT), Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe (MA), Miccosukee
Tribe of Indians of Florida (FL), Mi'kmaq Nation (ME), Mississippi Band
of Choctaw Indians (MS), Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut (CT),
Monacan Indian Nation (VA), Nansemond Indian Nation (VA), Narragansett
Indian Tribe (RI), Oneida Indian Nation (NY), Pamunkey Indian Tribe
(VA), Passamaquoddy Tribe at Indian Township (ME), Passamaquoddy Tribe
at Pleasant Point (ME), Penobscot Indian Nation (ME), Poarch Band of
Creek Indians (AL), Rappahannock Tribe (VA), Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe
(NY), Seminole Tribe of Florida (FL), Seneca Nation of Indians (NY),
Shinnecock Indian Nation (NY), Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of Louisiana (LA),
Upper Mattaponi Indian Tribe (VA), and Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head
(Aquinnah) (MA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A. Marshall Plan for Tribal Nations and Executive Order 14112

In recognition of chronic and ongoing failures to fund trust and
treaty obligations, USET SPF has consistently advocated for a Marshall
Plan for Tribal Nations, based on the principle that the United States
should make a financial investment in Tribal Nations similar to that of
the Marshall Plan through which the United States invested in
rebuilding Europe after World War II. The Marshall Plan for Tribal
Nations not only calls for a significant investment to bring Tribal
Nations up to an appropriate baseline, but it also calls for
sufficient, effective, and respectful funding mechanisms moving
forward. It advocates for funding delivery and use parameters that are
respectful of Tribal Nations' inherent sovereignty. The Marshall Plan
for Tribal Nations is gaining momentum, with Tribal organizations
signing on and media coverage supporting the effort.
USET SPF celebrates that the White House has already taken steps to
deliver on the foundational principles underpinning the Marshall Plan
for Tribal Nations. Executive Order No. 14112, issued in December and
titled ``Reforming Federal Funding and Support for Tribal Nations To
Better Embrace Our Trust Responsibilities and Promote the Next Era of
Tribal Self-Determination,'' seeks to assign a dollar amount to the
United States' unmet obligations to Tribal Nations, and also mandates
federal agencies utilize flexibility to facilitate Tribal Nations'
exercise of our inherent sovereignty in our use of federal funds. The
Executive Order explains: ``We must ensure that Federal programs, to
the maximum extent possible and practicable under Federal law, provide
Tribal Nations with the flexibility to improve economic growth, address
the specific needs of their communities, and realize their vision for
their future.''
B. Support for PL 477 Program

The PL 477 Program is one tool through which appropriately flexible
federal funding can be delivered to Tribal Nations, and fully
implementing and expanding the funding mechanisms of the PL 477 Program
is integral to both the Marshall Plan for Tribal Nations and Executive
Order 14112.\2\ The PL 477 Program serves as a next step in the
evolution of federal funding for Tribal Nations, and it is a model we
hope to see replicated in other areas. It is revolutionary in that it
authorizes Tribal Nations to consolidate diverse federal funding
sources from across 12 federal agencies into one, streamlined Tribal
program designed by the Tribal Nation to help its struggling community
members achieve self-sufficiency and stability. The bedrock principle
of the 477 Program is to enable Tribal Nations to exercise our inherent
sovereignty in our use of federal funds, in addition to promoting the
improved integration and streamlining of Tribal Nation programs and
reporting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The 477 Program was authorized under the Indian Employment,
Training, and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992, Public Law
102-477, which was amended in 2000, Public Law 106-568, and again in
2017, Public Law 115-93. The 477 Program is codified at 25 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 3401-3417.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 477 Program removes strings tied to federal funding such that
Tribal Nations may pool and reallocate federal funding integrated into
our 477 plans across the services provided through our 477 plan. 25
U.S.C. Sec. Sec. 3413(a)(1)(A), (a)(2), 3410(b)(3). Integrated funds
that are not obligated or expended remain available without fiscal year
limitation. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3413(b)(1). The PL 477 statute creates
authority to waive integrated programs' statutory, regulatory, and
administrative requirements that get in the way of streamlined
operation. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3406(d). And the PL 477 statute removes all
reporting requirements tied to integrated programs, instead requiring
just one comprehensive annual report on implementation of the 477 plan.
25 U.S.C. Sec. 3410(a)(2)(A), (b). These are only a few of the 477
Program's functions, all of which are designed to put more decision-
making power in the hands of Tribal Nations and remove federal
impediments so that we can better respond to the needs of our
communities.
The 477 statute sets forth three criteria that define the universe
of programs eligible for integration under the PL 477 Program. First,
the program must be operated by one of the 12 covered federal agencies.
See 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(b). Second, the program must be implemented for
one of the covered purposes, which are designed to be broad so that
they encompass not just employment and training programs but also
related supportive services. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(a)(1)(A). Third, in
order for a program to be eligible for integration into a 477 plan, it
must receive a covered type of funding. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3404(a)(1)(B),
(a)(2). When a program meets these three eligibility criteria, as
determined by the Department of the Interior (DOI), 25 U.S.C.
Sec. 3407(a), it is eligible for integration into a 477 plan.
USET SPF is invested in seeing the PL 477 Program succeed, be
implemented to the maximum extent permissible under the law, and be
replicated for other types of federal programs. It is one step toward a
future in which Tribal Nations are freed from the obstacles preventing
us from utilizing federal funding as sovereign nations.
C. Call for All Federal Partner Agencies to Fully Implement PL 477

Despite the importance of the PL 477 Program and what it means for
delivery of federal funding to Tribal Nations, some federal partners
have historically--and currently--prevented full implementation of the
PL 477 Program. They have opposed integration of programs they operate
and attempted to maintain control over funds after their integration.
We believe these issues tie back to concerns of officials or staff
within federal partner agencies about losing control over programs they
operate. Many of these individuals are not accustomed to working
alongside Tribal Nations. Full implementation of the PL 477 Program
requires all parties to understand and respect Tribal sovereignty and
to believe that Tribal Nations are equipped to do what is best for our
people.
We ask Congress to ensure the federal partner agencies have an
appreciation of the principles behind the PL 477 Program--including the
trust and treaty obligations it is designed to fulfill and Tribal
Nations' sovereignty and self-determination it is intended to respect.
We call on Congress, the White House, and leadership within each
federal agency to make clear that all government officials and staff
must comply with the PL 477 statute. Additionally, it is essential DOI
has the tools and backup necessary to ensure all federal partners and
program officials and staff fully implement the 477 Program. Indeed,
the White House through Executive Order 14112 has already recognized
its obligation to assist federal agencies to identify and utilize
opportunities to increase funding flexibility for Tribal Nations, and
to intervene when federal agencies refuse to do so.
All federal partners must be made to understand that it is DOI that
has exclusive decision-making authority over whether a program meets
the PL 477 eligibility criteria for integration into a PL 477 plan. 25
U.S.C. Sec. 3407(a). They must acknowledge there is no separate legal
authority authorizing any federal partner to avoid transferring funds
associated with a program DOI has approved, and instead the PL 477
statute mandates funds be transferred promptly. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3412(a);
see also 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3410(a)(2)(D)(ii).
All federal partners must also understand the covered purposes are
broad and designed to include supportive services, not just programs
authorized specifically for employment and training. 25 U.S.C.
Sec. 3404(a)(1)(A). A restrictive interpretation undercuts Congress's
intention to facilitate Tribal Nations to create wraparound self-
sufficiency programs for our people.
All federal partners must understand that, once a program is
integrated into a PL 477 plan, every reporting requirement tied to that
program automatically falls away and is replaced by the annual PL 477
report. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3410(a)(2)(A), (b). They must also understand
that all funds integrated into a PL 477 plan may be pooled and
reallocated across services within the 477 plan. 25 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 3413(a)(1)(A), (a)(2), 3410(b)(3).
All of these things and more happen as an automatic function of
integration into a PL 477 plan. On top of these automatic functions,
all federal partners must understand that the PL 477 statute itself
creates authority to waive requirements associated with the integrated
programs, including when those requirements are found in the program's
authorizing statute. 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3406(d).
Federal agencies that refuse to implement these congressional
mandates must face real consequences. Only after they are made to
comply with the mandates of the PL 477 statute will they understand
that Tribal Nations will exceed their expectations in reshaping the
services carried out through the programs they operate.
D. Department of Justice Position

We recently learned the Department of Justice (DOJ) has taken the
position it has separate legal authority to refuse to transfer program
funds into a Tribal Nation's PL 477 plan when it disagrees with DOI's
assessment of program eligibility.
The Wyandotte Nation on February 26, 2024, received a positive
determination from DOI approving integration of two programs operated
by DOJ into Wyandotte's PL 477 plan. While DOJ eventually agreed that
the programs were eligible for integration and said it would transfer
the funds, it preserved its position regarding its alleged separate
legal authority. In a letter submitted on the record for this oversight
hearing, DOJ said: ``After careful legal analysis and the decision by
the Secretary of the Interior to integrate the Wyandotte Nation's 477
Plan, the Department has concluded it may, in this circumstance,
lawfully transfer to Interior funds under two discretionary grant
programs and is moving quickly to do so.'' Thus, DOJ doubled down on
its position that in other circumstances and based on its own legal
analysis there may be situations where it is unlawful to transfer
integrated funds.
We are concerned that DOJ's position could be adopted by the other
federal partner agencies and used as a mechanism to refuse to integrate
the full scope of eligible programs into Tribal Nations' PL 477 plans.
Such a position could derail the success of the PL 477 Program, which
we view as integral to the evolution of federal funding delivery to
Tribal Nations. We join Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, Bryan
Newland, in emphasizing that this position is deeply regressive and
fails to reflect the spirit and intent of EO 14112 or the PL 477
Program in any way. We urge you to impress upon DOJ that it has
obligations to support Tribal Nation sovereignty, including under the
PL 477 statute as a federal partner agency, and that to shirk those
obligations contradicts the law.
Conclusion

We appreciate your attention to full implementation of the PL 477
Program. Please reach out to Liz Malerba, USET SPF Director of Policy
and Legislative Affairs, at
[emailprotected]
and Katie Klass, USET/
USET SPF General Counsel, should you have any questions.

[all]
