- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 4389, TO AMEND THE NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY BIRD CONSERVATION ACT TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO THAT ACT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "MIGRATORY BIRDS OF THE AMERICAS CONSERVATION ENHANCEMENTS ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 4770, TO REAUTHORIZE THE CHESAPEAKE BAY OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "CHESAPEAKE BAY SCIENCE, EDUCATION, AND ECOSYSTEM ENHANCEMENT ACT OF 2023"; AND H.R. 5009, TO REAUTHORIZE WILDLIFE HABITAT AND CONSERVATION PROGRAMS, AND FOR OTHERPURPOSES, "WILDLIFE INNOVATION AND LONGEVITY DRIVER REAUTHORIZATION ACT" or "WILD ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 4389, ``MIGRATORY BIRDS OF THE
AMERICAS CONSERVATION ENHANCE-.
MENTS ACT OF 2023''; H.R. 4770,.
``CHESAPEAKE BAY SCIENCE, EDUCATION,
AND ECOSYSTEM ENHANCEMENT ACT OF.
2023''; AND H.R. 5009, ``WILDLIFE INNO-.
VATION AND LONGEVITY DRIVER.
REAUTHORIZATION ACT'' OR ``WILD ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND
FISHERIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, October 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-69

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-813 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, October 18, 2023......................     1

Statement of Members:
Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     2
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     2

Panel I:

Sarbanes, Hon. John P., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Maryland..........................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Robinson, Carrie Selberg, Director of the Office of Habitat
Conservation, National Marine Fisheries Service,
Washington, DC.............................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Guertin, Stephen, Deputy Director for Program Management and
Policy, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC.....     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Cassidy, Ben, Executive Vice President of International,
Government and Public Affairs, Safari Club International,
Washington, DC.............................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record.......................    21
Wraithmell, Julie, Vice President and Executive Director,
Audubon Florida, Miami, Florida............................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Colden, Allison, Maryland Executive Director, Chesapeake Bay
Foundation, Annapolis, Maryland............................    31
Prepared statement of....................................    33
Caccese, Robert T., Director of Policy, Planning, and
Communications, Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania...................................    37
Prepared statement of....................................    39

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 4389, TO AMEND THE NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY
BIRD CONSERVATION ACT TO MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO THAT ACT, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES, ``MIGRATORY BIRDS OF THE AMERICAS CONSERVATION ENHANCEMENTS
ACT OF 2023''; H.R. 4770, TO REAUTHORIZE THE CHESAPEAKE BAY OFFICE OF
THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES, ``CHESAPEAKE BAY SCIENCE, EDUCATION, AND ECOSYSTEM
ENHANCEMENT ACT OF 2023''; AND H.R. 5009, TO REAUTHORIZE WILDLIFE
HABITAT AND CONSERVATION PROGRAMS, AND FOR OTHERPURPOSES, ``WILDLIFE
INNOVATION AND LONGEVITY DRIVER REAUTHORIZATION ACT'' or ``WILD ACT''

----------

Wednesday, October 18, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bentz, Wittman, Radewagen,
LaMalfa; Huffman, Peltola, Hoyle, Dingell, and Porter.
Also present: Representatives Sarbanes.

Mr. Bentz. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries will come to order.
Good morning, everyone. I want to welcome Members,
witnesses, and our guests in the audience to today's hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Member. I
therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Joyce, and the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Salazar, be
allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
We are here today to consider three legislative measures:
H.R. 4389, the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation
Enhancements Act of 2023, sponsored by Representative Salazar
of Florida; H.R. 4770, the Chesapeake Bay Science, Education,
and Ecosystem Enhancement Act of 2023, sponsored by
Representative Sarbanes of Maryland; and H.R. 5009, the WILD
Act, sponsored by Representative Joyce of Ohio.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. As everyone should be aware, votes have been
scheduled for 11 a.m. this morning. In the interest of hearing
from our witnesses, I will keep the statement short.
We are here today because one of our responsibilities as
members of the Committee on Natural Resources is to
periodically evaluate the authorities this Committee grants to
Federal agencies under its jurisdiction. Today, we are
evaluating three bipartisan bills that would reauthorize
programs within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses regarding the
importance of these programs and why they merit
reauthorization.
With that, I thank the Members for their work on these
bills and the witnesses for testifying today.
I now recognize Ranking Member Huffman for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning,
everyone. I am happy to be here discussing important
conservation legislation, and I am grateful to each of our
witnesses for making the trip to Washington, DC.
Today, we will be discussing three bipartisan pieces of
legislation. Who says there is no bipartisan path forward and
this place has to be mired in chaos? Look at this Subcommittee
today. All of these bills focus on the conservation and
protection of unique animals and ecosystems.
We will hear testimony on H.R. 4770, the Chesapeake Bay
Science, Education, and Ecosystem Enhancement Act of 2023, led
by our friend, Representative Sarbanes. Chesapeake Bay is an
important estuary, the largest in the United States, home to 18
million Americans and a diverse array of fish and wildlife that
have suffered from pollution, overfishing, and coastal
development. This bill authorizes the NOAA Chesapeake Bay
Office to help study and restore this essential part of our
landscape.
It also authorizes funds for the competitive Bay Watershed
Education and Training Grants. These grants help to fund
educational experiences that teach students about the
Chesapeake Bay and develop skills needed to protect it. I look
forward to hearing from our witness, Dr. Allison Colden, the
Maryland Executive Director of the Chesapeake Bay Foundation,
on this important bill.
We will also discuss H.R. 5009, the WILD Act. This bill
would reauthorize and amend several wildlife conservation acts,
making it easier to support long-term conservation work for
iconic species like elephants, rhinoceroses, tigers, great
apes, and marine turtles.
The bill also reauthorizes the Partners for Fish and
Wildlife Program, which supports habitat restoration efforts
across the United States and our territories. The Partners for
Fish and Wildlife Program within the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service employs biologists who work with private landowners to
help them conserve and improve wildlife habitat. It is an
important program, a component of the collaborative
conservation effort for endangered and threatened species that
we often talk about in this Committee.
And then finally, we will hear some testimony on H.R. 4389,
the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation Enhancements
Act of 2023. This bill amends the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Act to modestly increase the Federal cost share of
each supported project, making grants more accessible to
applicants. Projects supported through this Act support nearly
200 species of neotropical migratory birds, and have already
benefited 5 million acres of migratory bird habitat in over 40
countries.
Neotropical migratory birds migrate vast distances,
spending winter in the tropics and summering in the United
States and Canada. This bill will ensure that these species
continue to benefit from habitat conservation across their
expansive migratory routes for years to come.
Mr. Chair, I ask unanimous consent that our colleague, Mr.
Sarbanes, join us on the Democratic side and have permission to
sit at the dais and participate in today's hearing.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Huffman. I appreciate that and yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ranking Member Huffman. I will now
introduce our first panel. As is typical with legislative
hearings, the bills' sponsors are recognized for 5 minutes each
to discuss their bills.
With us today is Congressman John Sarbanes, who is
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN P. SARBANES, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE MARYLAND

Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Chairman Bentz, Ranking
Member Huffman, members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity
to testify today in support of H.R. 4770, the bipartisan
Chesapeake Bay Science, Education, and Ecosystem Enhancement
Act of 2023, or SEEE Act.
This bill takes important steps to support the ongoing
restoration of the Chesapeake Bay by reauthorizing NOAA's
Chesapeake Bay Office and authorizing the agency's long-running
Bay Watershed Education and Training, or B-WET Grant program.
For Marylanders, the Chesapeake Bay is the cornerstone of
both our heritage and our economy. My Virginian co-leads on
this bill, Representatives Jen Kiggans, Rob Wittman, and Bobby
Scott, who also represent districts directly on the Bay, know
from their own experiences how this national treasure has
shaped our country's history, and even today serves as the
economic engine that powers our region's seafood, tourism, and
recreation industries.
Beyond Maryland and Virginia, the Chesapeake Bay watershed
spans Delaware, the District of Columbia, New York,
Pennsylvania, and West Virginia, intertwining the lives of more
than 18 million people with the nation's largest estuary.
Unfortunately, in recent decades, the health of the
Chesapeake Bay and the prosperity of the communities who rely
on it has been negatively affected by nutrient runoff across
the watershed, disappearing coastal and marine habitat, and
many other factors. That makes the passage of the Chesapeake
Bay SEEE Act all the more important.
NOAA's Chesapeake Bay Office coordinates and conducts
scientific research, habitat restoration efforts, and
environmental education projects across the watershed to
improve the Bay's health and ensure its sustainable use for
generations to come. The Chesapeake Bay SEEE Act would bolster
NOAA's critical coastal research stewardship work in several
ways I will mention very briefly.
First, the bill would reauthorize the Chesapeake Bay Office
for the first time since 2006. Though Congress has annually
appropriated funds for the Bay Office's operations, it can be
challenging for the office to most effectively act as the hub
of all NOAA's Bay-related programs and activities amid this
uncertainty. By reauthorizing the office, we can best position
it to efficiently carry out its mission of using science,
service, and stewardship to restore and protect the Bay.
Second, the bill would enhance the Chesapeake Bay
Interpretive Buoy System, which collects real-time
meteorological, oceanographic, and water quality information,
and wirelessly relays this weather and environmental data to
inform researchers, boaters, educators, and the public.
Third, the bill would statutorily authorize the B-WET Grant
program and centralize its administration within the Bay
Office. This will build on the well-established success of the
B-WET program, which for more than 20 years has helped inspire
the next generation of scientific leaders by providing K-12
students in the Chesapeake Bay watershed invaluable, hands-on
education about how their everyday actions affect the Bay.
Fourth and finally, the bill would expand NOAA's
Aquaculture Technical Assistance programs, which play a vital
role in restoring the Chesapeake's living resources, from
oysters to the iconic blue crab. Beyond protecting the Bay's
habitat, these programs also provide indispensable support for
our seafood industry and the tens of thousands of jobs it
provides.
The health of the Chesapeake Bay and its watershed can only
continue to improve through robust Federal, state, and local
partnerships. Ensuring that NOAA's Chesapeake Bay Office is
equipped to best carry out its part in these efforts is
essential to a successful, long-term restoration and protection
of this national treasure.
Last Congress, the SEEE Act advanced out of this Committee
by voice vote, and I hope that today's hearing is the first
step in continuing that legacy of strong bipartisan support for
the Chesapeake Bay in this Congress.
Again, thank you very, very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity to present today.
I yield back. Thank you very much.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Congressman Sarbanes, for your
testimony.
I ask unanimous consent that the statements from
Congresswoman Salazar and Congressman Joyce be entered into the
hearing record.
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now introduce our second panel.
Ms. Carrie Selberg Robinson, Director of the Office of
Habitat Conservation with the National Marine Fisheries Service
in Silver Spring, Maryland; Mr. Stephen Guertin, Deputy
Director for Policy at the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in
Washington, DC; Mr. Ben Cassidy, Executive Vice President of
International, Government and Public Affairs with the Safari
Club International in Washington, DC; Ms. Julie Wraithmell,
Executive Director of Audubon Florida in Tallahassee, Florida;
Dr. Allison Colden, Maryland Executive Director with the
Chesapeake Bay Foundation in Annapolis, Maryland; and Mr.
Robert Caccese, Director of Policy, Planning, and
Communications with the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission
in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
I now recognize Ms. Carrie Selberg Robinson for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARRIE SELBERG ROBINSON, DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF
HABITAT CONSERVATION, NATIONAL MARINE FISHERIES SERVICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Robinson. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today and to discuss H.R. 4770, Chesapeake
Bay Science, Education, and Ecosystem Enhancement Act of 2023,
and H.R. 5009, Wildlife Innovation and Longevity Driver
reauthorization Act, or the WILD Act.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA,
is responsible for the stewardship of the nation's living
marine resources and their habitat. NOAA Fisheries provide
vital services for the nation: sustainable and productive
fisheries, safe sources of seafood, the recovery and
conservation of protected species, and healthy ecosystems, all
backed by sound science and an ecosystem-based approach to
management.
The resilience of our marine ecosystems and coastal
communities depends on healthy marine species, including
protected species such as whales, sea turtles, salmon, and
corals.
H.R. 4770 would reauthorize the NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office,
update our legislative authority, and provide additional
direction and flexibility. We would like to thank Rep. Sarbanes
for introducing this important piece of bipartisan legislation
along with the bill's three co-sponsors who represent the
Chesapeake Bay watershed jurisdictions of Maryland and
Virginia.
The NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office, NCBO, is a division of the
Office of Habitat Conservation within the NOAA National Marine
Fisheries Service. NCBO uses its capabilities in science,
restoration, and community engagement to improve the
understanding, management, and stewardship of the Chesapeake
Bay. NCBO focuses on sustainable fisheries and habitat science,
oyster restoration, oceanographic and meteorological
observations, environmental literacy, and community
partnerships. As a part of this overall effort, NCBO is working
with partners to support the restoration of oyster populations
in 10 Bay tributaries by 2025, which has already resulted in
the largest oyster reef restoration project in the world.
NCBO also funds fisheries research that provides real-world
applications that support Federal and state marine resource
managers.
NCBO also monitors Bay conditions by maintaining the
Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System. This network of buoys,
acoustic receivers, and water column sensors tracks water
quality, fish movement, and weather information at key
locations, and delivers this data to our colleagues engaged in
ecological forecasting, as well as to boaters, recreational
anglers, and other researchers.
In support of the environmental literacy goal of the
Watershed Agreement, NCBO partners with states and school
districts throughout the region to increase K-12 environmental
literacy programs throughout the Chesapeake Bay Watershed
Education and Training Competitive Grant program, also known as
B-WET.
This legislation would empower NCBO with the tools and
capabilities to directly support the conservation and
restoration goals of NOAA, the Chesapeake Bay program, and our
partnerships in the Bay, and we appreciate the Committee's
attention to this program.
Regarding H.R. 5009, the WILD Act, NOAA works with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service to implement the Marine Turtle
Conservation Act, which supports international sea turtle
conservation and recovery. NOAA Fisheries and the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service identify high-priority projects and provide
financial and technical assistance.
In closing, NOAA stands ready to work with all of you to
address the current and future challenges to our marine
ecosystems. Thank you, and I look forward to discussing these
bills with you today.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Robinson follows:]
Prepared Statement of National Marine Fisheries Service, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce
on H.R. 4770 and H.R. 5009

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
and to discuss H.R. 4770, ``Chesapeake Bay Science, Education, and
Ecosystem Enhancement Act of 2023,'' and H.R. 5009, ``Wildlife
Innovation and Longevity Driver reauthorization Act'' or the ``WILD
Act.''
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is
responsible for the stewardship of the nation's living marine resources
and their habitat. NOAA Fisheries provide vital services for the
nation: sustainable and productive fisheries, safe sources of seafood,
the recovery and conservation of protected species, and healthy
ecosystems--all backed by sound science and an ecosystem-based approach
to management. The resilience of our marine ecosystems and coastal
communities depends on healthy marine species, including protected
species such as whales, sea turtles, salmon, and corals.
H.R. 4770 would reauthorize the NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office, update
our legislative authority, and provide additional direction and
flexibility. We would like to thank Rep. Sarbanes for introducing this
important piece of bipartisan legislation along with the bill's three
co-sponsors who represent the Chesapeake Bay watershed jurisdictions of
Maryland and Virginia.
NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office

The NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office (NCBO) is a division of the Office
of Habitat Conservation within the NOAA National Marine Fisheries
Service. NCBO uses its capabilities in science, restoration, and
community engagement to improve the understanding, management, and
stewardship of the Chesapeake Bay. NCBO focuses on sustainable
fisheries and habitat science, oyster restoration, oceanographic and
meteorological observations, environmental literacy, and community
partnerships.
NOAA has been a partner in the Chesapeake Bay Program since 1984.
In 2014, NOAA and its Federal and state partners committed to the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed Agreement, which included goals supporting the
restoration and protection of the Bay watershed and guiding the work of
the Chesapeake Bay Program.
NCBO is the Federal agency lead working to implement the Watershed
Agreement objectives for oysters, blue crabs, forage species, and fish
habitat. As part of this effort, NCBO is working with partners to
support the restoration of oyster populations in 10 Bay tributaries by
2025--the largest oyster reef restoration project in the world. NCBO
funds important fisheries research that provides real-world
applications that support Federal and state marine resource managers.
NCBO is also committed to place-based initiatives to improve
fisheries habitat and coastal community resilience in the Choptank
River Habitat Focus Area in Maryland and the Middle Peninsula of
Virginia.
NCBO monitors Bay conditions by maintaining the Chesapeake Bay
Interpretive Buoy System. This network of buoys, acoustic receivers,
and water column sensors tracks water quality, fish movement, and
weather information at key locations and delivers this data to NOAA
colleagues engaged in marine weather and ecological forecasting, as
well as to boaters, recreational anglers, and other researchers.
In support of the Environmental Literacy Goal of the Watershed
Agreement, NCBO partners with states and school districts throughout
the region to increase systemic and sustainable implementation of K-12
environmental literacy programs through the Chesapeake Bay Watershed
Education and Training (B-WET) competitive grant program.
Climate change is a critical issue facing the Chesapeake Bay and
its watershed. Climate considerations are embedded into all NCBO does--
from observations and fisheries research to education, workforce
development, and community engagement programs. NCBO coordinates the
Chesapeake Bay Program's climate and resilience activities, including
supporting the development of green infrastructure in underserved
communities.
Finally, NCBO is strongly committed to increasing diversity,
equity, inclusion, and justice both in our office culture and in our
programs. We do this by actively seeking engagement of underserved
communities in our place-based initiatives, supporting internship
programs focused on students from populations historically excluded
from science fields, and ensuring our grant funding supports the
priorities of diverse communities and is accessible to them.
H.R. 4770--Chesapeake Science, Education, and Ecosystem Enhancement Act

NOAA supports the objectives of H.R. 4770, which would reauthorize
the NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office and update its legislative authority.
The bill would recognize and provide authority for long-standing
NCBO programs and activities, including two programs not included in
the 2002 reauthorization act--the Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy
System and the Chesapeake B-WET Program. The Chesapeake Bay Coastal
Living Resources Management and Habitat Program will also allow for
development of programs that restore, protect, and build the resilience
of critical coastal habitats and vulnerable communities to offset the
effects of climate change.
This legislation would authorize NCBO with the tools and
capabilities to directly support the conservation and restoration goals
of NOAA, the Chesapeake Bay Program, and the Chesapeake Bay Watershed
Agreement.
H.R. 5009 (Rep. Joyce of Ohio), ``Wildlife Innovation and Longevity
Driver reauthorization Act'' or the ``WILD Act''

The Marine Turtle Conservation Act supports international sea
turtle conservation and recovery. Through the Marine Turtle
Conservation Fund, USFWS provides financial and technical assistance to
international partners to reduce terrestrial and marine threats to sea
turtles and to better assess and understand their population status.
NOAA Fisheries coordinates with USFWS to identify high priority
projects and provide financial and technical assistance.
Conclusion

NOAA is proud to continue to be a leader in conducting ocean
science, serving the nation's coastal communities and industries, and
ensuring responsible stewardship of our ocean and coastal resources. We
value the opportunity to continue working with this Subcommittee on
these important issues. Thank you, Members of the Subcommittee and your
staff for your work to support NOAA's mission. I am happy to take your
questions.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Guertin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN GUERTIN, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR PROGRAM
MANAGEMENT AND POLICY, U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Guertin. Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. I am Steve Guertin,
Deputy Director for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. We
appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today on two
bills that reauthorize three successful programs that invest in
partnerships to conserve wildlife at home and abroad.
H.R. 4389, the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation
Enhancements Act, would reauthorize the Neotropical Migratory
Bird Conservation Act, or Neotrops Act. The Service supports
H.R. 4389 with a few recommended modifications.
Since the early 1900s, the United States has undertaken
substantial actions and investments to conserve migratory
birds, but these investments are at risk if the migrating birds
do not have suitable habitat to support their life cycles
outside of the United States. Congress enacted the Neotrops Act
to protect these investments we make here in the United States.
Through the Neotrops Act the Service works to conserve 390
species of neotropical birds that migrate to the United States
each year from other countries. These birds pollinate plants,
control pests, and generate billions of dollars of economic
activity through bird watching and photography. Since 2002, the
Neotrops Act has conserved or restored more than 5 million
acres of bird habitat and leveraged an additional $346 million
in partner funding.
While we support and welcome the changes this bill would
make, the Service recommends decreasing the cost share
requirement even further to a one-to-one match. This would open
doors to a broader coalition of applicants and partners.
The Service also supports increasing the cap on
administrative expenses to address anticipated growth in demand
for the program, and we note that demand for the program has
outstripped funding in recent years.
H.R. 5009, the WILD Act, reauthorizes two popular, long-
standing Service programs that promote species and habitat
conservation: the Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program and
the Multinational Species Conservation Fund.
The Service supports H.R. 5009.
Through the Partners Program we advance collaborative
conservation on private lands. Our biologists work with
landowners on a voluntary basis to help them conserve and
improve wildlife habitat on their lands. Conservation on
private lands is critically important to accomplish our
mission, because nearly 70 percent of the land in the United
States is privately owned.
Over the past 35 years, the Partners Program has helped
around 30,000 landowners to conserve more than 6.4 million
acres of fish and wildlife habitat. A 2014 study found that
every dollar the program contributed to a project generated
nearly $16 in economic returns to local communities. The
program is flexible, effective, and provides lasting benefits
for wildlife and communities across the country.
We have seen similar successes through the Multinational
Species Conservation Fund, which conserves some of the world's
most iconic species, including sea turtles, great apes,
elephants, rhinos, and tigers. Conserving these species is a
specific directive from Congress to the Service. From 2015 to
2022, the funds provided over $90 million in grants and
cooperative agreements, and leveraged nearly $200 million in
additional funds toward conserving these species. U.S. dollars
invested in the range countries go a long way. Projects
supported by the funds mitigate threats to these species,
conserve ecosystems, advance diplomacy, improve stability in
foreign countries, and build goodwill toward the United States.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. We
appreciate the Subcommittee's interest in our conservation
partnerships. Working with others is central to our mission,
and reauthorization of these programs will enable us to
continue to advance our conservation mission at home and
abroad.
I would be pleased to answer any questions the Committee
has.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Guertin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior
on H.R. 4389 and H.R. 5009

Introduction

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Stephen Guertin, Deputy Director for Policy
for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) within the Department
of the Interior (Department). I appreciate the opportunity to testify
before you today on two bills that reauthorize three long-standing and
successful programs that invest in partnerships to conserve wildlife at
home and abroad.
The Service's mission is working with others to conserve, protect,
and enhance fish, wildlife, plants, and their habitats for the
continuing benefit of the American people. For more than 150 years, the
Service has collaborated with partners across the country and around
the world to carry out this mission. The programs reauthorized in the
legislation before the Subcommittee today are pivotal to these
conservation partnerships.
The Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act (NMBCA) has created
durable and effective partnerships with other nations to conserve a
shared resource. Each year, 390 species of neotropical migratory birds
migrate to and from the United States, spending winters in southern
countries and returning to North America in the summer. These birds
include beloved and familiar species such as the Baltimore oriole, the
Golden-cheeked warbler, and the American oystercatcher along with
broader groups of songbirds, shorebirds and birds of prey. In addition
to their role in pollination, seed dispersal and pest control,
migrating birds also provide warnings of the effects of climate change
and environmental contamination and generate billions of dollars of
economic activity through bird watching and photography. A key aspect
of this law is that it ensures that conservation activities undertaken
in the U.S. are bolstered by habitat conservation outside of the U.S.
in key areas of the species' ranges. It also leverages about four times
the funds invested and has provided critical support for neotropical
bird conservation and research throughout the Western Hemisphere for
over two decades.
The Partners for Fish and Wildlife (PFW) Program has long been a
critical tool in helping the Service advance collaborative conservation
on private lands. With more than 70 percent of land in the U.S. in
private ownership, the success of the Service's conservation mission
hinges on its ability to work with partners to conserve and restore
fish and wildlife habitat on private lands. Established in 1987, the
PFW Program facilitates conservation with private landowners to benefit
both trust species and landowners. Through over 200 PFW biologists
located in all 50 states and territories, the Service provides free
technical and financial assistance to private landowners, managers,
tribes, corporations, schools, and nonprofits interested in improving
wildlife habitat on their land. Projects are custom designed to meet
the unique needs of each partner and can range from several-acre
wetland restorations to grassland restoration projects that stretch
thousands of acres.
Similarly, the Multinational Species Conservation Funds have been
essential to conserving some of the world's most iconic species, as
identified by Congress, through partnerships in their range countries.
Poaching, wildlife trafficking, human-wildlife conflict, habitat loss,
and disease have all contributed to the decline of these species, which
include elephants, rhinoceros, tigers, great apes, and marine turtles.
Key populations of many of these species are found in countries where
these threats are compounded by political instability, expanding human
populations, and a lack of funding and capacity for conservation.
Projects supported by the Multinational Species Conservation Funds
mitigate threats to these species, conserve ecosystems, advance
diplomacy, improve stability in foreign countries, and build good will
towards the United States.
H.R. 4389, Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation Enhancements
Act of 2023

H.R. 4389, the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation
Enhancements Act of 2023 would reauthorize the NMBCA through fiscal
year (FY) 2028. The bill would increase the federal share of each
project to a maximum of 33.3 percent; require the Service to submit a
report to Congress within 180 days of enactment describing the
implementation of existing collaborative requirements in the Act;
increase the allowable administrative expenses available to the
Secretary each fiscal year to a maximum of 4 percent or $200,000,
whichever is greater; and increase the authorization of appropriations.
The Service supports H.R. 4389, with some recommendations for
improvement, which would continue the legacy of effective
international, collaborative conservation and provide increasing
financial support for, and thereby public access to, bird conservation.
The Service's Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation program
provides grants for the conservation of neotropical migratory birds to
countries in Latin America, the Caribbean, Canada, and the United
States. The program operates an annual grant cycle where Service staff
and outside experts review eligible project proposals and makes
recommendations to the Director. Since 2002, NMBCA has provided more
than $89 million to support 717 projects in 43 countries. These
projects have positively affected more than 5 million acres of bird
habitat and leveraged an additional $346 million in partner funding.
This May, the Service awarded $5.1 million in federal funds, leveraging
more than $19.6 million in partner contributions, for 32 projects
across 30 countries. The networks developed through this program have
evolved into a powerful conservation tool.
Increasing the federal cost-share requirement to 33 percent from
the current 25 percent will open doors to a broader coalition of
applicants and partners. However, the Service notes that if the federal
share were increased to a maximum of 50 percent, a 1:1 match, it would
enable the Service to engage an even larger number of partners, take on
a greater partnership role with projects, and reduce risk to the
program if partners are unable to raise a higher match level.
Similarly, while the Service appreciates support for increasing
allowable administrative expenses, we recommend increasing the amount
permitted under the legislation to up to 5 percent or $300,000,
whichever is greater. If the federal cost share increases, increased
administrative funding will be critical to handle the additional
workload associated with an expected increase in applicants and grant
recipients. Additionally, increasing the maximum amount to the
recommended level would enable Service employees to ensure better
compliance with federal financial assistance requirements that improve
performance and conservation delivery.
Finally, the Service is requesting $9.9 million for this program in
the President's FY 2024 budget. In recent years, proposals for funding
have totaled close to $10 million annually. Authorizing appropriations
at the Service's requested level would allow the program to meet
increasing demand from applicants and improve outcomes for birds that
are facing threats from climate change, habitat degradation, and other
challenges that require long-term education, research and monitoring.
For these reasons, we would welcome the opportunity to work with
the sponsor and the Subcommittee to ensure the NMBCA can continue its
legacy of collaborative conservation and meet the demand from
applicants and partners across the Hemisphere.
H.R. 5009, Wildlife Innovation and Longevity Driver Reauthorization Act

H.R. 5009, the Wildlife Innovation and Longevity Driver
Reauthorization (WILD) Act reauthorizes two popular, long-standing
Service programs that promote species and habitat conservation: the PFW
Program and the Multinational Species Conservation Funds. The Service
supports H.R. 5009, which would enable the Service to continue
leveraging some of our most successful collaborative conservation
efforts at home and abroad.
Over the past 35 years, the PFW Program has been highly successful
in helping the Service and its partners meet shared conservation goals,
helping around 30,000 landowners complete more than 50,000 habitat
restoration projects totaling more than 6.4 million acres of fish and
wildlife habitat. A 2014 study found that for every $1 the PFW Program
contributed to a project, the program generated $15.70 in economic
returns to local communities. Whether the program is restoring coastal
marshes in Ottawa County, Ohio, or working with the partners to restore
a park in Bay City, Michigan, it proves to be a flexible and effective
program that provides lasting benefits to wildlife and communities.
The Multinational Species Conservation Funds are authorized through
five laws that created individual competitive grant programs supporting
the conservation of international at-risk species. These programs
provide critical technical and financial assistance to local
communities, government agencies, and non-government organizations,
working to conserve at-risk species and habitat across the globe. From
2015 to 2022, the Funds provided $92.5 million in grants and
cooperative agreements and leveraged nearly $200 million in additional
funds towards conserving these species. Since their inception, the
Funds have engaged nearly 600 domestic and foreign partners in over 54
countries.

Each of the five Funds are applied to unique species conservation
challenges abroad:

The African Elephant Conservation Fund provides critical support
for curbing the current African Elephant poaching epidemic, combatting
the trafficking of this species' ivory and meat, and reducing the
demand for these products. The Asian Elephant Conservation Fund
specializes in enhancing human-Asian Elephant co-existence through
local stewardship and community outreach in addition to promoting
applied research and transboundary conservation efforts. The Rhinoceros
and Tiger Conservation Fund is aimed at community engagement in both
South Africa and South Asia, and includes a suite of measures, such as
wildlife trafficking mitigation measures that seek to eliminate to
collection and sale of rhinoceros horns as well as tiger pelts, teeth,
bones, and products, and establishing networks of citizens to protect
tigers through reduced human-wildlife conflict. The Great Ape
Conservation Fund seeks to preserve some of our world's most
intelligent animals by combatting pet-trade related capture and
poaching throughout Africa and Asia. Lastly, the Marine Turtle
Conservation Fund addresses threats to turtle survival through nesting
site protection, marine debris reduction, fishery bycatch reduction,
and other localized conservation projects. The program was also
expanded by Congress in 2019 to include support for the conservation of
freshwater turtles and tortoises.
H.R. 5009, Wildlife Innovation and Longevity Driver Reauthorization
Act, reauthorizes funding for the PFW Program through FY 2028;
reauthorizes funding for the Multinational Species Conservation Funds
at existing funding levels through FY 2028; and authorizes multiyear
grants for up to five years for the Multinational Species Conservation
Funds programs.

The Service has identified some suggested modifications, which are
discussed below.

Reauthorization of the PFW program would enable the Service to
continue to achieve strong conservation outcomes through hand-in-hand
collaboration with private landowners. However, the Service notes that
the Administration's FY 2024 budget request includes almost $80 million
for the PFW Program--nearly $5 million more than would be authorized by
H.R. 5009. This proposed increase underscores the need for
collaborative efforts to enhance private lands, protect trust species,
and support ecosystem and community resiliency and the program's
capability to address that need. The Service would welcome the
opportunity to discuss with the Subcommittee how the PFW Program is
equipped to deploy the additional funding included in our budget
request, including how we anticipate an increase in funding could
amplify the program's achievements and benefits to landowners and
neighboring communities.
With regard to the Multinational Species Conservation Funds
programs, we note that the current caps on administrative funds are not
consistent across the five programs, nor are they sufficient to cover
total administrative costs associated with implementing and overseeing
the Funds. The Service would welcome the opportunity to discuss this
further with the sponsor and the Subcommittee.
Conclusion

The Service appreciates the Subcommittee's interest in our
conservation partnerships. Working with others is central to the
Service's mission, and reauthorization of the Neotropical Migratory
Bird Conservation Act, Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program, and
Multinational Species Conservation Funds will enable the Service to
continue our work with our partners to conserve species at home and
abroad.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Stephen Guertin, Deputy
Director for Policy, U.S. Fish & Wildlife

Mr. Guertin did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. Why is the Service is not utilizing the Partners for
Fish and Wildlife Program more to reduce or eliminate the need for
listing rather than putting more money towards Ecological Service
budget and personnel? Oftentimes the work of the ecological services
department would be duplicative of the work that could be done by the
partners program before a species is listed.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Cassidy for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BEN CASSIDY, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT OF
INTERNATIONAL, GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS, SAFARI CLUB
INTERNATIONAL, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Cassidy. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman,
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for your invitation
today to discuss H.R. 5009, Wildlife Innovation and Longevity
Driver Reauthorization Act, or the WILD Act. I am here as a
representative of Safari Club International, or SCI, an
organization that has long prioritized conservation efforts
here in the USA, as well as across the globe.
Our organization's work on the ground in Africa,
facilitated by the best available wildlife science, leads to
the inescapable conclusion that the future of the continent's
wildlife depends on the extraordinary power of community-driven
conservation. When we say community-driven conservation, we
mean that the African communities and the African people have
not only the inalienable right, but also the knowledge of how
to best protect the wildlife species whose habitats are within
their borders and, indeed, in their backyards.
That is why SCI supports the WILD Act, as it represents the
largest U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service allocation of funds
toward community-driven conservation projects in southern and
eastern Africa, including but not limited to, range states such
as Zimbabwe, Zambia, Angola, Namibia, and Botswana, which make
up the Kavango-Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area, or
KAZA.
KAZA, which is home to 55 percent of the world's elephants
and 20 percent of African lions, recently used WILD Act grant
funding to help complete a monumental elephant survey covering
106 million acres, that is the size of France, which showed
stable and increasing elephant populations across the region.
The reason for this success? The incorporation of sustainable
use strategies, often more plainly referred to as legal
regulated hunting.
Southern African wildlife officials and African wildlife
scientists agree that the incorporation of legal and regulated
hunting is an essential component of larger conservation
strategies, scientifically proven to save wildlife habitat from
human development, bolster economic opportunities for rural
African communities, and combat the criminal and unregulated
killing of wildlife, also known as poaching.
Congressional reauthorization of the WILD Act should
further fund and acknowledge these countries' proven
conservation strategies, especially with respect to not only
African elephants, but also Asian elephants, rhinoceros,
tigers, and turtles.
All of this points to one glaring truth: it is easy for us
to mandate policies and pontificate about protecting elephants
from thousands of miles away, but look at what successes we can
bring about when we incorporate, instead of reject, the
expertise of the people who co-exist with these animal
populations.
Unfortunately, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service currently
administers the WILD Act in a way that all too often hinders
community-based conservation. The process of receiving WILD Act
conservation funds has become too tangled and dominated by
large NGOs, who can afford to retain the staff necessary to
navigate the overly complicated legal maze required to petition
for funding. The WILD Act must more easily facilitate the
allocation of resources for community-based conservation, not
bury African applicants under American paperwork, bureaucracy,
and red tape.
Secondly, the unfortunate truth is that communities and
officials in southern African countries see the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service as divorced from their reality on the ground,
and therefore not a good faith partner. And who can blame them?
On one hand, Fish and Wildlife is giving grants that promote
sustainable use projects like the KAZA survey. Then, on the
other hand, Fish and Wildlife Service is rejecting sustainable
use proposals at international conferences like the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora, also known as CITES. When the leadership of Fish and
Wildlife Service speaks out of both sides of its mouth, African
stakeholders do not see a reliable ally.
Lastly, the WILD Act's implementation scheme represents a
significant diversion of assets from countries and communities
whose population management strategies represent the most
substantial and effective form of conservation. Many WILD Act
grant beneficiaries reject the benefits of legal, regulated
hunting and use WILD Act funds as a crutch to fund programs
that might otherwise be successfully paid for by hunting
revenue in range states. Why are we subsidizing a choice to be
less efficient and less strategic?
U.S. Fish and Wildlife can find more effective ways to
communicate with and listen to southern African countries to
address their wildlife conservation needs. This must be an
approach hunters and anti-hunters alike can agree on.
SCI remains very supportive of the WILD Act, but we suggest
that Congress use its oversight function to ensure that
community-based conservation funds reach the African
communities that need it most, rather than the coffers of
multi-national NGOs. Such reforms to the application process
would ensure the WILD Act fulfills its true mission of funding
effective conservation.
Thanks for your time, and I welcome any and all questions
from the Committee.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Cassidy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Benjamin Cassidy, Executive Vice President of
International, Government and Public Affairs, Safari Club International
on H.R. 5009

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Raking Member Huffman, Representative
Joyce, Representative Dingell, and members of the House Committee on
Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today about how commonsense,
community-centered conservation is critical for the meaningful
protection of the world's most iconic species. I am Benjamin Cassidy,
Executive Vice President of International, Government and Public
Affairs for Safari Club International (``SCI''). SCI is a nonprofit
I.R.C. Sec. 501(c)(4) corporation with approximately 85,000 members and
advocates worldwide. SCI is the only hunting rights organization with a
Washington, D.C. based national and international advocacy team and an
all-species focus. SCI's missions include conservation of wildlife,
protection of the hunter, and education of the public concerning
hunting and its use as a conservation tool. The conservation programs
of SCI's sister organization Safari Club International Foundation
(``SCIF''), support research, wildlife management, conservation
projects, and rural community leadership in North America, Africa, and
Central Asia.
SCI's global conservation efforts, specifically those in Africa,
prioritize community-driven conservation. What we see time and again is
that these communities are relentless advocates for the incorporation
of legal, regulated hunting as a component of their larger,
multifaceted conservation strategies. It is no surprise that the
countries that conserve 80% of the world's African elephants, nearly
70% of black rhinos, and approximately 90% of all white rhinos allow
lawful hunting.\1\ The same can be said for populations of lion,
leopard, giraffe, wild dog, cheetah, and many more. Specifically, this
legal regulated hunting offers benefits that include, but are not
limited to, preserving wildlife habitat and combatting poaching through
reducing human-wildlife conflict and providing economic opportunities
to communities, thereby disincentivizing poaching or other wildlife
crimes. Let us not forget that the two largest threats to wildlife
species are habitat loss and poaching.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ C.R. Thouless et al., African Elephant Status Report 2016
(``Elephant Status Report''), https://portals.iucn.org/library/sites/
library/files/documents/SSC-OP-060_D.pdf (reporting over 339,000 of the
total 415,000 African elephants are estimated to inhabit the seven
countries where they are hunted); African and Asia Rhinoceroses--
Status, Conservation and Trade (2022), CITES CoP19 Doc. 75 Annex 4,
Report prepared by the IUCN Species Survival Commission and TRAFFIC
(reporting 68% of Africa's black rhinos and 89% of Africa's white
rhinos inhabit Namibia and South Africa).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The WILD Act represents the largest pool of money from the
Department of the Interior that is directed towards community-driven
conservation projects in African range states. The WILD Act would
reauthorize the Multinational Species Conservation Fund (``MSCF'')
which supports global conservation of imperiled species, including
rhinos, elephants, tigers, great apes, and turtles. The grants target
species and address habitat conservation, law enforcement, and
technical assistance for conserving species under the MSCF. SCI
supports H.R. 5009 and its grant programs but believes that the process
for putting funds into conservation has become too tangled and
dominated by large international non-governmental organizations
(``NGOs''). SCI suggests that the grant process be reformed to fulfill
the MSCF's mission of putting resources into conservation, rather than
being consumed by paperwork and bureaucracy.
The WILD Act Reauthorizes Critical Funding for Elephants, Rhinos, and
Other Wildlife

The WILD Act would reauthorize MSCF funding used to promote
conservation of certain species. For African elephant, the WILD Act
would reauthorize the African Elephant Conservation Act (``AECA'') for
fiscal years 2024 through 2028 at $5 million per fiscal year. The AECA
grants the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (``Service'') the authority
to establish the African Elephant Conservation Fund (``AECF'') to
provide funding for projects that benefit African elephants through
research, conservation, and management of the species and its habitat.
Projects are carried out in cooperation with African range states and
NGOs.
As a recent example of the importance of this funding, the AECF
provided grant monies for the first ever synchronized aerial elephant
survey for the entire Kavango Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation Area
(``KAZA''). Established in 2011 and covering 106 million acres across
parts of Angola, Botswana, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, KAZA is the
world's largest transboundary conservation landscape. In September
2023, KAZA announced the results of its 2022 elephant survey.\2\ The
much-anticipated results from the first-of-its-kind survey show exactly
what hunters, outfitters, and southern African governments have known
all along: elephants are stable or increasing throughout the region and
in particular in countries where they are part of a sustainable use
conservation hunting program. The estimated elephant population for the
region was calculated at 227,900.\3\ This represents an increase from
the IUCN's 2016 African Elephant Status Report, which estimated a
combined 216,970 elephants in the KAZA region. Across KAZA, 58% of
elephants were found in Botswana, 29% in Zimbabwe, 9% in Namibia, and
the remaining 4% were found in Zambia and Angola combined.\4\ These
kinds of surveys and resulting data are critical for the implementation
of both domestic and international elephant management policies that
drive effective elephant conservation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ KAZA Launches its 2022 KAZA Elephant Survey results (2023),
https://www.kavangozambezi.org/2023/08/31/kaza-launches-its-2022-kaza-
elephant-survey-results/.
\3\ Bussiere, E.M.S. and Potgieter, D., An Aerial Survey of
Elephants and Other Large Herbivores in the Kavango Zambezi
Transfrontier Conservation Area Volume I: Results and Technical Report
(2023).
\4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reauthorization of the MSCF via the WILD Act will provide important
conservation funding administered through the AECA and other relevant
Acts. However, from SCI's perspective, Congress should encourage the
Service to structure the relevant grant programs such that local and
community conservation programs are the end beneficiaries, rather than
funneling grant funds through large, international NGOs.
Implementation of the MSCF Needs to Change

Despite the well-meaning intent of the MSCF and Congress's
reauthorization of these funds, the implementation process for
administering the grants, and the Service's general approach to
awarding conservation efforts in Africa, should be improved.
Regrettably, many stakeholders and conservation partners in southern
Africa view many of the Service's actions related to African
charismatic mega-fauna as divorced from their reality on the ground.
Rather than recognizing the conservation successes of southern Africa--
related in particular to elephants, rhinos, and other popular species--
the Service's actions routinely hinder development of robust
conservation programs in the region. Elephant management in Botswana is
a great example.
After a five-year closure, Botswana reopened hunting in 2020
because of increased human-wildlife conflict and the failure of
photographic tourism to successfully accommodate for the livelihoods of
rural Botswanans. Botswana has an estimated 130,000 elephants with an
estimated carrying capacity of 50,000 elephants. Upon lifting the
moratorium, the Director of Wildlife and National Parks, Kabelo
Senyatso stated, ``Botswana has an estimated 130,000 elephants and the
population is growing, not declining . . . we lifted the hunting
moratorium on elephant in order to generate sustainable income for our
communities, not to control the elephant numbers.'' \5\ Hunting
generated income has become necessary to compensate communities who
live near and among large and destructive wildlife, like elephants. And
the results of the KAZA elephant survey, explained above, indicate that
elephant populations in the region are stable and increasing, with
Botswana having the most elephants of any country in the world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ IUCN Says Support for Proven Elephant Management is Critical to
Species' Conservation in New Red List Assessment (2021) (``IUCN Red
List Assessment''), https://safariclub.org/iucn-says-support-for-
proven-elephant-management-is-critical-to-species-conservation-in-new-
red-list-assessment/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite the need to mitigate human-wildlife conflict and the
benefits of clearly sustainable hunting, the Service's rules and
regulations related to African elephant promulgated and implemented
pursuant to the Endangered Species Act have diminished the positive
impacts that conservation hunting can have in Botswana. By putting up
regulatory barriers, in particular related to the importation of sport-
hunted elephants, the Service continues to reduce the funding that
might otherwise be available to mitigate significant human-wildlife
conflict and supplement overstretched government resources.
Notwithstanding the Service's general recognition that sustainable
use hunting programs drive conservation and benefit local communities
throughout the region (and elsewhere around the world), the Service
routinely makes it unnecessarily more difficult for range states to
implement robust sustainable use programs by restricting or prohibiting
the importation of sport-hunted wildlife, voting against beneficial
sustainable use trade in fora like the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species (``CITES''), and awarding conservation
grants to programs that oppose sustainable use conservation. This must
change.
Regulated hunting generates significant benefits with low
environmental impact. The seven countries where elephants are hunted
and exported to the U.S. sustain over 81% of the global elephant
population. The four countries which export 90% of all elephant
trophies conserve over 60% of the world's elephant. Normally, when a
community has achieved some impressive metric--a school with high test
scores, a town with high incomes--we admire this success and try to
replicate it. Instead, the Service routinely grants MSCF funds to
countries and programs with no hunting in an attempt to manufacture
positive conservation outcomes in otherwise failing programs.
Dr. Chris Comer, Director of Conservation for SCIF, and an
experienced wildlife biologist, stated:

There are two kinds of elephants; those that are struggling due
to unmitigated poaching and dwindling habitat; and those where
government and landholders have set aside wild areas,
implemented programs to incentivize communities to protect
elephant, and invested in efforts to counter the commercial
poaching rings that decimate elephant populations.
Overwhelmingly, the elephants that are doing well are located
in Southern African countries, particularly [Southern African
Development Community] countries, where elephant management
includes both non-consumptive and consumptive use of the
species.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ IUCN Red List Assessment.

The Department of the Interior must find better, more effective
ways to promote sustainable use conservation, recognize successful
programs, and meet the needs of programs that produce benefits to
wildlife and habitat. WILD Act grant monies should be sent to the
countries and communities with demonstrable successes in order to
continue and enhance those successes and encourage others to do the
same. SCI encourages these grant funds be utilized as an incentive to
reward positive outcomes, rather than continuing to prop up programs
with limited benefits.
In particular, many community-based conservation programs could use
additional funds to preserve critical habitat and allocate resources
toward anti-poaching efforts. As co-sponsor Congressman Joyce said,
``[c]ommonsense, community-centered conservation helps restore habitats
and endangered wildlife, lifts up economies, and makes communities more
secure.'' \7\ MSCF grants should focus on providing communities with
the funds necessary to disincentivize poaching, reduce the competition
for habitat, and provide additional livelihood opportunities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Joyce, Dingell Introduce Legislation to Protect Wildlife and
Conservation Programs (2023), https://joyce.house.gov/posts/joyce-
dingell-introduce-legislation-to-protect-wildlife-and-conservation-
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anti-Poaching Efforts
Currently, hunting raises most of the revenue needed for anti-
poaching efforts. Hunting raises substantial revenue from concession
leases, trophy fees, conservation fees, taxes, and other charges levied
by national and local governments and landholders. Prior to trophy
import restrictions imposed by the U.S. and other western countries,
elephant hunting was the highest or among the highest sources of
hunting revenue.\8\ A large percentage of this revenue is used for law
enforcement and anti-poaching by national wildlife authorities.\9\ For
example, in Zimbabwe in 2014, hunting revenue funded one-quarter of the
wildlife authority's budget, and over 60% of this revenue was dedicated
to anti-poaching efforts.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ P.A. Lindsey et al., The Significance of African Lions for the
Financial Viability of Trophy Hunting and the Maintenance of Wild Land,
PLoS ONE 7(1) (2012), https://journals.plos.org/plosone/
article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0029332.
\9\ E.g., Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority,
Zimbabwe National Elephant Management Plan (2021-2025) (``Zimbabwe
Elephant Plan''), pp. 11, 12, 14 (``Financial resources deployed in the
management and general conservation of elephant during the years 2016
to 2019, averaged approximately $5.6 million per year or about $90.00
per km
2
excluding administrative costs.''); I.R. Nkuwi,
Conservation Status and Related Impacts of Elephants and Lion Trophy
Ban to Tanzania, Presented During International Wildlife Conservation
Council (Sept. 2018) (``Conservation Status of Elephant and Lion in
Tanzania'').
\10\ Showcasing Implementation of Zimbabwe's National Elephant
Management Plan (2015-2020) and Its National Action Plan, CoP18 Inf. 32
(2019), https://cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/cop/18/inf/E-CoP18-
Inf-032.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, hunting operators frequently run their own anti-poaching
patrols, which reduce the national government's law enforcement burden
and expand the ``boots on the ground''.\11\ It is not uncommon for
hunting operators to spend $70,000 to $100,000 a year (or more) on
anti-poaching. In the same vein, community game scouts, employed using
revenues from safari hunting, extend poaching control into communal
areas. For example, there are over 750 community game scouts in Zambia,
funded by hunting revenues. Similarly, from 2010 to 2015, rural
district councils in Zimbabwe spent $1.77 million on law enforcement
activities in CAMPFIRE areas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Zimbabwe Elephant Plan, p. 12 (``The presence of regulated
hunting can also reduce illegal activities. Many hunting operators in
Zimbabwe have specialised anti-poaching units. Private operators' lease
agreements include anti-poaching as an obligation of the
concessionaire.''); Conservation Status of Elephant and Lion in
Tanzania.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These efforts are working--far better in hunting areas than in
other parts of Africa, in which hunting is not part of the conservation
regime. One key indicator of the level of elephant poaching, the
Proportion of Illegally Killed Elephant (``PIKE''), shows both a
consistent downward trend in elephant poaching in southern and eastern
Africa, and that poaching is well below the ``unsustainable''
threshold.\12\ On the other hand, the PIKE in central and western
Africa is considerably higher and above the ``unsustainable''
threshold. Faced with these metrics of success, it is difficult to
understand why the Service sends so much money to countries without
regulated hunting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ The CITES ``Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephant''
(``MIKE'') program collects data on elephant mortalities and causes of
death, and evaluates relative poaching levels based on the PIKE,
calculated as the number of illegally killed elephant divided by the
total number of elephant carcasses observed. A PIKE value of 0.5 or
above implies that more elephant died from illegal killing that any
other causes. The 2022 MIKE report for eastern Africa shows ``strong
evidence for . . . a downward trend [in poaching] from 2011 to 2021,''
and that ``[t]he trend [in poaching] in the last five years, from 2017
to 2021, is downward.'' The PIKE for eastern Africa for 2021 was
estimated at 0.28, which is well below the ``unsustainable'' threshold
of 0.5 and well below the continental average of 0.40. CITES
Secretariat, Report on Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephants
(MIKE), CoP19 Doc. 66.5 (2021), Sec. 23. Likewise, ``[i]n the last five
years, from 2017 to 2021, there is strong evidence of a downward
trend'' in poaching in southern Africa, and the PIKE was estimated at
0.27, below the average continental PIKE estimate of 0.40.'' Id.
Sec. 25. Notably, the high PIKE of 0.70 in western Africa, where there
is no regulated hunting, increased the continental estimate. But the
low elephant population and small sample size means the reliability of
this PIKE estimate has ``a high level of uncertainty'' Id.
Sec. Sec. 26-27.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Habitat Protection
Countries that allow for legal, well-regulated hunting protect
habitat, save wildlife, support communities, and directly fight
poaching. The primary threat facing elephants--and almost all species--
is loss of habitat. Hunting justifies the preservation of large tracts
of intact habitat. Hunting areas protect far more land than national
parks in the relevant range states, from 1.5 times as much land to more
than five times as much land. Hunting areas also conserve far more
habitat than national parks in popular photo-tourist destination
countries that do not permit hunting, such as Kenya.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ For reference, Kenya is approximately two-thirds the size of
Tanzania, but its elephant range is less than one-third the size of
Tanzania's elephant range, and its elephant population is less than
half as large as Tanzania's. African Elephant Specialist Group,
Elephant Database, https://africanelephantdatabase.org/. ``[W]ildlife
numbers outside parks have declined in Kenya since it banned hunting.''
R. Emslie et al., Prince William Is Talking Sense--Trophy Hunting Is
Crucial to Conservation, The Independent (Mar. 18, 2016), https://
www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/prince-william-is-talking-sense-
trophy-hunting-is-crucial-to-conservation-a6940 506.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A 2007 study found that hunting areas protected over 22% more
habitat than national parks, or twice the size of Texas, that is more
than all formally protected areas on the continent combined.\14\ That
figure does not account for the growth of communal conservancies,
private ranches, and trans-frontier conservation areas (``TFCAs'')
since 2007. For example, 50 communal conservancies in Namibia protected
118,000 km
2
in 2007. As of the end of 2021 (in the middle of
the international Covid-19 pandemic), in Namibia alone, 86
conservancies protected over 180,000 km
2
.\15\ Communal lands
are of special importance, with the majority of elephant range in
southern Africa on communal lands, outside strictly protected national
park boundaries.\16\ The incentives from hunting (such as revenues,
infrastructure projects, employment, and meat) help maintain this land
as habitat and prevent its conversion to crops, livestock grazing, and
other human purposes.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ P. Lindsey et al., Economic and Conservation Significance of
the Trophy Hunting Industry in Sub-Saharan Africa, 134 Biological
Conservation 455-469 (2007), https://www.perc.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/08/Economic-and-conservation-significance.pdf.
\15\ Namibian Association of CBNRM Support Organisations, State of
Community Conservation in Namibia (2021) (``State of Community
Conservation in Namibia''), http://www.nacso.org.na/resources/state-of-
community-conservation.
\16\ Elephant Status Report, p. 138. Communal areas protect well
over half a million square kilometers of habitat across southern
Africa.
\17\ R. Cooney at al., The Baby and the Bathwater: Trophy Hunting,
Conservation and Rural Livelihoods, 68 Unasylva 249 (2017/1), https://
www.fao.org/3/i6855en/I6855EN.pdf; A. Dickman, Ending Trophy Hunting
Could Actually Be Worse for Endangered Species, CNN (Nov. 24, 2017),
https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/24/opinions/trophy-hunting-decline-of-
species-opinion-dickman/index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Buffer zones created by hunting concessions provide critical
habitat for protecting national parks and expand the habitat available
for wildlife species. In part this explains why countries that depend
on regulated hunting have the largest populations of elephant, rhino,
lion, leopard, giraffe, wild dog, cheetah, and many more.
Community Livelihoods
Hunting, especially elephant hunting, benefits the rural
communities who live alongside elephants (and other species) and who
are most impacted by this wildlife. Human-elephant conflict is a major
issue in southern Africa. Communities are increasingly exposed to loss
of crops, damage to water supplies and fences, and even physical harm
to humans.\18\ For example, in the Zambezi and Erongo-Kunene regions of
Namibia's communal conservancies, there was an average of 700 elephant
conflict incidents reported between 2015-2019.\19\ When hunting was
suspended in Zambia (2012-2014), the wildlife authority received over
5,440 reports of crop or property damage and human injury caused by
elephants. In ten communal districts in Zimbabwe, an estimated 50
people were killed, and more than 7,000 hectares of crops were
destroyed by elephants between 2010 and 2015. The financial losses of
the crops were estimated to be as high as $1 million.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Botswana Department of Wildlife and National Parks, Botswana
Elephant Management Plan and Action Plan (2021-2026), CoP19-Inf-102
(``Botswana Elephant Plan''), p. 15; CAMPFIRE Association, The Role of
Trophy Hunting of Elephant in Support of the Zimbabwe CAMPFIRE Program
(Dec. 2016) (``CAMPFIRE Role of Trophy Hunting''); CAMPFIRE
Association, Press Statement on Lifting of the Suspension of Elephant
Trophy Imports into America (Nov. 21, 2017) (``CAMPFIRE Press
Statement''), https://campfirezimbabwe.org/article/press-statement-21-
november-2017; N. Onishi, A Hunting Ban Saps a Village's Livelihood,
The New York Times (Sept. 12, 2015).
\19\ State of Community Conservation in Namibia, pp. 63-64.
\20\ CAMPFIRE Press Statement.

Hunting can help boost community tolerance for elephants through
creating clear and direct benefits from wildlife. For example, in the
national elephant management plan, the Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Management Authority explains,

When it is viewed as a valuable asset, wildlife becomes an
economically competitive land use in Zimbabwe, which leads to
habitat preservation instead of habitat destruction and
conversion to agriculture or livestock production. Game animals
have a survival advantage because of user-pay stewardship
systems where use revenue generated from tourist hunters is
paid through to wildlife authorities and local communities.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Zimbabwe Elephant Plan, p. 12.

Prior to the Service's suspension of elephant trophy imports from
Zimbabwe in 2014, hunting revenues averaged $2.2 million/year in
CAMPFIRE Areas, and elephant hunting alone generated approximately $1.6
million/year (70% of the total on average).\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ CAMPFIRE Role of Trophy Hunting; CAMPFIRE Press Statement.

Opposing potential restrictions on trophy imports in the state of
Connecticut, the Director of Zambia's Department of National Parks and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wildlife explained,

the benefits of regulated hunting are crucial to maintaining
rural community support for growing populations of dangerous
game such as elephants, lions, and leopards. . . . [S]ome of
Zambia's poorest communities bear the greatest impact of crop-
raiding elephants . . . But these communities tolerate the
wildlife largely because they derive income, social services,
and much-needed game meat from regulated hunting.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ C. Simukonda, CT's Ban of 6 African Species Would Hurt, Not
Save, Wildlife, Stamford Advocate (Apr. 19, 2021), Stamford Advocate,
https://www.stamfordadvocate.com/opinion/article/Opinion-CT-s-ban-of-6-
African-species-would-16105621.php.

Under Zambia law, at least half of all hunter-harvested game meat
must be shared with local communities, resulting in approximately
130,000 kg of fresh game meat provisioned each year to local
communities.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ P.A. White & J.L. Belant, Provisioning of Game Meat to Rural
Communities as a Benefit of Sport Hunting in Zambia, PLoS ONE 10(2)
(2015), https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0117237.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, approximately 55% of the hunting revenues in Namibia's
communal conservancies come from elephant hunts alone. The
conservancies secure otherwise unprotected habitat across 180,000
km
2
and benefit 238,700 people.\25\ Revenue from hunting is
reinvested into badly needed rural infrastructure, like construction of
clinics and schools, improvements in drinking water, building and
improving roads, and much more.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ R. Naidoo et al., Complementary Benefits of Tourism and
Hunting to Communal Conservancies in Namibia, 30 Conservation Biology
(Jan. 8, 2016), p. 635, https://conbio.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1111/cobi.12643; State of Community Conservation in Namibia, p. 11.
\26\ E.g., E. Koro, Significant Benefits: The Reason Why Hunting
Will Not Stop in Africa Despite Foreign Opposition, The Chronicle (Feb.
22, 2023), https://www.chronicle.co.zw/significant-benefits-the-reason-
why-hunting-will-not-stop-in-africa-despite-foreign-opposition/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, when rural communities live near hunting areas (common
in some countries, less common in others), elephant hunting provides
much-needed protein. Hunting operators and conservancies are also major
sources of employment in the remote areas where hunting takes
place.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ R. Cooney at al., The Baby and the Bathwater: Trophy Hunting,
Conservation and Rural Livelihoods, 68 Unasylva 249 (2017/1), https://
www.fao.org/3/i6855en/I6855EN.pdf.

Botswana's President took to international media to explain why
Botswana was reopening hunting after a moratorium; \28\ this is further
explained in Botswana's national elephant management plan:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ H.E.M. Masisi, Hunting Elephants Will Help Them Survive, Wall
Street Journal (June 19, 2019), https://www.wsj.com/articles/hunting-
elephants-will-help-them-survive-11560985152.

The hunting moratorium [in Botswana] resulted in ill-feeling in
a number of communities and settlements, especially from
members of the local population who regard hunting as a
traditional way of life. Many local people were formerly
reliant on controlled hunting for food, income and employment
especially on marginal lands where elephant occur but where
land that is not suitable and financially viable for
photographic tourism and other economic options, such
agriculture is very limited. . . . When hunting was suspended
in 2014, many community Trusts in northern Botswana experienced
large declines in income.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Botswana Elephant Plan, pp. 21, 23; see also E. Koro, Inside
Botswana Communities' 21st century International Hunting Windfall,
Zimbabwe Independent (Mar. 15, 2023), https://www.theindependent.co.zw/
local-news/article/200008854/inside-botswana-communities-21st-century-
international-hunting-windfall (discussing benefits to Botswana
communities from reopening of regulated hunting).

Currently, countries where regulated hunting is banned or severely
limited are using MSCF grants to fund otherwise unsuccessful
conservation strategies because they do not achieve the same benefits
that sustainable use conservation hunting programs generate. In other
words, the very fact that most of these grants go to programs in range
states that do not have robust sustainable use conservation hunting
programs is indicative of the failure of hunting prohibitions. These
countries use MSCF funds as a ``crutch'' to fund the same programs
successfully paid for by hunting revenue in range states. Why is the
Service rewarding ill planned conservation strategies? This is a
diversion of the bulk of the funds from countries and communities whose
population management strategies represent the most substantial and
effective form of conservation.
Conclusion

In essence, the grant programs should be utilized to help protect
habitat and incentivize good conservation practices, including
community-based conservation. These programs ensure a low-overhead,
results-based approach to maximize effectiveness, efficiency, and
conservation success. Hunting already does all of the above. It helps
protect target species like elephant and rhino. It helps reduce
trafficking with boots on the ground anti-poaching efforts. It is low
overhead and results-based--hunting cannot occur without a sustainable
and sizable population. And the countries that rely on hunting have
documented conservation success.
SCI supports H.R. 5009 and the relevant grant programs but the
process for putting funds into conservation has become too tangled and
dominated by large international NGOs. Congress and the Service should
work to reduce the paperwork and bureaucratic burden required to access
these funds and incentivize successful conservation programs, rather
than continuously sinking grant monies into programs antithetical to
community-centered conservation that have little chance of on-the-
ground success.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Ben Cassidy, Executive Vice
President of International, Government and Public Affairs,
Safari Club International

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. Mr. Cassidy, in your testimony, you mentioned that the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's actions do not always support
international community-centered conservation. Can you provide
additional explanation as to what the Service can do better related to
international conservation?

Answer.

1. Remove regulatory red tape.

In the Endangered Species Act (ESA), Congress did not require
permits for most hunting trophies. In fact, Congress created a
presumption of legality for the import of most hunting trophies in
Section 9(c)(2) of the ESA.\1\ Under this presumption, most hunting
trophies would be importable without a permit. However, the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (USFWS), by regulation, has overridden this
presumption of legality for species including elephant, argali, and
lion--the latter, over the objections of range countries. By so doing,
the USFWS has created red tape for the range countries with the world's
largest populations of these species. And it has created more work for
itself. As explained in my testimony, the USFWS has been unable to
timely process permits. The delays and uncertainty created by the USFWS
permit requirements are one way by which the USFWS does not support
community-centered conservation. And the USFWS could address this
problem fairly easily. It could amend its regulations to remove the
permit requirements. That would make its administration of the ESA more
consistent with Congress' intent in Section 9(c)(2). And it would be
more consistent with Section 8 of the ESA, which requires the USFWS to
``encourage foreign conservation.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Section 9(c)(2) is codified at 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1538(c)(2)
(presuming as legal the non-commercial import of species that are not
listed as endangered and are already protected by listing on Appendix
II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)). Hunting trophies are imported for non-
commercial purposes. Several notable species that are hunted--argali
from Central Africa, lion from southern Africa, almost all elephant
from southern Africa--are listed as threatened (so not listed as
endangered) and are listed on Appendix II of CITES. But for USFWS
regulations, the import of hunting trophies of these species would be
presumed legal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Respond to community requests for amended regulations that recognize
and support community-centered conservation.

Two community associations, the CAMPFIRE Association representing
rural communities in Zimbabwe and the Ngamiland Council of Non-
Governmental Organizations (NCONGO) from Botswana submitted a petition
in 2021 to the Department of the Interior, asking to revise USFWS
regulations to reduce the burden on rural and local communities and to
make the regulations consistent with the President's Executive Order on
Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities through
the Federal Government.\2\ The USFWS has not proposed regulations in
response to this petition. But the suggestions from these community
representatives would provide a good starting point for how the USFWS
could improve its international conservation efforts, should the USFWS
decline to remove the regulations that serve as barriers to
conservation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.campfirezimbabwe.org/sites/default/files/
petition_ncgongo_ca.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Streamline the permitting process.

At the very least, the USFWS should reconsider how it goes about
its permitting process. Rural communities and range countries routinely
object to the USFWS ``moving the target'' for how to demonstrate the
undefined term of ``enhancement'' required in USFWS regulations.\3\
Until 2014, the ``enhancement'' requirement sought a demonstration of
benefits, typically in terms of habitat protection, anti-poaching
funding, or improved community livelihoods. Range countries with
hunting programs could make this showing without much difficulty.
Countries like Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania,
Zambia, and Zimbabwe indisputably have more habitat set aside for
wildlife than in countries without hunting, have stable sources of
anti-poaching funding, and are implementing community-based
conservation programs. Thus, these countries maintain the world's
largest populations of elephants, giraffes, leopards, lions, and other
species. But the USFWS has gradually moved away from its prior
interpretation of ``enhancement.'' In 2014, for example, despite
recognizing that Zimbabwe has an elephant population exceeding 80,000,
the USFWS suspended the issuance of import permits for elephant from
Zimbabwe without warning or notice because it found Zimbabwe's 17-year-
old national elephant management plan was ``outdated.'' Similarly, in
late 2022 the USFWS published a proposed rule that would require range
countries to make a host of certifications on very specific points.\4\
The USFWS should go back to its previous interpretation of
``enhancement,'' which created less of a barrier to imports and less of
a detriment to community-centered conservation programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, e.g., 50 C.F.R. Sec. 17.32, Sec. 17.40(e), (j).
\4\ SCI's comments explaining the many shortcomings of this
proposal are available at https://safariclub.org/wp-content/uploads/
2023/03/2023-03-20-Elephant-4d-Rule-Comment-Final37.pdf?_
s=0i1gtazdh4pevnasl74i.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the USFWS could make nationwide enhancement findings.
For argali sheep, USFWS regulations would permit such national findings
to be made by the USFWS Director and published in the Federal
Register.\5\ For elephants and lions, the USFWS could develop these
findings under its typical notice-and-comment rulemaking process.
Although the initial rulemaking would take a little more time than the
current individual enhancement findings, the USFWS could reduce its
overall burden, as well as the burden on individual hunters, and would
give confidence that imports could occur pursuant to a rulemaking. The
USFWS could consider setting the rule for set duration, such as ten
years, and then revisit the rule as needed. That would assist
communities and range countries with their conservation planning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 50 C.F.R. Sec. 17.40(j).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Streamline the grant application process.

As explained in my testimony, the process for applying for
Multinational Species Conservation Fund grants is onerous. As a result,
the grants are often awarded to U.S. non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) who then partner with NGOs in range countries. Rural communities
do not often partner with U.S. NGOs in the same way--especially in
southern Africa, where wildlife populations are healthier. The USFWS
should reduce the paperwork associated with the grant program. It could
also develop specific grants for which local communities could apply,
such as grants under the African Elephant Conservation Fund to reduce
human-elephant conflicts. It could also develop a specific grant
program for the range countries themselves, again, with reduced
paperwork. Such a program would be consistent with the directive of the
African Elephant Conservation Act.

Question 2. Promotion of community-centered conservation seems to
have broad bipartisan support in Congress. In addition to passing the
WILD Act, what else can Congress do to promote international wildlife
conservation and fix related challenges?

Answer.

1. Make minor amendments to the ESA to encourage foreign conservation,
including by making Section 9(c)(2) mandatory.

Fifty years ago this December, the U.S. Congress passed, and
President Nixon signed, the ESA into law. The Supreme Court has called
the ESA ``the most comprehensive legislation for the preservation of
endangered species enacted by any nation.'' \6\ But sprawling,
comprehensive legislation can become less effective over time when
administrative agencies take liberties to implement the statute
differently than intended. Having the benefit of learning from 50 years
of implementation, Congress can reflect on what was intended when the
ESA was enacted, how the law is implemented by the USFWS, and how to
fix situations in which implementation conflicts with Congress'
original intent. A few small changes can make a significant and
meaningful impact that will benefit international wildlife
conservation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 180 (1978).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Perhaps the best example of a small change with big impact is
amending Section 9(c)(2) of the ESA.\7\ This section was intended to
facilitate the import of certain foreign species. When adopting the
ESA, the 1977 Congress undoubtedly realized that the USFWS has no power
to regulate foreign species on foreign soil. Thus, the ESA's signature
protections, such as recovery planning and critical habitat
designations, cannot apply to foreign species. The USFWS only has the
authority to regulate the import of these species.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1538(c)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress expected the USFWS to use this authority as a carrot, not
a stick--and Section 9(c)(2) and its legislative history reflect this
expectation. Section 9(c)(2) provides that the import of a non-
endangered (i.e., threatened or non-ESA listed) species, which is
already protected by listing on Appendix II of CITES and which is not
being imported for commercial purposes, is presumed to be legal.
However, the USFWS has interpreted Section 9(c)(2) as a rebuttable
presumption and asserts that it has rebutted the presumption for a
number of ESA threatened and CITES Appendix II species, including
African elephant, lion, and Asian argali. Thus, the exemption does not
apply for import of these species, and ESA import permits are required.
The ``architect'' of the ESA, Michigan Rep. John Dingell, explained
that this section was included primarily so that the import of hunting
trophies from healthy wildlife populations could continue without
obstruction. Rep. Dingell acknowledged that the bill which became the
ESA ``ha[d] been attacked by some as a[n] anti-hunter bill; it ha[d]
been attacked by others as a prohunter bill. In reality, it is
neither.'' He explained that the ESA was ``carefully drafted to
encourage . . . foreign governments to develop healthy stocks of
animals occurring naturally within their borders. If these animals are
considered valuable as trophy animals, and are not endangered, they
should be regarded as a potential source of revenue to the managing
agency and they should be encouraged to develop to the maximum extent
compatible with the ecosystem upon which they depend.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ House Consideration and Passage of H.R. 37 with Amendments,
U.S. Congressional Record (Sept. 18, 1973), p. 195.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rep. Dingell further confirmed that the Department of the Interior
would place ``no barriers'' on the import of ``nonendangered trophy
animals'' from countries where they ``are being managed in such a way
as to assure their continued and healthy existence.'' He concluded:
``This is as it should be, because it is only in the understanding that
these animals have a real and measurable value that many of the less
developed countries will agree to take steps to assure their continued
existence.'' \9\ According to Rep. Dingell, Section 9(c)(2) was
intended to provide security for those who lawfully hunted animals in
these countries, so they could import the animals without fear the
USFWS would block their imports. Yet that is exactly what the USFWS has
done.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the last few years, the USFWS has developed a huge backlog for
the import of hunting trophies, for personal (non-commercial) purposes,
from countries with impressive conservation records. For example, the
USFWS has hundreds of permit applications pending for the import of
elephant trophies from Botswana, Zimbabwe, Namibia, and South Africa.
These four countries conserve over half the world's elephants; they
also account for almost 90% of imports of elephant hunting trophies.
Elephants are listed as threatened, not endangered, and elephants from
these populations are listed on Appendix II of CITES. But for USFWS
regulations, these imports would be exempt from ESA permit requirements
pursuant to Section 9(c)(2). The same is true for lions from southern
Africa, argali from central Asia, and a number of other species
worldwide. An amendment to Section 9(c)(2) would alleviate a
significant (self-inflicted) burden on the USFWS' permitting office and
allow those federal employees to focus on species that truly need
permitting oversight.
Countries around the world depend on the revenues and other
benefits from hunting to justify and fund the protection of habitat,
and to incentivize conservation of these species by private and
community stakeholders. In southern Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, and
Namibia, countries with large elephant populations and increasing lion
populations, have well-developed community-centered conservation
programs that ensure the people who live side-by-side with dangerous
megafauna can benefit from regulated hunting. Yet these well-developed
programs are negatively impacted by import restrictions. These
countries, and their communities, private stakeholders and ecologists,
have spoken out against such restrictions. But their comments have
fallen on deaf ears. Despite the opposition from range countries, the
USFWS continues to put up barriers to the import of hunting trophies.
Congress could fix this problem with a one-sentence amendment to
the ESA. Congress could make the language in Section 9(c)(2) mandatory.
In other words, instead of ``presuming'' the legality of imports,
Congress could simply declare that the non-commercial import of non-
endangered species already regulated by Appendix II of CITES is legal
and does not require import permits.

The corrective amendment to Section 9(c)(2) is as simple as:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3813.001

.epsThis change would effectuate the original intent of Congress
when it included Section 9(c)(2) in the ESA. As Rep. Dingell declared,
allowing the import of trophies from healthy wildlife populations ``is
as it should be.'' \10\ But it is not how it is.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ House Consideration and Passage of H.R. 37 with Amendments,
U.S. Congressional Record (Sept. 18, 1973), p. 195.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Require robust consultation with range states prior to listing
amendments and special rule amendments.

The ESA's predecessor, the Endangered Species Preservation Act of
1966, only applied to domestic species. In 1969, that law was amended
to allow the listing of foreign species as threatened or endangered,
but only for purposes of regulating international commercial trade.
The 1977 ESA for the first time allowed foreign species to be
listed the same as domestic species. In so doing, Congress required the
USFWS to ``encourage foreign conservation programs,'' ESA Section
8,\11\ and to ``take these [programs] into account'' when making a
listing determination, ESA Section 4(b).\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Section 8 is codified at 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1537.
\12\ Section 4(b) is codified at 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1533(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite these--and other--directives from Congress, the USFWS
routinely fails to fully consider foreign conservation programs when
deciding whether to list a species or when amending a listing rule. The
USFWS also fails to consider any negative impacts that listing
decisions may have on such foreign conservation programs. And the USFWS
generally fails to use its listing authority to encourage foreign
conservation; rather, it tends to apply sweeping rules and restrictions
that do not adequately differentiate between countries that have
successful conservation and those that do not.

To help rectify this defective approach to foreign species
conservation, Congress should amend Section 4(b)(1) of the ESA:

Section 4(b)(1) of the Act (16 U.S.C. Sec. 1533(b)(1)) is
amended to include the following subsection (C):

(C) In carrying out this subsection and taking into account
efforts made by any foreign nation, or any political
subdivision of a foreign nation, to protect such species, the
Secretary shall:

(i)(a) Contact, in-person if practicable, any nation in
which such species is presently found in significant numbers
(at least 3% of the estimated global population), to consult on
the status of the species in that nation and potential negative
impacts of the listing on that nation's conservation programs;
and (b) Provide a questionnaire asking for information on
conservation practices to protect the species in that country,
to which the foreign nation shall be provided a reasonable time
to respond.

(ii) Give any information provided in response to this
consultation request and/or questionnaire the highest weight in
assessing the factors identified in the above section.

(iii) Determine not to list such species in the relevant
foreign nation if information provided by that nation
demonstrates that its conservation efforts, including predator
control, protection of habitat and food supply, or other
conservation practices, are reasonably maintaining the
available habitat and current population of the species in that
nation (which may include a decline in the current population,
if the decline is not considered statistically significant by
peer-reviewed scientific analyses), unless compelling
scientific or management data indicate otherwise.

(iv) Explain in any rule listing such species, based on
country-specific data and findings, why the listing is
necessary despite any negative impact on the foreign nation's
conservation efforts demonstrated by that foreign nation in
response to the consultation and/or questionnaire required by
this section.

If the ESA is really going to protect and recover species, the
USFWS should be working with range countries, not against them. The
USFWS, via the ESA, should better acknowledge successful conservation
efforts and apply the burden of ESA listings only on those countries
that have demonstrated an inability to successfully conserve the
relevant species.

Question 3. In addition to these grants, what programs or efforts
does the USFWS have in place to encourage foreign conservation? How
could the USFWS improve its international conservation efforts?

Answer. To SCI's knowledge, the USFWS has very few programs in
place to encourage foreign conservation, outside of these grant
programs. That belief was reinforced by the proposed 4(d) rule for
African elephant that the USFWS published in November 2022, which has
been vigorously opposed by the southern African range countries.\13\ In
the proposed rule and the subsequent public listening session to
explain the proposal, the USFWS stated that it provides ``technical
assistance and capacity building'' for range countries, but clarified
that such assistance is specific to how to comply with U.S.
requirements for import of hunting trophies. Such a program is not
really ``technical assistance.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ 87 Fed. Reg. 68975 (Nov. 17, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to the recommendations above to revise its regulatory
requirements, the USFWS could improve its international conservation
efforts by developing a technical assistance and capacity building
program, where it could assist range countries with on-the-ground
conservation. Similarly, if the USFWS is concerned about law
enforcement or legal requirements in range countries, the USFWS could
develop programs that provide technical assistance and capacity
building in these areas. The USFWS could hire biologists to help
develop best practices for habitat protection, anti-poaching, or
reducing human-wildlife conflicts, and share these best practices with
range countries. Should the USFWS endeavor to provide such assistance,
SCI is confident that the USFWS biologists and on-the-ground agents
would likewise learn from the range state personnel who successfully
conserve the world's most charismatic megafauna.

Question 4. In your opinion, are the USFWS' international
conservation efforts effective? Why or why not? What could the USFWS do
better?

Answer. Some of the USFWS' international conservation efforts are
effective. The USFWS has issued many grants that have assisted with on-
the-ground conservation. The Kavango Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation
Area (KAZA) elephant survey is a good example of an effective use of
USFWS grants.\14\ But, at least with respect to southern Africa, the
USFWS has used its permitting power as a stick--not as a carrot. The
USFWS can do better by no longer trying to force foreign conservation
efforts into compliance with USFWS permitting requests and demands,
which are inflexible and often ignore the differences among the land
tenures and conservation programs of the countries in southern Africa.
Instead, the USFWS should focus on partnering with countries, as well
as local and rural communities, to continue their track record of
successful conservation. As discussed throughout these responses, the
USFWS can do this by listening to the range countries, instead of
ignoring their petitions or their opposition to proposed USFWS
policies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Information about the KAZA elephant survey is available at
https://safariclub.org/kaza-elephant-survey-results/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 5. In addition to reauthorizing these grant programs, what
could Congress do to improve the USFWS' international conservation
efforts?

Answer. In addition to the reauthorization of conservation funding
under the WILD Act and the minor ESA amendments discussed above,
Congress can further support international conservation efforts by
adopting the U.S. Foundation for International Conservation Act
(USFICA), H.R. 1298.

USFICA will enhance global conservation efforts by leveraging
public-private partnerships, empowering local communities, expanding
habitat buffer zones, and promoting sustainable use of natural
resources. Congress should pass the bill as critical to safeguarding
biodiversity and promoting sustainable use, community-centered
conservation around the world.

The bill's 1:1 public-private funding formula will advance
efficient and dynamic conservation projects beyond federal
bureaucracy while boosting current government and NGO
efforts.

The bill appropriately recognizes that tailoring
conservation to local needs leads to security and
sustainable development.

The bill's funding can be used for developing buffer zones
around protected areas, which helps to reduce human-
wildlife conflict.

The bill acknowledges that local communities and
governments, particularly in southern Africa, have a right
to manage their wildlife and benefit from their natural
resources; hunters' support is critical to these wildlife
economies.

USFICA has bipartisan support in Congress and broad support from
conservation stakeholders. As it will provide long-term, core support
for conserved areas and leverage additional contributions from other
funding sources, SCI encourages Congress to pass USFICA as another
measure that will provide support for community-centered conservation.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
I now recognize Ms. Wraithmell for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JULIE WRAITHMELL, VICE PRESIDENT AND EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, AUDUBON FLORIDA, MIAMI, FLORIDA

Ms. Wraithmell. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today in support of H.R.
4389, the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation
Enhancements Act.
My name is Julie Wraithmell. I am the Vice President and
Executive Director of Audubon Florida, the Florida State
program of the National Audubon Society. With our nearly 2
million members, Audubon works to protect birds in the places
that they need through our 16 state and regional offices, 32
centers, 450 chapters, and by working in 10 countries across
the Americas.
Over the past few weeks, millions of migratory birds have
been passing through my home state, Florida, as well as
Washington, DC, and communities across the United States during
their fall migration. These birds are undertaking awe-inspiring
journeys from their nesting habitat throughout America. More
than half of our country's birds will fly to Latin America and
the Caribbean to winter, including hundreds of beloved species
of birds like orioles, hummingbirds, ducks, shorebirds, hawks,
and many more.
It is only normal for us to think of the birds of our
everyday lives, the birds of our neighborhoods and communities
as ``our birds,'' belonging to that place. But in reality, many
of them are only on loan to us and, in fact, spend their lives
in motion washing like tides back and forth across the
hemisphere. These lives in motion are made possible by a
connected chain of habitats like stepping stones that birds
have depended upon for thousands of years.
In Florida, I can do everything that I can to protect the
places that my birds need in my state. But no matter how
successful I am, the chain is only as strong as its weakest
link. And if the links to Florida's south are failing, the
birds that we bid farewell to in the fall won't return to us
again in the spring.
The presence of migratory birds in our communities provides
a deep sense of joy and wonder, whether it is birds like
Baltimore orioles gracing our backyard trees and feeders,
purple martins raising their families in our schoolyards and
farms, to waterfowl such as blue winged teal dabbling in local
wetlands. More than 96 million people participated in bird
watching in 2022, according to the latest survey released by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. And consumer spending on
bird feeding, bird watching equipment, and travel creates more
than $100 billion in economic output annually. Birds also
provide numerous ecosystem services, including pest control,
pollination, seed dispersal, and more.
Tragically, bird populations are in steep decline, which
means that these benefits to people and communities are also
disappearing. A 2019 report found that North America's bird
population has declined by 3 billion birds since 1970. That is
more than 1 in 4 birds on the continent that have vanished in
less than a lifetime.
Recognizing the need for migratory bird conservation
investments, Congress passed the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Act in 2000. Since its inception, this program has
provided essential conservation funding across the Americas by
catalyzing partnerships and investing in cost-effective
projects to improve habitat conservation, promote bird-friendly
land use and farming practices, advanced research, and more.
Since 2000, the program has supported more than 700 projects
across 43 countries, benefiting more than 5 million acres of
habitat. Of the $89 million invested by the United States,
partners have brought an additional $346 million to the table.
Audubon supports the Migratory Birds of the Americas
Conservation Enhancements Act because it will help address
several current needs and opportunities for migratory birds.
The legislation will grow its authorized funding to meet the
demand for the program and the needs of our declining bird
populations, and it will improve the program's accessibility by
amending the matching requirement which has been identified as
an obstacle for partners, especially for smaller organizations
that do not have access to large funding resources.
Now is the time to reauthorize and enhance the Neotropical
Migratory Bird Conservation Act through passage of this
legislation. We are grateful for the leadership of
Representatives Salazar, Larsen, Joyce, and Peltola for
introducing this bipartisan bill, and to the Subcommittee for
holding this hearing. We encourage the advancement of this bill
to support America's migratory birds so that they can continue
to provide the significant value to the nation that they do,
and contribute to part of what makes America special.
Thank you, and I would look forward to any questions that
you may have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Wraithmell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Julie Wraithmell, Executive Director,
Audubon Florida
on H.R. 4389

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee--thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
in support of H.R. 4389, the Migratory Birds of the Americas
Conservation Enhancements Act.

My name is Julie Wraithmell, and I am the Vice President and
Executive Director of Audubon Florida, a state office of the National
Audubon Society. Nationwide, Audubon represents nearly 2 million
members and works to protect birds and the places they need through its
16 state and regional offices, 32 centers, 23 sanctuaries, more than
450 grassroots chapters, and by working in ten countries across the
Americas.
Audubon Florida is Audubon's largest state program with nearly
100,000 members, around 100 researchers, resource managers, educators,
and policy staff working to protect our water, wildlife, habitat, and
climate through the lens of birds.
Over the past several weeks, millions of migratory birds have been
passing through Florida, Washington, DC, and communities across the
United States during their fall migration, when many of the birds who
nest in the U.S. and Canada head south for the winter. According to the
bird migration tracking tool, BirdCast, more than 415 million birds
have migrated across Florida since August--including more than 54
million birds on one night alone.
These birds are undertaking awe-inspiring journeys, traveling from
their nesting habitat throughout America and as far north as the Arctic
and the vast boreal forest of Canada. Some overwinter in the southern
U.S., but more than half of America's birds will make their way to
Latin America and the Caribbean to winter--some traveling thousands of
miles and navigating countless hazards. This includes hundreds of
beloved species of birds from across the nation, such as orioles,
hummingbirds, swallows, ducks, shorebirds, hawks, and many more.
Many of them migrate at night, navigating by the stars, the earth's
magnetic field, and even the low frequency rumble of waves on distant
shores and winds crossing distant mountain ranges. Some, like
Whimbrels, a large shorebird, may fly for days nonstop over water.
Others, like Ruby-throated Hummingbirds, will lose more than 60% of
their bodyweight in their 15-hour nonstop flight across the Gulf of
Mexico from Louisiana to the Yucatan.
Some, like the Red Knot, spend their lives in perpetual summer--
spending the northern hemisphere's summer nesting on the tundra and
enjoying the southern hemisphere's summer at the southern tip of South
America.
The Blackpoll Warbler will fly up to 12,000 miles each year, from
as far as Alaska to Brazil, including nonstop journeys for days at a
time, while weighing as much as a AAA battery. Many of these journeys
are illustrated through Audubon's Bird Migration Explorer, which brings
together the latest tracking data for more than 450 species of birds,
along with conservation challenges they face along the way, and the
connections they illuminate between places across the hemisphere.
It's only normal for us to think of the birds of our everyday
lives--the birds of our neighborhoods and communities, states, and
regions, as our birds, belonging to that place. But in reality, many of
them are only on loan to us, and in fact spend their lives in motion,
washing like tides back and forth across the hemisphere.
These lives in motion are made possible by habitat anchors, where
birds nest in the north and winter in the south, connected by a chain
of essential habitats like stepping stones that the birds have depended
on for tens of thousands of years. In Florida, we can do everything we
can to protect the places ``my'' birds need in the state. But no matter
how successful we are, the chain is only as strong as its weakest link.
And if the links to Florida's south are failing, the birds we bid
farewell to in the fall, won't return to us again in the spring.
The presence of migratory birds in our communities during parts of
the year provides a deep sense of joy and wonder for people across the
country. Whether it's the enjoyment of birds in our backyards like
Baltimore Orioles gracing our trees and birdfeeders, Purple Martins
raising their young in our schoolyards and farms, to the waterfowl such
as Blue-Winged Teal dabbling in local wetlands, to the jewel-toned
warblers that delight birders in our local parks, National Wildlife
Refuges, and beyond.
Last week, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Association
of Fish and Wildlife Agencies released a new survey, which found that
more than 96 million people across the country participated in
birdwatching in 2022, including around the home and during travel. That
represents more than 1 in 4 people in the country, making it one of the
most popular and fastest-growing pastimes in America. 95% of those
participants enjoyed birdwatching around the home, and nearly half of
them--more than 43 million people--traveled outside the home to observe
wild birds. And during the height of the Covid-19 pandemic,
participation surged as millions of people found solace and comfort in
watching birds around their homes and neighborhoods.
Birds also provide significant cultural, spiritual, and subsistence
values to communities, and a direct connection to nature. They provide
numerous ecosystem services, such as pest control by consuming insects
that can damage our agricultural production and forests, while feeding
on mosquitoes in our communities, as well as supporting pollination of
our crops, seed dispersal, and more. Studies have even found that the
presence of birds benefits our psychological well-being.
And birds have a major economic impact. The 96 million people that
participate in birdwatching results in substantial consumer spending on
bird-feeding, birdwatching equipment, and travel, which supports local
communities around the nation, and creates more than $100 billion in
economic output annually. Wildlife-watching generally has a substantial
and growing economic impact. The most recent FWS and
AFWA survey found that wildlife-watchers spent more than $250
billion on these activities in 2022, including trip-related expenses,
equipment, and more.
Bird migration hotspots like Cape May NJ, Hawk Mountain PA, Grand
Isle LA, Bosque del Apache NM, Magee Marsh OH, and Platte River NE
demonstrate that protecting their habitat makes dollars and sense
because of the wildlife-viewing tourism-economies driven by birds.
In Southwest Florida, Audubon's Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary attracts
more than 100,000 people every year to enjoy birdwatching and wildlife
viewing. In many regions across the hemisphere, bird watching supports
sustainable ecotourism, which provides economic lifelines to
communities while keeping birds and ecosystems healthy.
Tragically, bird populations have been in decline for decades,
which means that these valuable benefits to people and communities are
also disappearing. A 2019 report found that North America's bird
population has declined by 3 billion birds since 1970--in other words,
more than 1 in 4 birds on the continent have vanished in less than a
lifetime.
The 2022 State of the Birds report found that birds of nearly all
types and in all landscapes, except for waterfowl and wetland-dependent
birds, are in decline, including more than half of all bird species. On
the one hand, the recovery of our waterfowl populations shows that
conservation efforts can work with sufficient resources and
partnerships. Yet the report also found that 70 species are now at a
tipping point, which have already lost half of their populations since
1970, and their populations will be further halved in the years ahead
without action.
Birds are indicators of the health of our environment. So declining
bird populations means that the health of our ecosystems and the
conditions that support human well-being are also in decline. And we
also know that birds are facing ongoing and increasing threats. This
includes habitat loss, pollution, preventable mortality, climate
change, and more. These threats are putting increasing pressure on bird
populations which only increases the need to invest further resources
in their conservation.
For example, devastating wildfires in the U.S. and in the boreal
forest of Canada are creating tragic impacts for people and communities
and damaging habitat for millions of migratory birds, and increasing
hazards during migration such as building collisions present serious
challenges to birds. This month in Chicago, more than 1,000 migratory
birds died at just one building along the lakefront, which puts further
stress on their populations.
Migratory birds--especially the hundreds of species that travel
long-distances across the hemisphere--have seen some of the greatest
population declines, and face some of the most significant challenges
going forward. Of the 3 billion birds lost since 1970, 2.5 billion were
migratory birds. That includes a loss of more than 2 in 5 Baltimore
Orioles and Barn Swallows on the continent. Bird species that migrate
to South America have declined overall by more than 40%. While these
recent numbers paint a stark and shocking picture, the declines and
needs for migratory birds have been known for many years.
That's why Congress passed the Neotropical Migratory Bird
Conservation Act in 2000. That bipartisan legislation, passed with
leadership from the late Congressman Don Young, created a grant program
to support bird conservation efforts throughout the Western Hemisphere.
This program provides an essential source of funding and
partnerships for migratory bird conservation across the Americas. It
enables the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to support efforts across
the U.S., Canada, Latin America, and the Caribbean, by catalyzing
partnerships and investing in cost-effective projects that benefits
bird habitat, enhances education and awareness, advances necessary
research and coordination, and more.
Successful bird conservation in our states and across the nation
depends on conservation and partnerships not only in the states, but
across the full ranges of migratory birds. Maintaining and recovering
bird populations will require working together within the United
States, and also in places like Colombia, Panama, Chile, Mexico,
Canada, and more.
This program helps to preserve all the links in the chain of
migration that these birds depend upon. In part because of the
concentration and importance of wintering migratory birds in certain
regions, these projects can be a highly cost-effective investment in
conservation and make an outsized impact. Moreover, many of these
wintering and migratory stopover sites in Latin America continue to be
at risk from habitat loss, including deforestation, and the program
supports efforts to target key places for conservation to address these
challenges.
Since 2000, the NMBCA program has supported more than 700 projects,
across 43 countries, benefiting more than 5 million acres of habitat.
Of the $89 million invested by the U.S., partners have brought more
than $346 million to the table. These projects have advanced
conservation across the entire flyways of migratory birds and their
full annual cycle.
For example, the Wood Thrush is an iconic bird of our eastern
forests, which is famous for its flutelike, ethereal song, and it is
the official bird of Washington DC. Sadly, these songs are fading from
our forests, as this species has declined by more than 60% since 1970.
It has been identified as a Species of Greatest Conservation Need in 29
states, including Florida, Virginia, Arkansas, West Virginia, and more.
NMBCA projects have helped to conserve its nesting habitat in the
Appalachian Mountains of West Virginia, as well as its wintering
habitat in places like Guatemala.
There, funding has helped to empower young women of the Maya
highlands to help sustainably manage natural resources and forest
habitat in their communities, while securing vital wintering areas for
Wood Thrush and other migratory and resident birds. In doing so, this
funding also helps our states achieve their bird conservation goals
through the State Wildlife Action Plans by helping to advance their
recovery and reinforce state investments.
Similarly, the Cerulean Warbler, a stunning blue-and-white songbird
beloved by birders, has declined by more than 70% since the 1970s, and
has been identified as a Species of Greatest Conservation Need by 35
states, including Florida. The NMBCA has supported conservation of its
nesting habitat, such as the aforementioned West Virginia project,
along with efforts in Ohio, Iowa, and Canada, and vital projects in its
wintering habitat in Colombia, Peru, Ecuador, and more. This includes
efforts to not only conserve key habitat, but also work with landowners
on projects such as bird-friendly coffee production.
Despite the important and effective investments in the NMBCA, there
has been more demand for the grants than the program can currently
meet. As of 2021, less than one-third of all proposals have been able
to receive funding, leaving more than 1,800 projects unable to be
supported and implemented.
And to help meet the needs of the birds that are vanishing before
our eyes, more resources are urgently needed for bird conservation on
the ground, and in the places of greatest need. NMBCA projects help
proactively invest in these species, which reduces the need for listing
under the Endangered Species Act.
Many of the species this program benefits are facing long-term
declines, and could be considered for ESA listings without further
investments.
Audubon supports H.R. 4389, the Migratory Birds of the Americas
Conservation Enhancements Act, because it will address several current
needs and opportunities for migratory birds and for the NMBCA program.
First, the legislation will reauthorize the program, which is an
important and timely step as the five-year authorization ran through
Fiscal Year 2023. Second, the legislation will help grow the authorized
funding over time, which will help provide additional resources to meet
the overwhelming interest in the program.
Third, the legislation will address a significant current barrier
to participation in the program and improve its accessibility by
amending the matching requirement. The current 3:1 match has been
identified as an obstacle for partners to apply for grants, especially
for smaller organizations that do not have access to large funding
resources. By amending the statutory requirement to a 2:1 match, more
partners will be able to come to the table, while bringing it closer in
line with similar conservation grant programs. Additionally, this does
not limit partners from bringing more funding to the table than would
be required under the legislation.
Fourth, the legislation will support greater capacity for managing
the program, by increasing the ceiling for administration. Current
levels under the 3% ceiling are insufficient to support full-time staff
capacity to implement the program, and the legislation will help
provide greater support for management by raising it to 4%.
Now is the time to reauthorize and enhance the NMBCA program, and
the Migratory Birds of the Americas legislation will take key steps to
achieve these important and necessary goals. We are grateful for the
leadership of Representatives Salazar, Larsen, Joyce, and Peltola for
introducing this bipartisan legislation, and for the bill's co-
sponsors, as well as to Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman for
holding this hearing on this vital legislation. We look forward to
assisting the committee, and we encourage the advancement of this bill
to support America's migratory birds, so that our communities will
continue to enjoy the economic and quality of life benefits of having
these birds among us.
Thank you, and I would look forward to any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you.
I now recognize Dr. Colden for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALLISON COLDEN, MARYLAND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
CHESAPEAKE BAY FOUNDATION, ANNAPOLIS, MARYLAND

Dr. Colden. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me here to testify today on behalf of the Chesapeake
Bay Foundation and our more than 300,000 members in support of
H.R. 4770, the Chesapeake Bay Science, Education, and Ecosystem
Enhancement Act, or SEEE Act.
I would also like to take a moment before I start and
recognize Mr. Wittman and thank him for his support of this
important legislation.
For more than half a century, CBF has led a landmark effort
to save the Chesapeake Bay, a national treasure on which more
than 18 million people and more than 3,600 species of plants
and animals depend. Our watershed spans from the headwater
streams of Cooperstown, New York to the confluence of the
Atlantic Ocean in Virginia Beach, Virginia, and westward to the
Allegheny Mountains. We are the largest estuary in the nation
and the third largest estuary in the world.
More importantly, the Chesapeake Bay is a vital economic
engine for our region and for our nation. Setting aside
recreation, cultural, and tourism industries, the commercial
and recreational fisheries alone supported more than $7 billion
in sales, nearly $2 billion in income, and supported more than
60,000 jobs in 2020, according to NOAA's latest reports.
For more than 40 years, Federal, state, and local
governments, alongside non-profit partners and businesses have
worked to restore the Chesapeake Bay's habitats, enhance their
ecosystem function, and reduce pollution. And it is because of
this broad partnership that so much work has been done to date.
However, there is still much work to be done.
To achieve meaningful and lasting restoration, as well as
accelerate the pace of our progress, we need all of our Federal
partners at the table, and that is why I sit before you today.
The reauthorization of the NOAA's Chesapeake Bay Office, or
NCBO, an authorization of the Chesapeake Bay Watershed
Education and Training Program, or B-WET, could not come at a
more critical time.
The SEEE Act would reauthorize NCBO and strengthen their
ability to lead cutting-edge science to restore the Bay and
support our watersheds vital fisheries. Through research,
technical assistance, coordination, monitoring, and
restoration, NCBO provides the important insights for improving
the Bay ecosystem and supporting our coastal economies.
One area where NCBO's leadership really shines is large-
scale oyster restoration. Over the past decade, with NOAA's
coordination and leadership, NCBO has led more than 1,300 acres
of oyster reef restoration and led the planting of more than 10
billion juvenile oysters in the Chesapeake Bay. This equates to
more than 1,000 football fields' worth of healthy habitat,
water filtration, and enhanced fishing opportunities. NCBO led
the development of the large-scale oyster restoration approach,
helped design our success metrics, has supported oyster
hatchery production and the ongoing comprehensive monitoring of
these projects. Because of this leadership and support, the
Chesapeake Bay has become a global model. And without NCBO,
projects of this scale, complexity, and level of success simply
would not be possible.
NCBO is also on the front lines of advancing our
understanding of impacts to the Chesapeake Bay from a changing
climate through its vast ocean observing network which includes
buoys that track oceanographic conditions, telemetry arrays
that monitor fish movement, and water quality sensors
monitoring key environmental parameters. These insights are
critical to our understanding of the impacts of climate change
on the Bay, and for providing timely management relevant
information to decision makers.
The SEEE Act would also authorize the B-WET program, which
offers students and teachers the opportunity to learn about the
scientific value and wonder of the Chesapeake Bay firsthand. As
the Federal lead for K-12 education in the Chesapeake Bay
Program Partnership, NCBO implements the B-WET program
providing the tools, resources, and funding necessary to ensure
the next generation of Bay stewards have a comprehensive
understanding of our complex watershed.
Since its inception more than two decades ago, the B-WET
program has supported more than 700,000 students and more than
25,000 teachers through high-quality, meaningful watershed
education experiences. Since 2002, NOAA has awarded more than
$48 million to nearly 300 projects in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed alone.
At this critical time, we encourage this Committee to
promote the swift passage of H.R. 4770 to ensure NCBO has the
necessary financial stability to continue its vital role in
restoring the Bay's waterways, fisheries, and wildlife.
Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you again for the opportunity to testify,
and I look forward to hearing your questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Colden follows:]
Prepared Statement of Allison Colden, Ph.D., Maryland Executive
Director, Chesapeake Bay Foundation
on H.R. 4770

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify today on behalf of
the Chesapeake Bay Foundation (CBF) and its over 300,000 members in
support of H.R. 4770--Chesapeake Bay Science, Education, and Ecosystem
Enhancement Act (SEEE Act).
For more than half a century, CBF has led a landmark effort to save
the Chesapeake Bay--a national treasure on which the health and
wellbeing of over 18 million people \1\ and 3,600 species of plants and
animals depend.\2\ The watershed spans 64,000 square miles from
Cooperstown, New York to Virginia Beach, Virginia and westward to the
Allegheny Mountains. In total, it encompasses six states--Delaware,
Maryland, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia--and the
District of Columbia.\3\ There are 11,684 miles of shoreline and
includes 150 major rivers and streams in the watershed.\4\ It is our
nation's largest estuary and the third largest estuary in the world.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Chesapeake Bay Program
(CBF), What is a Watershed?, https://www.chesapeakebay.net/discover/
watershed.
\2\ The flora and fauna in the watershed including in this number
are 348 species of finfish, 173 species of shellfish, over 2,700 plant
species and more than 16 species of underwater grasses. Additionally,
the 87 species of waterbirds rely on the Bay. Fish and Wildlife
Service, Chesapeake WILD, www.fws.gov/program/chesapeake-wild#.
\3\ EPA CBP, What is a Watershed?, supra note 1.
\4\ Id.
\5\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Bay is a vital economic engine for the region and for the
nation. According to NOAA's latest report, in 2020 the commercial
seafood industry in Maryland and Virginia brought nearly $6.7 billion
in sales, over $1.6 billion in income, and nearly 46,000 jobs to the
region.\6\ Recreational fishing in Maryland and Virginia in 2020
supported over 16,000 jobs, nearly $725 million in sales, and nearly
$268 million in income.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ National Marine Fisheries Service. 2022. Fisheries Economics of
the United States, 2020. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-
F/SPO-236A, p.110, available at https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2023-
09/FEUS-2020-final2-web-0.pdf.
\7\ Id. at 111.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For more than 40 years, federal, state, and local governments
alongside non-profit partners and businesses have worked together to
reduce pollution, restore habitat, and enhance ecosystem function in
the Chesapeake Bay. It is thanks to this broad partnership that we have
made great strides toward restoration. In 2025, Chesapeake Bay
restoration efforts will face a key deadline for implementation of best
management practices and achievement of Bay Watershed Agreement
restoration goals, but there is still much work to be done. In order to
be successful and to accelerate the pace of progress, we will need the
strong support of all federal partners in the Chesapeake Bay clean-up.
Thus, the reauthorization of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Chesapeake Bay Office (NCBO) and authorization of the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed Education and Training (B-WET) program, could
not come at a more critical time.
H.R. 4770--Chesapeake Bay Science, Education, and Ecosystem Enhancement
Act (SEEE Act)

The SEEE Act would reauthorize the NCBO and strengthen the Office's
ability to deliver cutting-edge science to help restore the Bay and
support the watershed's oyster, blue crab, striped bass, and other
ecologically and economically valuable fisheries. Through research,
technical assistance, coordination, long-term monitoring, and habitat
restoration, NCBO provides important insights for improving the Bay's
ecosystem and supporting coastal communities. Through its leadership
role in the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Bay Program's Goal
Implementation Teams, the NCBO is responsible for the stewardship of
our fisheries and coastal habitats and ensuring the estuary and the
species that depend on it have a healthy future for many years to
come.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See, e.g., EPA CBP, Maintain Healthy Watersheds Goal
Implementation Team, https://www.chesapeakebay.net/who/group/
maintaining_healthy_watersheds_goal_implementation_ team.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Large-scale Oyster Restoration
The Eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica) is a keystone species in
Chesapeake Bay, responsible for building complex, three-dimensional
reefs which provide critical nursery habitat for more than 350 species
and filtering sediment and nutrients from the water, improving water
quality and clarity. Oyster reefs, once a dominant feature of the Bay's
shallows are essential habitat for important fish species like black
sea bass, red drum, summer flounder, and spotted sea trout. Many
recreational fishers value these reef habitats for the abundance and
diversity of fish communities they support.
As a result of historical overharvesting, pollution, and disease,
the Bay's native oyster population is at a fraction of historic levels.
Large-scale restoration projects provide the best chance for reversing
the population decline and safeguarding the vital services oysters
provide. These projects create reef habitat for oysters to grow,
reproduce and contribute larvae to additional reef areas in the Bay.
They also build functioning reef systems that work collectively to
improve the Bay's water quality and biodiversity.
In 2009, the Executive Order on Chesapeake Bay Protection and
Restoration acknowledged the economic, social, and cultural value of
the Chesapeake Bay to the nation as a whole and created a Federal
Leadership Committee including EPA and NOAA, charged with developing
priority strategies to restore the health and natural resources of the
Chesapeake Bay.\9\ It was through this committee that the concept of
large-scale oyster restoration was born.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Exec. Order No. 13508, 75 Fed. Reg. 23,099 (May 15, 2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In June 2014, representatives from the entire watershed signed the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed Agreement.\10\ For the first time, Delaware,
New York, and West Virginia committed to full partnership in the Bay
Program. The agreement includes the Chesapeake Clean Water Blueprint
goals for 2017 and 2025, but also established additional conservation
goals, such as goals for habitat restoration and conservation,
improving fisheries, increasing public access public access, and
environmental literacy. This Agreement included a commitment to large-
scale oyster restoration in ten tributaries by 2025.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ EPA CBP, Chesapeake Bay Watershed Agreement, https://
www.chesapeakebay.net/what/what_guides_us/watershed_agreement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This outcome, to complete oyster restoration in ten tributaries, is
currently on track to be completed by 2025 and is widely recognized as
the largest oyster restoration project in the world, thanks in no small
part to the contributions of the NCBO.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ All of the outcomes under NOAA leadership are on track to meet
their commitments making it clear that NOAA plays an invaluable role in
ensuring that the partnership is making progress to restoring the Bay.
EPA, Charting a Course to 2025: A Report and Recommendations for the
Chesapeake Executive Council on How to Best Address and Integrate New
Science and Restoration Strategies Leading up to 2025, at 25 (July 21,
2023), available at https://d18lev1ok5leia.cloudfront.net/
chesapeakebay/documents/Charting-a-Course-to-2025_CBP_2023-07-26-
001306_jvtn.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCBO provides critical leadership and financial support to
Chesapeake Bay oyster restoration efforts. They led the development of
the restoration approach, the definition of success metrics, and the
ongoing comprehensive monitoring of restoration projects. Each year,
NCBO contributes funding to support production of oyster spat-on-shell,
a key restoration product used to seed newly-constructed reefs. In
2023, a record 1.7 billion oyster spat were planted in Maryland alone,
with nearly 1 billion planted on large-scale restoration projects
alone.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See Governor Moore Announces New Annual Record for Chesapeake
Bay Oyster Planting, (Oct. 10, 2023), https://governor.maryland.gov/
news/press/pages/governor-moore-announces-new-annual-record-for-
chesapeake-bay-oyster-planting.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCBO scientists conduct habitat assessments to understand baseline
conditions before and after oyster restoration projects, providing
critical knowledge to resource managers who work to ensure long-term
success of these restoration efforts. The data and information that the
NCBO collects helps other resource managers across the globe shape
their own restoration projects based on lessons learned here in the
Bay.
Over the past decade, with NOAA's coordination and leadership, more
than 1,300 acres of oyster reefs have been restored and more than 10
billion juvenile oysters have been planted in Chesapeake Bay. NOAA
equates these numbers to ``1,055 football fields'' of healthy habitat,
natural water filtration, and enhanced fishing opportunities for
people.\13\ Additionally, NOAA has recently released a draft
restoration goal defines steps to build on and improve the next phase
of large-scale oyster restoration following the completion of the ten
tributaries restoration in 2025.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ 2022 Chesapeake Bay Oyster Restoration Update, https://
d18lev1ok5leia.cloudfront.net/chesapeakebay/documents/2022-Chesapeake-
Bay-Oyster-Restoration-Update.pdf
\14\ Chesapeake Progress, Oysters, https://
www.chesapeakeprogress.com/abundant-life/oysters (the ten tributaries
are Harris Creek, the Little Choptank, Tred Avon, upper St. Mary's and
Manokin rivers in Maryland, and the Great Wicomico, Lafayette, Lower
York, Lynnhaven and Piankatank rivers in Virginia).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Monitoring indicates that these restoration projects are showing
great promise, with most reefs meeting the success criteria to be
considered fully restored. A NCBO-led comprehensive research program
indicates that restoration is also paying dividends to the Chesapeake
Bay ecosystem. Restored reefs are estimated to removed seven times as
much nitrogen from the water each day than unrestored areas, reducing
excess nutrients that fuel low-oxygen `dead zones.' Productivity of
important prey species for fish, including worms, grass shrimp, mud
crabs, and others, can exceed 5,000 individuals per square meter, and
survival of juvenile blue crabs is three times higher on reefs than in
unrestored areas. These ecosystem benefits have tangible advantages for
coastal communities as well. Once mature, oyster reefs in the Choptank
River system in Maryland are expected to increase fishery landings and
revenue by $23 million annually and support an additional 300 jobs in
coastal counties that are heavily dependent on the seafood industry.
Without NCBO's technical expertise, coordination, monitoring, and
support, projects of this scale, complexity, and level of success would
simply not be possible. The SEEE Act supports and allows the NCBO to
expand its restoration efforts.
Ocean Monitoring and a Changing Climate
Across the Chesapeake Bay, the NCBO manages a vast ocean observing
network, including observation buoys that track meteorological and
oceanographic parameters, telemetry arrays that monitor fish movement,
and water quality sensors that monitor ecosystem conditions. For
example, the Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System (CBIBS) \15\
provides weather and environmental information such as wind speed,
temperature, and wave height, updated every six minutes. The data
provided by CBIBS is available online, via mobile app, or by phone
call, allowing boaters and anglers to access real-time data to plan
their trips and be safe on the water. Data from the buoys are combined
with satellite data to track harmful algal blooms, monitor sediment
plumes, measure oxygen levels important to fish throughout the year,
and forecast the distribution and severity of dangerous bacteria--
information critical to oyster aquaculture operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ NOAA, Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System, https://
buoybay.noaa.gov/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, NCBO is on the front lines of advancing our
understanding of how a changing climate will impact the Chesapeake Bay,
particularly fish species and the habitats they depend on. NCBO has
brought together experts from across the watershed and beyond to
understand how rising water temperatures, low oxygen `dead zones', and
habitat availability will change over time, and the impacts that will
have on commercial and recreational fisheries. NCBO staff recently co-
authored a seminal report on the impacts of rising water temperatures
on Chesapeake Bay, including key fish habitat like underwater
grasses.\16\ Ongoing work will quantify the availability of habitat for
species like striped bass, summer flounder, and black sea bass.
Researchers are also working to identify the environmental drivers that
determine the productivity of forage fish species like Atlantic
menhaden, which serve as primary prey for the Bay's top predators.
These insights are critical to understanding the challenges that a
changing climate presents for the Bay and providing timely, management-
relevant information for resource agencies and decisionmakers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Batiuk, R., Brownson, K., Dennison, W., et al. 2023. Rising
Watershed and Bay Water Temperatures: Ecological Implications and
Management Responses--A STAC Workshop. STAC Publication Number 23-001.
Edgewater, MD. (505 pages), available at https://www.chesapeake.org/
stac/wp-content/uploads/2023/01/STAC-Report_-Rising-Temps.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ability to address the complex challenges of rising water
temperatures, low oxygen `dead zones', and habitat availability have on
our watershed demands scientific expertise and adequate funding. As the
federal lead for the climate resiliency goal team, the NCBO is equipped
to continue leading climate resilience and adaptation work in the
watershed. However, to stand up to the challenges a changing climate
poses and position the next generation of Bay stewards for success,
deeper investments must be made in this vital work. The SEEE Act
expands the NCBO ocean monitoring efforts, which will provide the
necessary data to implement science-based decision making across the
watershed.
Environmental Education
Additionally, the SEEE Act would authorize the B-WET program which
offers students and teachers the opportunity to learn about the
scientific value and wonder of the Bay ecosystem firsthand. The NCBO is
the federal lead for K-12 education in the Chesapeake Bay Program
partnership providing the tools, resources, and funding necessary to
ensure the next generation of Bay stewards have a comprehensive
understanding of our complex watershed.
Throughout the watershed, students, teachers, and experts team up
year-round to learn about the Chesapeake's diverse habitats through
hands-on learning. Students engage in defining local issues,
participate in field investigations, learn to synthesize information
and draw conclusions, and develop action-oriented projects. This
learning, known as Meaningful Watershed Educational Experiences (MWEE)
\17\, is a cornerstone of environmental education, and enables student
learning in the context of life-relevant, real-world problems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ NOAA, Bay Watershed Education and Training, https://
www.noaa.gov/office-education/bwet; see also CBF, Meaningful Watershed
Educational Experiences, https://www.cbf.org/join-us/education-program/
mwee/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCBO implements the B-WET program, which delivers grant funding
across the watershed for dozens of environmental literacy programs,
educating tens of thousands of students, and providing professional
development for hundreds of teachers. B-WET helps equip educators with
the skills, knowledge, and confidence to effectively teach students
about the watershed, ensuring the next generation of bay stewards are
environmentally literate. For instance, in Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 NOAA
awarded funding to CBF to assist in bringing together teachers and
community members to build and maintain successful MWEEs in four
counties in Pennsylvania.\18\ This program will help ensure that
educators receive the tools needed to effectively develop and teach an
environmental education curriculum in addition to ensuring that the
community supports and participates in getting students out into
nature.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ NOAA, Past and Current Chesapeake B-WET Projects,
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/new-england-mid-atlantic/chesapeake-bay/past-
and-current-chesapeake-b-wet-projects#pennsylvania.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, NCBO helps states across the watershed organize. It
connects state departments of education with their natural resource
agencies, focusing on key opportunities to benefit students and share
innovative ideas (such as MWEEs) between states.
NCBO also runs the Environmental Science and Training Center,
providing educators the knowledge and tools they need to deliver up-to-
date science information to the next generation. Through workshops at
NOAA's Oxford Lab and throughout the watershed with partner
organizations, teachers learn how to apply science with students in the
classroom and in the field.
Since its inception two decades ago, Chesapeake B-WET has evolved
from funding projects in individual schools to supporting school
districts and state-wide environmental literacy efforts. It has
directly reached more than 730,000 students and nearly 30,000
professional development opportunities in the Chesapeake Bay
watershed.\19\ Since 2002, NOAA has awarded more than $117 million to
929 B-WET projects \20\ with over $51 million to support more than 275
B-WET projects in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ EPA CBP, 40 years of Educating Chesapeake Bay Stewards, (Sept.
22, 2023), https://www.chesapeakebay.net/news/blog/40-years-of-
educating-chesapeake-bay-stewards.
\20\ NOAA, Bay Watershed Education and Training, supra note 17.
\21\ Pers. Comm. with NOAA (Oct. 13, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The SEEE Act would authorize the B-WET program, providing more
students with the opportunity to learn first-hand about the importance
of protecting and restoring the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
Funding for NCBO
The SEEE Act would provide necessary financial stability to the
NCBO for FY 2024 through FY 2027. To effectively implement its
Strategic Plan,\22\ the NCBO needs reassurances it will have consistent
funding. As highlighted above, and one example of how sustained funding
is necessary to meet NCBO's goals, the ten oyster restoration projects
that NCBO is working on will require additional monitoring and
evaluation past 2025 in three-to-six-year intervals.\23\ In order to
ensure that these long-term restoration projects are completed and the
agency has the ability to collect the necessary data to determine the
water-quality benefits, reassurances that funding will be available is
needed. Additionally, efficiencies can be derived from sustained
funding for monitoring and restoration by reducing uncertainty and
associated mobilization costs, making federal investments more cost-
effective over time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ NCBO 2020-2025 Strategic Plan, https://
repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/28762/noaa_28762_DS1.pdf; see
also NCBO Biennial Report to Congress Fiscal Years 2019 and 2020,
https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2021-04/NCBO%2019-
20%20Biennial%20Report%20to%20 Congress%20FINAL.pdf?null.
\23\ Chesapeake Progress, Oysters, supra note 14 (``Monitoring and
evaluation will take place at three- and six-year intervals following
construction and seeding. This monitoring and evaluation phase will not
be complete until after 2025.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

Restoring the Chesapeake Bay has always been a bipartisan effort.
At this critical time for the Bay cleanup effort, we encourage this
committee to promote swift passage of H.R. 4770 to ensure that NCBO
continues to play a vital role in restoring the health of the Bay--its
waterways, fisheries, and wildlife habitats, meeting the 2025
restoration requirements and helping to lead the next chapter of
restoration efforts in Chesapeake Bay.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Dr. Colden.
I now recognize Mr. Caccese for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT T. CACCESE, DIRECTOR OF POLICY, PLANNING,
AND COMMUNICATIONS, PENNSYLVANIA FISH AND BOAT COMMISSION,
HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Caccese. Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify. I am Bob Caccese, Director of Policy,
Planning, and Communications for the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat
Commission.
Today, I am representing the Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies. Our mission is to protect the authorities of
our member agencies and enhance their abilities to manage fish
and wildlife as public trust resources for current and future
generations. All 50 states are members, as well as the U.S.
Virgin Islands and the District of Columbia.
My testimony focuses on H.R. 5009, the Wildlife Innovation
and Longevity Driver Reauthorization Act, or WILD Act, but I
wanted to mention that the Association also supports H.R. 4389,
the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation Enhancements
Act, as well. Both are important programs that deliver tangible
conservation outcomes.
I would like to thank Congressman Joyce and Congresswoman
Dingell for introducing the WILD Act. This bipartisan
legislation would reauthorize critical U.S. fish and wildlife
conservation programs. Specifically, it would reauthorize the
Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program, which enables wildlife
and habitat conservation in all 50 states and territories, and
the Multinational Species Conservation Funds, which help
conserve some of the world's most iconic species, including
rhinos, elephants, tigers, great apes, and turtles.
While the Association supports the bill in its entirety, I
will focus my testimony on the Partners for Fish and Wildlife
Program (Partners Program), as that is where my expertise is
most applicable.
H.R. 5009 reauthorizes the Partners Program through Fiscal
Year 2028, and its enactment is a critical priority of the
Association, as the program is set to expire this year.
Since its inception in 1987, the Partners Program has
enabled restoration of more than 6 million acres of habitat by
bringing together state, Federal, tribal, and private partners.
Last year alone, the program aided completion of more than
1,800 projects and leveraged every Federal dollar spent on
projects with almost $4 in partner contributions.
In Pennsylvania, the Partners Program assisted in
restoration of Cooper's Run, a trout fishery upstream of the
Susquehanna River in the Chesapeake Bay. Like many successful
conservation efforts, it was private landowners who initiated
this project with designs and permitting provided by Partners
for Fish and Wildlife staff. The work of the Partners Program
enabled NGOs and the Fish and Boat Commission to restore 14
stream and river miles, increasing habitat for trout, songbird,
waterfowl, and threatened turtles. Land and business owners
will see tangible economic benefits as well, thanks to reduced
flooding and improved water quality. Ultimately, this project
reduced sediment by approximately 214 tons per year.
Other highlights of the program in Pennsylvania include
stream restoration projects, enhancing our world-class Spring
Creek fishery, increasing the amount and quality of habitat,
and providing greater access for angling and recreation. The
program also supports implementation of our state Wildlife
Action Plan, like in Lancaster County, where we introduced the
Chesapeake logperch, a species of greatest conservation need
that we are actively working to keep from becoming endangered.
The Partners Program works with our Game Commission as
well, creating hundreds of acres of habitat for American
woodcock, and assisting with critical telemetry data on
migration routes and breeding habitat. They are also working
together to keep the Allegheny woodrat off the endangered
species list by installing nesting structures and conducting
ongoing scientific studies on colonization of the use of
artificial structures. This type of scientific support provided
by the program helps state agencies maximize the impact of our
conservation efforts and ensure the American taxpayer the best
possible return for their investment in our public trust
resources.
Other examples from across the country include Partners'
work at River Bend West in Michigan last year, where $73,000 in
project investment from the program was leveraged with $1
million in partner contributions to restore one of the few
undeveloped sites in the Saginaw River. Mitigation of
contaminated soils, eradication of invasive species, extensive
planting of native species, and restoration of natural features
for herpetofauna, mammals, waterfowl, and other migratory
birds, and the benefits extend to people, too. Projects like
Riverbend West that provide targeted restoration within city
limits ensure that the benefits of nature are more equitable
and accessible for all members of the public to enjoy.
Now just a few moments on H.R. 4389. With its enactment in
2002, the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act
established one of the most cost-effective and impactful
conservation programs for addressing the needs of migratory
birds. And again, as I mentioned, the Association supports that
bill.
In closing, the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies
strongly supports passage of H.R. 5009, which delivers common-
sense, community-centered conservation that helps restore
habitats and endangered wildlife, lifts up economies, and makes
communities more secure.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I welcome
your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Caccese follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert T. Caccese, Director of Policy, Planning
and Communications, Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission
Representing the Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies
on H.R. 5009 and H.R. 4389

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
I am Bob Caccese, Director of Policy, Planning and Communications
for the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission. Today I am representing
the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (Association). Our
mission is to protect the authorities of our member agencies and
enhance their abilities to manage fish and wildlife as public trust
resources for current and future generations. All 50 states are members
as well as the U.S. Virgin Islands and the District of Columbia.
My testimony focuses on H.R. 5009, the Wildlife Innovation and
Longevity Driver Reauthorization Act, or WILD Act, but I wanted to
mention that the Association also supports H.R. 4389, the Migratory
Birds of the Americas Conservation Enhancements Act as well. Both are
important programs that deliver tangible conservation outcomes.
H.R. 5009, ``WILD Act''

I would like to thank Congressman Dave Joyce and Congresswoman
Debbie Dingell for introducing the WILD Act. This bipartisan
legislation would reauthorize critical U.S. Fish and Wildlife
conservation programs. Specifically, it would reauthorize the Partners
for Fish and Wildlife Program, which enables wildlife and habitat
conservation in all 50 states and territories, and the Multinational
Species Conservation Funds, which help conserve some of the world's
most iconic species, including rhinos, elephants, tigers, great apes,
and turtles.
While the Association supports the bill in its entirety, I will
focus my testimony on the Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program
(Partners Program) as that is where my expertise is most applicable.
H.R. 5009 reauthorizes the Partners Program through fiscal year 2028
and its enactment is a critical priority of the Association as the
program is set to expire this year.
Since its inception in 1987, the Partners Program has enabled
restoration of more than six million acres of habitat by bringing
together state, federal, tribal, and private partners. Last year alone,
the program aided completion of more than 1800 projects and leveraged
every federal dollar spent on projects with almost 4 dollars in partner
contributions.
In Pennsylvania, the Partners Program assisted in restoration of
Cooper's Run, a trout fishery upstream of the Susquehanna River and the
Chesapeake Bay. Like many successful conservation efforts, it was
private landowners who initiated this project, with designs and
permitting provided by Partners for Fish and Wildlife staff.
The work of the Partners Program enabled NGOs and the Pennsylvania
Fish and Boat Commission to restore 14 stream and river miles,
increasing habitat for trout, songbird, waterfowl, and threatened
turtles.
Land and business owners will see tangible economic benefits as
well thanks to reduced flooding and improved water quality. Ultimately,
this project reduced sediment by approximately 214 tons per year.
Other highlights of the Partners Program in Pennsylvania include
stream restoration projects enhancing our world class Spring Creek
fishery, increasing the amount and quality of habitat, and providing
greater access for angling and recreation. The program also supports
implementation of our State Wildlife Action Plan, such as in Lancaster
County, where we reintroduced the Chesapeake logperch, a Species of
Greatest Conservation Need that we are actively working to keep from
becoming endangered.
The Partners Program works with our Game Commission as well,
creating hundreds of acres of habitat for American Woodcock and
assisting with critical telemetry data on migration routes and breeding
habitat. They are also working together to keep the Allegheny woodrat
off the endangered species list by installing nesting structures and
conducting ongoing scientific studies on colonization and the use of
artificial structures.
This type of scientific support provided by the program helps state
agencies maximize the impact of our conservation efforts and ensure the
American taxpayer the best possible return for their investment in our
public trust resources.
Other examples from across the country include partners' work at
Riverbend West in Michigan last year, where $73,000 in project
investment from the program was leveraged with $1 million in partner
contributions to restore one of the few undeveloped riparian sites on
the Saginaw River.
Mitigation of contaminated soils, eradication of invasive species,
extensive planting of native species, and restoration of natural
features significantly enhanced upland and wetland habitats for small
mammals, herpetofauna, deer, waterfowl, and other migratory birds, but
the benefits extend to people too. Projects like Riverbend West that
provide targeted restoration within city limits ensure that the
benefits of nature are more equitable and accessible for all members of
the public to enjoy.
H.R. 4389, ``Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation Enhancements
Act''

Now, just a few comments on H.R. 4389. With its enactment in 2002,
the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act established one of the
most cost-effective and impactful conservation programs for addressing
the needs of migratory birds.
Although only a portion of the funding provided through the Act is
applied to projects within the United States, the Association supports
this bill because of the tangible positive impacts to bird species
breeding within our states, many of which are Species of Greatest
Conservation Need, and which spend the remainder of the year
distributed throughout Latin America and Caribbean.
Absent a dedicated effort to support conservation projects in these
areas, Neotropical migratory birds will continue to decline as they
have been for the past fifty years despite the careful management by
our state wildlife agencies. This bill will enable more on-the-ground
conservation actions where it will benefit bird populations the most
and continue to demonstrate the collaborative, multi-national approach
necessary to be effective in the management of these species.
Conclusion

In closing, the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies strongly
supports passage of H.R. 5009, which delivers commonsense, community-
centered conservation that helps restore habitats and endangered
wildlife, lifts up economies, and makes communities more secure. We
also support H.R. 4389. Once again, thank you to Chairman Bentz,
Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the Committee for the
opportunity to testify. I am glad to answer any questions you have or
follow up with more information as needed.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I thank the witnesses for their
testimony, and we will now recognize Members for 5 minutes each
for questions.
Mr. Wittman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
our witnesses for joining us today.
Ms. Selberg Robinson, I want to start with you. Can you
give us your perspective on what has happened with the
Chesapeake Bay in the past two decades, as far as restoration
efforts, where we are today with our resources such as oysters,
and also where we are with water quality?
And can you talk about the role that the Chesapeake Bay
Program Office plays as far as coordinating the efforts of each
state and, obviously, the requirements under the Federal Clean
Water Act like TMDLs, where everybody has to look at what they
are doing to improve water quality?
Ms. Robinson. [Audio malfunction.] To meeting that goal,
and the scale of this work is really unprecedented. As you have
heard this morning, this has become the world's largest oyster
restoration project in the world, and it has resulted in more
than 1,400 acres of healthy, restored reefs.
So, how do we know that they are healthy? We know that they
are healthy because we monitor them. We are looking for key
things like density and biomass to make sure that they are a
functioning reef. And a functioning reef really contributes to
both the ecology and the economy of the Chesapeake Bay. We are
really pleased with the progress we are making with oyster
restoration and the role that it plays to support our
commercial or recreational fisheries like blue crab in each
state.
We lead work groups that bring all of the states together
and our NGO partners to have important conversations about
fisheries research, oyster restoration.
Our office does not have a lead role in the TMDL effort.
That is led by our colleagues over at the EPA.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Ms. Selberg Robinson.
Dr. Colden, I want to get your perspective on oyster
restoration, how you see it. Obviously, the overall numbers are
very impressive, but if you could give us a little drill-down
on what that has involved. In other words, when you have reef
restoration, is it a combination of aquaculture, is a
combination of private interest on the Bay that do spat on
shell culture, all of those different things? Can you give us
an overall view about how that is unfolding?
Dr. Colden. Absolutely, and thank you for the question.
Oyster restoration that NCBO leads is a tremendous effort
that involves states as well as local non-profits, private and
public oyster hatcheries, which are producing the oyster larvae
necessary for these projects, as well as supporting local
watermen who are participating in placing spat on shell, who
are participating in the restoration activities themselves.
More recently as well, oyster aquaculture was approved as a
best management practice for reducing nitrogen, and oyster
restoration has been approved as of last week. So, not only are
these industries contributing to the recovery of oyster
populations, they are also helping us achieve our pollution
reduction goals through bioextraction through harvest, and
enhanced denitrification, which removes excess nitrogen from
the water.
Dr. Wittman. You talked a little bit about the role that
the oysters play as filter feeders. Can you give us a little
perspective on what they do in taking food that is algae out
that can, for an overpopulation, create some problems for the
Bay, but also what they do in removing sediment?
We know there is a function that they remove sediment that
is not food, and are able to take that out of the water column.
Dr. Colden. Yes, absolutely. They also improve the water's
clarity. As sediment enters the Chesapeake Bay it clouds the
water, making it difficult for things like underwater grasses
to thrive. By filtering out that sediment and packaging up into
small packages, it makes it sink to the Bay bottom faster,
making the water clearer and allowing those other habitats like
underwater grasses, which are incredibly important for things
like blue crabs, allowing that water clarity to improve, allow
the sunlight to reach down to the bottom, and improve the
overall water clarity conditions.
Dr. Wittman. So, large-scale oyster restoration is really
Mother Nature's filter in taking a lot of stuff out of the Bay
that otherwise would take years and years to do, they can do it
in days?
Dr. Colden. Yes, absolutely.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Mrs. Peltola.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all
the folks who are here to testify on these really good pieces
of legislation today.
My first question is for Ms. Wraithmell. I represent
Alaska, and we have about 470 birds that call Alaska home. And
most of these are migratory birds, and their range extends
thousands of miles. And these international corridors that
these migratory birds traverse, thousands of miles, I think
that all these species really benefit from the international
conservation projects that we have agreements with Canada and
Mexico on. And I was just wondering if you could elaborate on
how H.R. 4389 is making grants more accessible to more diverse
applicants because of the increased Federal cost share.
Ms. Wraithmell. Absolutely. Alaska has many species that
spend lots of time in Latin America, whether it is blackpoll
warblers that are traveling all the way to Brazil or Hudsonian
godwits that are wintering in Chile. So, we recognize that we
need to have investments in all of the parts of their range,
not just in those that are in Alaska.
By looking at the matching requirements that are a part of
the grant, we can make sure that we are lowering the barrier of
entry for some of these projects in Latin America. We recognize
that our dollars go a really long way in some of these
geographies. And in fact, very small investments can yield
outsized benefits for these species, having almost a catalytic
role for them.
Mrs. Peltola. Mr. Chairman, my next question is for Dr.
Colden.
I really appreciated your testimony. I was wondering if you
can share a little bit about why supporting education,
research, and monitoring is so important to maintaining healthy
fisheries and coastal economies.
Dr. Colden. Absolutely. Thank you so much for the question.
I will start with education.
Saving the Chesapeake Bay is a long-term prospect. Our
organization and others throughout the watershed have been
working for more than 50 years to try to tackle this very
large, very complex issue. That is why we think it is so
incredibly important to make those investments in our next
generation of Bay stewards through K-12 education. It not only
has been shown to improve their academic performance, but it
has also been shown to really connect them with the watershed
and also give students the feeling that there is something that
they can do in order to improve their local environment.
We find that education is absolutely critical to instilling
that early sense of stewardship in students, and we have seen
the benefits of that as many of our own staff at the Chesapeake
Bay Foundation and others working in the restoration
partnership have gone on because of those experiences to work
on Bay restoration for their career.
As far as research and monitoring, we are right on the
cutting edge. Chesapeake Bay actually sits in a very unique
biogeographic area, where there is a transition from some
tropical and subtropical species to more temperate species. So,
as our climate continues to change and we observe those
observations in the Chesapeake Bay, it will be ground zero for
seeing rain shifts, seeing impacts of warming waters, impacts
of changes to ocean acidification. So, we believe that
investing in research and monitoring in the Chesapeake Bay will
give us those important insights right on the front lines,
which will be applicable to other estuaries throughout the
United States.
Mrs. Peltola. Just a quick follow-up on there. Are there
any fisheries or species that you think could benefit
significantly from the passage of this legislation?
And I know you talked extensively about oysters, but are
there some others?
Dr. Colden. Yes, absolutely. There is a tremendous number
of species which use the Chesapeake Bay as a nursery habitat,
but either spawn within the Chesapeake Bay or spawn offshore
and come into the Chesapeake Bay. Our anadromous fishes, for
example, things like Atlantic striped bass, the endangered
Atlantic sturgeon, blue crabs, these are all species which
support important commercial and recreational fisheries, and
also that are either using the Chesapeake Bay as a nursery or a
spawning area that then those fish move out of the Chesapeake
Bay and support fisheries all along the Atlantic coast.
So, understanding the dynamics of what is going on in the
Chesapeake Bay will have benefits for states all along the East
Coast.
Mrs. Peltola. And their economies, yes.
Dr. Colden. Yes, absolutely.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Mrs. Radewagen for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Huffman. I want to welcome the panel and thank you for
appearing today. My questions are for Mr. Caccese.
Fear of both government and ESA regulations and other red
tape can often make it difficult to get the support of industry
and private landowners for conservation projects. What can
Congress do to get buy-in from these partners and incentivize
more voluntary conservation?
Mr. Caccese. Yes, thank you for the question. And really,
at the heart of it, it comes down to providing the resources.
Having the private landowners reach out and be interested
in doing a voluntary conservation measure on their property,
there is a wealth of benefits that occur whether it is habitat,
whether it is increased outdoor recreation, a booming economy,
et cetera. But really, once one person does it, they can tell
their neighbors. At least I know that usually when you are
looking for advice on how good of a product something is, you
are going to talk to somebody to see what their thoughts are on
it. And that is what we have seen with this program, is
neighbors sharing their good stories and good news. And it has
really had an effect with others wanting to get into it, as
well. So, really, it boils down to providing those resources.
Mrs. Radewagen. So, it is clear that it takes a broad
coalition of partners to make conservation programs successful.
Why should Federal agencies continue to work with the states to
facilitate many of these on-the-ground partnerships?
Mr. Caccese. Yes, again, thank you for the question.
The states are the boots on the ground. And they have, No.
1, the authority within their jurisdictions for handling
certain species. They have created partnerships with the local
NGOs, counties, boroughs, parishes that they may live in, as
well as knowing how resources can be used in different ways.
It is really between, again, partnerships, trusts that have
been built, use of those resources, and then a knowledge of
essentially the backyard, right, the habitat that is in those
areas. The state agencies are really the ones that can work
with the Feds on the funding, but then take those resources and
really put them back into the community.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. Keeping species off the ESA list
is important, but what are some of the economic benefits the
public can expect from investing in state and private landowner
conservation programs?
Mr. Caccese. Sure. And again, thanks for the question.
Really, I think it is certainty. Putting voluntary measures
in place, again, it can help put outdoor recreation at the
forefront, it can help increase jobs in certain areas. I know
there was an example that I can refer to in Louisiana, where
there was a project, about $5.5 million that essentially aims
to protect and restore 90,000 acres of fire-adapted plant
communities. And what that does then is it opens up and will
open up, three different public lands areas for outdoor
recreation but, again, create jobs and increase that habitat to
what it once was. So, a lot of different benefits.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Chairman Bentz. I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Ranking Member
Huffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Colden, I want to start with you and begin by
complimenting you on how well you have a command of your
subject matter and explain that in such a compelling way to all
of us today. I am conditioned, of course, to believe that the
San Francisco Bay estuary is the center of the universe. But
listening to you does make me think that this Chesapeake Bay
place might be kind of a big deal. So, thank you for that.
And I want to ask you about some of the pressures that we
have talked about here today threatening the Chesapeake Bay
estuary: Ag runoff, industrial sewage, pollution, overfishing,
coastal development, and others, all exacerbated by climate
change. And I am wondering if you can elaborate a little bit on
how programs like the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Education and
Training Program kind of serve as an early warning system to
help anticipate and understand emerging threats, and why that
is so important for the communities that rely on the Chesapeake
Bay watershed.
Dr. Colden. Yes, thank you so much. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak more about the B-WET program and
environmental education.
As I mentioned previously, we are able to reach a
tremendous number of students and teachers through the B-WET
program, hundreds of thousands over the past 20 years. And to
borrow the name of an old TV show, Kids Do Say the Darndest
Things. So, we really get an insight into the hearts and minds
of how our communities are viewing the Chesapeake Bay, how they
are viewing the Chesapeake Bay cleanup and restoration through
interaction with these students as they come through the
education programs that Chesapeake Bay Foundation and many
other organizations work on.
So, we get to have some immediate feedback, but also have
learned that some of the best teachers are children going home
and speaking to their families or speaking to their parents
about the things that they have learned through environmental
education. So, really growing that stewardship from the
youngest Bay stewards all the way up through their families and
making change systematically that way is a really important way
that the environmental education works its way through our
watershed.
Mr. Huffman. There is also a collaborative element to this
work: partnerships between universities, non-profits, community
stakeholders. How does that improve research and monitoring in
the Chesapeake Bay, and what is your hope for future
collaborations if we can pass this legislation?
Dr. Colden. Collaboration has been absolutely essential to
all of the progress that has been made thus far in Chesapeake
Bay restoration. The reason why it is so important is because
it brings together the best of every different sector, and all
of the strengths that we have as a community to this very large
and complex problem.
For example, the NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office provides a
fisheries research funding program which provides grant funding
to universities and other academic institutions to carry out
cutting-edge research. We are making sure, through that grant
funding program, that folks who are on the front lines of the
latest in the scientific methods and approaches are able to
carry out this very timely and management relevant research
that goes, because of NCBO's involvement in the Chesapeake Bay
program partnership, right back into the management framework.
So, there is a very strong feedback loop between research,
monitoring, and management.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
Ms. Robinson, Dr. Colden educated us a bit about the
importance of oysters. From the NOAA perspective, though, I
wonder if you could speak a little bit about the critical work
on oyster reef restoration that this legislation would sustain,
and what your hopes are for the future of that work.
Ms. Robinson. Absolutely, thank you for the question. As we
have heard today, the oyster restoration is not only important
from a water quality perspective, but also because it serves as
critical habitat for species such as striped bass and blue
crabs.
And while we are really pleased with the progress we have
made so far, we also know that current oyster population levels
are well below historic highs, and we want to continue to build
upon our successes that we have had collaborating with all of
our partners, continue this great work of oyster restoration
into the future.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Mr. LaMalfa for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry to
parachute in on this from a previous Committee, and I hope I
have no redundancy here.
But I wanted to ask a couple of our panelists, under the
Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program to assist with the fish
food program, which we are having some pretty decent success
with on the Sacramento River area in Northern California in
rice country. Please comment, Mr. Guertin and Ms. Robinson, on
that, if you would, on what you see, the potential there, how
the progress is so far, and what potential it would yield for
being able to increase fish populations using farmers and
available technology and lands that would complement that.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you, Congressman, for your question.
The Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program is one of our
premier, voluntary, non-regulatory approaches that we can
employ to work with ranchers, farmers throughout the country.
In Northern California, as you point out, we are doing a lot of
work. I am aware we did some work, for example, on the Scott
River drainage, which benefited a lot of coho and chinook
salmon runs, and things like that.
We do a lot of work where we can provide technical
assistance, we can provide project dollars, we can work with
landowners, help them develop a business model that will allow
them to increase yields, balance that with wildlife
conservation measures. And just 2 weeks ago, I was out in
Montana for the Partnerscapes Conference. On private lands day,
we had about 50 landowners from around the country there,
seminars on fire management and invasive species control,
seminars on things like that.
Mr. LaMalfa. Certainly, so you look at it as a very
positive partnership that you want to continue to be a part of?
Mr. Guertin. Yes, Congressman. This is one of our most
effective programs. We have been able to work with 50,000
landowners across the United States.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, let me throw it to Ms. Robinson, too.
Ms. Robinson. We aren't engaged in that specific program.
Would you like me to speak to some of our habitat restoration
work in that area?
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes, that would be helpful.
Ms. Robinson. OK. Our community-based restoration program
focuses both on providing funding for on-the-ground
restoration, as well as technical assistance, like Fish and
Wildlife Service, to make sure that we are getting good habitat
restoration on the ground that addresses the recovery of
endangered species.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. Let me shift to the Klamath Lake
and Klamath River for a moment, please, as we have a waterfowl
bill here. It isn't necessarily geared toward the Pacific
Flyway, but we do have giant issues with the Pacific Flyway,
and how important that the basin is for propagating ducks and
other waterfowl, and how difficult that has been the last few
years here with the way water is being allocated or not
allocated to those refuges and areas, and agriculture is an
important part of that.
Please comment what you think moving forward with these,
the only species management there is for the fish in the river
or in the lake, and the waterfowl has been left to suffer on
that. Mr. Guertin, please.
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congressman. I
know there has been a lot of frustration by hunters in that
region. We have had to eliminate or curtail some of their
hunting opportunities for waterfowl. The long-term restoration
vision for the Klamath Basin is to restore that ecological
function, to balance out the needs for the endangered species
fish with vibrant waterfowl populations and hunting
opportunities, providing recreation and commercial fishers, as
well.
We have testified previously about some of the investments
the Administration is making through the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law that is dedicating millions of dollars there
to the Klamath Basin to help alleviate some of the frustration
folks have felt about those lack of hunting opportunities.
Mr. LaMalfa. It isn't just hunting, it is the actual
populations that are being devastated. And the whole situation
is just hell bent on sending water only down the river, much to
the detriment of agriculture. So, when you talk restoration,
does that mean agriculture is going to be restored out of
business in the basin? That is what many people are concerned
about, because all should be at the table, especially since
there was plenty of water in the lake this year, and the
numbers just keep decreasing, both for Ag and for the refuge.
So, with 10 seconds left, Ms. Robinson?
Ms. Robinson. I will just echo that I think the entire
Federal family is working with the states and all of the
interests in the Klamath Basin to come up with a sustainable
solution going forward.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman
Dingell for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Protecting wildlife has always been a top priority. Many of
you know that I am very concerned about America's shrinking
wildlife populations. And, unfortunately, it is a problem that
extends far beyond our nation's borders. Global wildlife
populations are also facing growing risks, and research shows
world wildlife populations have plummeted nearly 70 percent in
the last 50 years. This should alarm all of us.
As part of our response to the biodiversity crisis, the
Multinational Species Conservation Fund, or MSCF, was enacted
by Congress to address this decline. Since 1989, this program
has enabled the Fish and Wildlife Service to provide more than
4,500 grants totaling more than $330 million in support of
cost-effective partnerships to advance international
conservation.
For decades, it has played a key role in protecting some of
the world's most treasured species like elephants, rhinos,
tigers, and great apes that are now being pushed toward
extinction, due to the threats of poaching, human encroachment,
and illegal hunting and trapping. For example, funding projects
have led the international effort over the past decade to halt
and reverse the rapid growth in the poaching of wild elephants
and rhinos. Grants have also helped secure the remaining
habitats for many great ape species such as gorillas and
orangutans.
The MSCF has been highly successful in strengthening global
wildlife conservation, which is why I am proud to join
Representative Joyce in introducing the Wildlife Innovation and
Longevity Driver Reauthorization Act, or WILD Act, to
reauthorize it for 5 years. And I deeply appreciate
Representative Joyce's partnership with this important
legislation.
So, let me ask some quick questions. Mr. Guertin, can you
elaborate on the successes of the MSCF?
Mr. Guertin. Thank you for your question, Congresswoman.
This has been a highly effective international effort on
behalf of the U.S. Government, deployed through the Fish and
Wildlife Service. We have been able to deliver hundreds and
hundreds of quality conservation projects working in
partnership with our counterparts in range countries. This has
benefited many species, including Asian and African elephants,
rhinos, and others.
My colleague, Mr. Cassidy, talked a little previously about
some of the work Safari Club International does on that front,
and we recognize and value that partnership, and we believe, if
reauthorized, we can continue that momentum.
But more importantly, this would provide almost a third
more funding, going from $20 million to $30 million. The
projects we get already are at that level. So, if Congress
reauthorizes this program at a higher level, we could redouble
our efforts and deliver more quality conservation on the
ground.
Mrs. Dingell. Would you build on that, on what new threats
to wildlife will the MSCF be able to address?
Mr. Guertin. We are addressing many challenges within the
habitats of these species. These range from competition with
agriculture, they range from habitat destruction, they range
from a changing climate. There is a lot of poaching going on
and illegal hunting. So, we are able to, through these
projects, put in place a lot more protection with fencing,
rangers and patrols, on-the-ground surveillance, monitoring of
populations, and head off any future issues that we may see.
So, that reauthorization will give us the authority to
continue to deploy the program and do these good conservation
efforts.
Mrs. Dingell. And can you elaborate on the role local
communities play in recovering declining populations?
Mr. Guertin. Local communities are the fulcrum point of our
effort with any type of work that we do, whether it is
internationally or domestically. Our first imperative is to
partner with local communities, local government organizations,
build trust and confidence, demonstrate to them through our
prior successes our ability to have a successful partnership
and deliver outcomes. That is the same for the Multinational
Species Conservation Fund as it is for the Partners for Fish
and Wildlife Program here in the United States.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. It is very important we be able to
protect wildlife for future generations, and I believe that
this reauthorization is a critical part of this.
I will briefly add, because I can't not, that I hope the
Recovering America's Wildlife Act, which invests in the
proactive conservation of America's imperiled wildlife, is part
of this conversation.
I look forward to working alongside all of my colleagues to
swiftly reauthorize the MSCF without delay.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes himself for 5
minutes.
Ms. Wraithmell, what is the greatest driver of bird
mortality?
Ms. Wraithmell. The greatest driver of bird mortality is
[Audio malfunction].
Mr. Bentz. It has been suggested by the gentleman to my
left that it is actually cats.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bentz. That is not true?
My wife is a veterinarian. She suggests that it is not
cats, either, but I don't believe her.
So, my question to you is do these bills appropriately
address, focus upon, and prioritize your view of what is the
greatest driver of mortality? And if not, what should we do
differently in the bills?
Ms. Wraithmell. Thank you so much for your question. Yes, I
do think that they provide latitude to address all of the
issues that are affecting birds in the places that are most
important to them. And the bill is very strategic in the way
that it is increasing the funding that is available for these
programs because we recognize there have been so many
applications that have simply gone unfunded for lack of
funding.
At the same time, by addressing some of the cost share
issues, it is making the program more accessible, especially to
smaller partners and partners in other geographies so that the
money is ending up in the geographies that the birds [Audio
malfunction].
Mr. Bentz. Right. And forgive me for going so rapidly here,
but we are going to be called to the Floor soon.
So, the money that is being spent is doing something good.
And the measure of that good is what I am interested in. And I
am going to move to Dr. Colden with a similar question in a
moment, but the measure of the good, how many millions of birds
have been saved as a result of the money that we are spending.
Ms. Wraithmell. I would have to get back with a specific
number for how many millions of birds, my apologies. But I
think that we can look at the acres that have been protected,
particularly in wintering grounds, as a proxy for the number of
birds.
Mr. Bentz. What I would be interested in, if perhaps you
can share it, is the measure of good that these expenditures
are achieving, not just broad, general swipes that yes, we
throw money at it and it gets better. I would like to see the
numbers.
Dr. Colden, I actually asked Ms. Robinson this yesterday in
regard to the education aspect of some of these bills. And I
was on school boards in the past--actually, two of them--for a
number of years. And I would repeatedly ask for measures of
performance, measures of outcomes. And I heard a lot of general
statements about how great this educational effort is. Tell me,
what is your measure of that greatness?
Dr. Colden. There are studies that show that the increase
in academic performance, particularly in the areas of science
and math and other STEM fields, do benefit from environmental
education and curricula that is developed under these programs.
Mr. Bentz. Can you stop there for a second? These bills are
not designed--at least I don't think they are--to drive
educational output in STEM; they are designed as, I thought,
for purposes of environmental benefit.
Now, perhaps the definition of environmental benefit is
such that STEM fits in there someplace, but it almost seems
like that would belong in a different committee. But share with
me why you think that would be a measure of good that these
bills are trying to drive?
Dr. Colden. Exactly. As I mentioned previously, this is a
long-term effort, and we need to be building the scientific
workforce that can drive these restoration projects long-term.
So, by getting students interested in STEM fields, and then
supporting them through career development through middle
school, high school, and through college, we are building the
workforce that can help continue the work of Chesapeake Bay
restoration.
Mr. Bentz. I may well agree with you. Can you show me the
study that proves what you just said?
Dr. Colden. I will follow up with whatever metrics that we
have available with the Committee. I am happy to do that.
Mr. Bentz. That would be great, and forgive me for being so
abrupt, but I believe we are going to be out of time here soon.
Mr. Cassidy, elaborate on what you think the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife isn't doing correctly. I think you were alluding to
how things could be done better.
Mr. Cassidy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
question.
I mentioned CITES, where we have a very outsized role on
that international stage. We are 1 out of 183 parties. One
vote, but a lot of countries around the world look to us and
the positions that we take. I want to say I attended the last
convention of parties in Panama City, where we as a country
took positions that were against sustainable use. I want to
just say that it came as a surprise, I think, an unpleasant
one, to a number of our partners. I think that that goes to
needs to have stronger, better consultative processes and more
transparency with how we arrive at the votes we end up taking
as a nation at these conventions.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I will have to stop you there. I
really appreciate your answers.
I want to thank all the witnesses for their testimony and
the Members for their questions.
The members of the Committee may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to these in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on Monday,
October 23. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
