- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON MONETIZING NATURE AND LOCKING UP PUBLIC LAND: THE IMPLICATIONS OF BIDEN'S STRATEGY FOR NATURAL CAPITAL ACCOUNTING

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MONETIZING NATURE AND LOCKING UP PUBLIC LAND: THE IMPLICATIONS
OF BIDEN'S STRATEGY FOR NATURAL CAPITAL ACCOUNTING

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Thursday, March 7, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-103
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-080 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO       Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA       Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA           CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS  Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA       Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL       Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR  Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID       Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN       Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT       Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI       Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO       Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA       Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX       Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

PAUL GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
MIKE COLLINS, GA, Vice Chair
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, NM, Ranking Member

Matt Rosendale, MT                   Ed Case, HI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Mike Collins, GA                     Susie Lee, NV
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, March 7, 2024..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Collins, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Georgia...........................................     1
Stansbury, Hon. Melanie A., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Mexico....................................     3
Gosar, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona, Statement for the Record.......................    27

Statement of Witnesses:

Oaks, Marlo, State Treasurer, State of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah.......................................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Butcher, Ross, Commissioner, Member District 1, Fergus
County, Montana............................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Sgamma, Kathleen, President, Western Energy Alliance, Denver,
Colorado...................................................    14
Prepared statement of....................................    15

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stansbury

David Wilkinson, Executive Director, Yale University,
Tobin Center for Economic Policy, Statement for the
Record.................................................    29
Eli Fenichel, Professor, Yale School of the Environment,
Statement for the Record...............................    34
Ranking Member Melanie Stansbury, Statement for the
Record.................................................    38

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON MONETIZING NATURE AND LOCKING UP PUBLIC LAND:
THE IMPLICATIONS OF BIDEN'S STRATEGY FOR NATURAL CAPITAL ACCOUNTING

----------

Thursday, March 7, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:16 a.m. in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Mike Collins
[Member of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Collins, Rosendale, Curtis,
Hageman; and Stansbury.

Mr. Collins. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
``Monetizing Nature and Locking up Public Land: The
Implications of Biden's Strategy for Natural Capital
Accounting.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' statements be made part of the hearing record if they
are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MIKE COLLINS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Collins. Good morning, everyone, and thank you to our
witnesses for coming all the way to Washington, DC, to testify
on this important matter.
Today, we will examine the massive impact that the Biden
administration's National Strategy for Natural Capital
Accounting will have on a diverse range of stakeholders,
including state and local governments, as well as industry, and
examine the strategy's many shortcomings.
Just a few weeks ago, this Committee held a hearing on the
National Strategy for Natural Capital Accounting. However, the
authors of the report, including the Office of Management and
Budget, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, and the
Department of Commerce refused to show up, despite the far-
reaching consequences of their work. Instead, the
Administration sent a young staffer with zero knowledge of the
topic. Now, he was a nice, young enough man. I even offered him
help with finding a new job, but clearly, he was not the right
person to come and testify on this important issue. Needless to
say, I think the Biden administration sent him by design.
Sitting here in the Natural Resource Committee, I didn't
think that we would be spending a lot of time here talking
about accounting. But it turns out, if the Biden administration
gets its way, the strategy will impact not only the natural
resources policy, but the way Americans live their lives at
every level. The American people deserve seriousness and
clarity from this Administration, rather than the disregard and
deceit that we have observed so far.
I am sure that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
will simply write today's hearing off as a partisan crusade,
but I implore them to look past party lines. This is not simply
an issue for Republicans. Many on the left argue that
monetizing nature, according to the Biden administration's
national strategy, could fundamentally shift the use and
control of lands and waters from local communities and
stakeholders, including Indigenous populations and
democratically-elected governments, to the financial elites and
foreign interests for decades to come.
And that is just part of the problem. The inherent
complexity of ecosystems make them extremely difficult, if not
impossible, to quantify under a national system of natural
capital accounting and eco-services valuation. Monetizing and
oversimplifying the vast expanse and interconnectedness of
nature in this way will only give the Federal Government a
dangerous illusion of environmental control, and a distorted
assessment of our nation's precious natural assets.
Additionally, the White House Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs and Office of Science and Technology Policy
just issued an alarming guidance, the Accounting for Ecosystem
Services and Benefit Cost Analysis, to incorporate natural
capital accounting and ecosystem services valuation into
Federal actions, decisions, and rulemaking. Right off the bat,
this is a terrible idea that will impact Federal policy
decisions across the board and throw yet another roadblock in
the way of critical resource development projects.
Moreover, the directive to incorporate natural accounting
and ecosystem services valuation into benefit-cost analysis
will provide activist litigants with another weapon in their
anti-use, sue-and-settle arsenal.
As the ongoing bipartisan work over permitting reform
shows, we need to make it easier to build things and get stuff
done, not more difficult by creating yet another layer of
government analysis. President Biden and his Department of the
Interior have repeatedly attacked resources developed
throughout his presidency, canceling and blocking oil and gas,
critical mineral, and even certain renewable energy projects,
not to mention the shortsighted LNG export ban, the deficient
final 2024-2029 National OCS oil and gas leasing program,
cancellation of leases in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge,
and countless other examples. I could go on all day.
The Biden administration is aligned with the radical, anti-
use eco-activists and non-profits, whose ultimate goal is to
eliminate fossil fuel production by any means and lock up our
public lands and water, no matter the harm done to our nation.
The National Strategy of Natural Capital Accounting will aid
this effort by informing and reinforcing dangerous policies,
including the America the Beautiful 30x30 Initiative, the
Bureau of Land Management's proposed Conservation and Landscape
Health Rule, and the ongoing work to develop Natural Asset
Companies, or NACs. Together, these policies and many others
will affect stakeholders at every level.
Considering the far-reaching consequences of the National
Strategy for Natural Capital Accounting, the American people
deserve serious conversations on its many related initiatives
and its implications for stakeholders on the ground. I hope my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle agree.
I also hope my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
actually address the substance from the marginalized voices who
are concerned about the natural capital accounting, including
from those on the left who label it as a form of green
colonization, instead of broadly labeling critics as conspiracy
theorists.
It is a sad day when Members of Congress are unwilling or
unable to engage in a serious policy discussion, and resort to
dismissive red herring attacks instead.
I now recognize the Ranking Member Stansbury for her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MELANIE A. STANSBURY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Stansbury. Good morning, everyone. Happy State of the
Union Day. And I want to just start by welcoming our guests.
We know that you travel from far and wide to be here, and
it is always a joy to have people visiting from our
communities, especially elected officials. So, welcome. Thank
you for coming to DC.
I want to thank the Committee leadership for holding
another hearing on a topic that is of great interest, and
something that we must have bipartisan conversations about, but
I want to just take a moment here at the beginning to note that
we attempted to invite several witnesses on our side of the
aisle, but because of the behavior of some of the Members who
are not present here this morning towards witnesses in the last
hearing and previous hearings, people don't want to participate
in this setting because of the lack of respect and the
partisanship that has been shown in what should be a bipartisan
oversight committee.
So, I just ask my colleagues, and although Mr. Chairman is
always very kind, he has his southern manners, to show proper
respect to our witnesses who travel at great length and
personal expense, including the Administration witnesses who
come to testify in front of this Committee.
Addressing climate change, the integrity of our ecosystems,
and the ability of our communities to use our natural resources
in a sustainable manner is, of course, the work of this
Committee. It is why this Committee exists. As we all know, we
are facing a significant climate threat. We are seeing the
warmest years in history on record happening right now on the
planet. We are measuring sea level rise. We are seeing changes
in our hydrologic systems.
And as we will hear tonight in the State of the Union, for
those of you that haven't followed the details of what this
Administration and our Congress and the previous Congress has
done, I think it is important to note that we have taken some
of the most aggressive actions to address climate change ever
in the history of the planet.
[Slide.]
Ms. Stansbury. Last Congress, we passed the Inflation
Reduction Act, which is the most significant climate bill to
ever pass, not only in the United States, but in the history of
this planet. We also passed legislation to address the
manufacturing and science needs of this country through the
CHIPS Act, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and have
protected millions of acres of land through administrative
action, including this beautiful and sacred place behind me,
known as Chaco Canyon, which was protected within New Mexico
through a public land rule very similar to the one that we are
here to discuss today. And in fact, we had our state land
manager here to discuss this months ago, when we first
discussed this rule.
So, as I understand it, the purpose of this hearing is to
examine a set of three different policies that the Biden
administration has undertaken to try to protect our public
lands, to take action on climate change, and to protect the
integrity of our ecosystems. And I think it is important to
talk about what these policies are and what they are not.
Ecosystem services is a natural accounting system. As we
developed the vast infrastructure, water projects, roads, and
other pieces of infrastructure that made this nation great, we
also did so at great expense to the environment, to cultural
resources. And we understand now in the 21st century that we
must account for those services as we are making decisions.
That is what ecosystem services is all about. It has been
for decades a bipartisan effort to really fully account for the
system benefits of our environment. It was championed during
the Bush administration by the leadership of the Department of
the Interior. It was continued by the Trump administration when
they came in. And the Biden administration is now continuing
those efforts. It is not a partisan attack on the environment
or our public lands, but an accounting system for making fair
and appropriate decisions.
The BLM rule that we are also here to discuss has been the
subject of many hearings in this Committee over the last year,
and what we have seen is a continued effort to try to paint
this rule as a land grab. I hate these kinds of discourses
because they mislead the American people. They make ranchers,
farmers, and people who work the land feel like the government
is trying to do something to take away their land, and that is
not the case.
This is a modernization of existing Federal land rules,
according to statute and the authority of the Department of the
Interior to ensure that we are accounting for and managing our
lands in the most sustainable manner. And when we had a hearing
on this rule a few months ago, and we brought in New Mexico's
state land manager, she helped us understand that by doing so
we were actually able to optimize and maximize the benefits to
our state while protecting lands like this and still having
record profits from natural resource development, including oil
and gas, on our public lands. So, no, it is not going to lock
up our public lands or take away people's access.
Finally, I just want to say that over 80 countries in the
world have adopted policies using ecosystem services and have
modernized and taken an ecosystems approach to how they manage
their natural resources. This is really about bringing the
United States into the 21st century so that we can manage our
lands in a scientifically-based, economically sound, and a
community-wise and informed way. And that is really what we are
here to discuss.
But, unfortunately, I do very much look forward to hearing
the perspectives of those who have traveled here and will offer
their point of views on these policies, but I fear that we will
not get the whole story today because some of our witnesses
were not willing to come here and be berated by Congressional
Members.
I thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. Collins. Thank you.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentlewoman from Wyoming,
Ms. Hageman, and the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Curtis, be
allowed to sit and participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
Now I will introduce our witnesses. We have Mr. Marlo Oaks,
Treasurer of the state of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; Mr. Ross
Butcher, a Fergus County Commissioner, Montana; and Ms.
Kathleen Sgamma, President of Western Energy Alliance from
Denver, Colorado.
The witness for the Minority, Mr. David Wilkinson,
Executive Director of the Tobin Center for Economic Policy at
Yale University, is unable to attend in person, but will send
written testimony.
Let me remind the witnesses here today that under the
Committee Rules, you must limit your oral statement to 5
minutes, but your entire statement will appear in the hearing
record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Oaks for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARLO OAKS, STATE TREASURER, STATE OF UTAH, SALT
LAKE CITY, UTAH

Mr. Oaks. Vice Chair Collins, Ranking Member Stansbury, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify.
The White House strategy is a deeply flawed attempt to
financialized ecosystem services to the detriment of Americans,
especially local economies in resource-rich states like Utah
with dominant Federal land holdings.
As part of this effort, the NYSE recently submitted a
proposal to the SEC to allow for the listing of a new type of
company for public investment: a Natural Asset Company. Under
the facade of free market capitalism and supported by its most
esteemed institution, the NYSE, NACs would lock up America's
natural resources by removing public and private lands from
productive use. An NAC would raise money from investors
globally, including from China and Russia, and acquire the
rights to manage the ecosystem services of land. Economically
essential activities, including energy production, grazing,
logging, mining, hunting, and industrial agriculture would be
prohibited on NAC-managed land.
Although the proposal was withdrawn due to public outcry,
including from members of this Subcommittee, efforts to
leverage backdoor land use regulation continue. The White House
approach includes creating natural capital accounts and
conservation leases on public lands, both of which are based on
valuing ecological services. This means fixing a value to
things like clean air and productive soils. These values would
end up on public and even corporate balance sheets as natural
capital accounts.
A natural capital framework relies heavily on subjective
valuations like aesthetic value in an attempt to attain an
objective measure. This is futile and dishonest. Importantly,
this framework is not possible under U.S. accounting standards,
as many ecological services do not generate traditional
economic activity.
An alternative accounting system based on United Nations
standards of assigning an arbitrary value to natural processes
is contemplated. However, that system can't be squared with
GAAP accounting. Public goods like clean air should not be
financialized because they belong to society. Financializing
public goods opens a Pandora's box to these becoming
commodities that are bought and sold, traded, and owned.
In addition, ecological performance rights are not
recognized as legal property since they pertain to non-
exclusive public goods. Consequently, NACs would essentially be
shell entities lacking tangible assets.
The financialization of natural processes, combined with
the Administration's efforts to preserve 30 percent of
America's lands by 2030, raises serious questions about how
conservation easements could be affected by the agenda. Under
NACs, farmland would need to be farmed using poorly-defined
regenerative agricultural practices. Perpetuating industrial
agriculture would be prohibited as an unsustainable activity.
At what point do ecological services enter as a right over
other land uses like agriculture? For instance, a landowner
might be allowed to continue farming, but only use organic
fertilizer and no fossil fuel-based machinery or grazing to
avoid perpetuating industrial agriculture.
With public lands, the BLM has put forward a conservation
rule that attempts to redefine its multiple use mandate under
FLPMA to include conservation as a use, bypassing Congress to
effectively amend this statute. The BLM would then issue
conservation leases to private actors to manage the lands for
undefined conservation purposes.
When the Federal executive branch limits the multiple uses
of public lands, our local communities feel the effects. Utah
has faced economic challenges due to administrative decisions
aimed at scaling back natural resource-based industries. The
decline of sawmills, mines, and processing facilities has
resulted in diminished employment opportunities and investments
in crucial infrastructure.
Additionally, the lack of management in forests,
exacerbated by the reduction in logging and active oversight,
has heightened wildfire risks and associated costs.
Finally, the ability for foreign governments to invest in
NACs would present serious national security and natural
resource risks. What better way for a foreign adversary to
cripple the United States than by locking up our natural
resources and food supply without a fight?
The mixed use approach to managing public lands in Utah and
the care farmers and ranchers have for their lands are far more
effective than a proposal that involves prohibiting productive
uses of the land by assigning an arbitrary value and placing
the lands under the control of private investors.
Natural Asset Companies, natural capital accounts, and
conservation leases on public lands are deeply flawed ideas. By
attempting to assign a financial value to ecological services
and performance rights, we open the door to subjective
interpretations and potential abuse. These efforts circumvent
legislative processes and threaten the livelihoods of those who
rely on multiple use economic activities. These efforts should
continue to be scrutinized and ultimately stopped.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Oaks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marlo M. Oaks, State Treasurer of Utah

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify.
On Sept. 27, the New York Stock Exchange (``NYSE'') submitted a
proposal to the Securities and Exchange Commission to allow for the
listing of a new type of company for public investment. The purpose of
a Natural Asset Company (``NAC'') is to manage land not for economic
activity but to maximize ``ecological services.'' The proposal posed a
significant risk by creating a mechanism for public and private lands
to be permanently removed from productive use to address a laundry list
of ill-defined resource values, such as climate regulation, ornamental
resources, and visual amenity resources.\1\ Guised under the facade of
free-market capitalism and bolstered by the support of one of its most
esteemed institutions, the NYSE, NACs would lock up America's natural
resources. While this would be bad for all Americans, local and state
economies and tax bases in resource-rich western states like Utah with
dominant federal land holdings would be hardest hit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See p. 19-24 of IEG. ``Ecological Performance Reporting
Framework,'' available at https://www.sec.gov/files/rules/sro/nyse/
2023/34-98665-ex3.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If a NAC proposal were allowed to go forward, an investment group
would file to list a NAC on the NYSE. The NAC would raise money from
investors globally, including from sovereign wealth funds, perhaps from
China, Russia, and other nations. The NAC would then turn around and
acquire the rights to manage the ecosystem services of land in the
United States. The owner of the land or a land trust would enroll the
``ecological performance rights'' into the NAC, giving the NAC the
management authority over those rights and therefore every activity
that occurs on the land. The NAC could manage federal, state, and
private land, including conservation leases on public lands and
conservation easements on private lands. NACs could enroll conservation
easements through a land trust without the landowners' consent.
Economically essential activities that NACs would consider
unsustainable include energy production, grazing, logging, mining,
hunting, and industrial agriculture (meaning the use of synthetic
fertilizer and machinery). These activities would be prohibited on NAC-
managed land. Recreating on public lands could also face significant
curtailment. In states like Utah, where the federal government owns 67%
of the land and is pushing for more conservation easements, placing
lands under the control of private investors, including foreign actors,
who may not have our best interest at heart, would be devastating.
The NYSE proposal had serious and far-reaching ramifications, yet
it was initially only assigned a 21-day comment period and almost flew
under the radar. I learned of it a day after the comment period closed.
Due to significant outcry about the proposal, including from members of
this subcommittee, state and local governments, and other public and
private organizations from across the country, the SEC extended the
decision twice and reopened public comments. The NYSE ultimately
withdrew the proposal on January 17, the day before the comment period
closed. This had the effect of excluding from the record many
commenters who were on the verge of filing--another reason why
continued congressional oversight is so important.
Although the proposal was withdrawn, efforts to leverage backdoor
land-use regulation to address climate change and biodiversity issues
continue. The Biden Administration's approach includes creating Natural
Capital Accounts (``NCAs'') and conservation leases on public lands,
both of which are based on valuing ``ecological services'' or
``ecological performance rights,'' the core concepts undergirding the
NAC proposal. Unfortunately, this likely is not the last we will see of
this proposal and others like it.
Valuing Natural Processes

Measuring ecological services simply means fixing a value to
natural processes (e.g., clean air, water supply, flood protection,
productive soils for agriculture, climate stability, and habitat for
wildlife). NCAs attempt to identify and capture these values that would
end up on public and even corporate balance sheets.\2\ Importantly,
this is not possible under U.S. accounting standards, as many
ecological services do not generate traditional economic activity. For
that reason, NCA-boosters contemplate an alternative accounting system
based on United Nations standards of assigning an arbitrary value to
natural processes. However, that system can't be squared with GAAP
accounting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-
Economic Decisions: A U.S. System of Natural Capital Accounting and
Associated Environmental-Economic Statistics. (2023, January). Office
of Science and Technology Policy, Office of Management and Budget &
Department of Commerce. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/
2023/01/Natural-Capital-Accounting-Strategy-final.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even organizations in support of the effort like Ernst & Young (EY)
highlight some of the associated challenges in their comments on the
NAC rule. As EY points out, accounting firms that audit the yearly
financial statements and other disclosures required of publicly traded
companies do not have the expertise to assess ``biophysical measures
for different types of ecosystems'' without ``rely[ing] heavily on
external specialists.'' \3\ This would allow the accounting firms to
essentially outsource their audit of natural asset accounting on
company books to unknown actors outside the financial statement audit
process. Audits would presumably require the involvement of scientists
who are not registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight
Board and are not experienced with GAAP. Consistent with the increasing
government-sponsored censorship on scientific matters around issues
like climate change and COVID, presumably these outside experts would
have carte blanche to drive valuations as they see fit, while remaining
above reproach and immune from challenge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See EY comment to SEC on NAC proposal available at https://
www.sec.gov/comments/sr-nyse-2023-09/srnyse202309-281019-686302.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With that said, the goal was to create not just a new kind of
company, but also a new asset class. A new company might attract
millions or billions of investment dollars. A new asset class could
attract trillions. The financial incentives are huge. The value of
traditional economic assets is estimated to be worth $1.5 quadrillion.
The value of the assets that produce ecosystem services (like
photosynthesis) is estimated at $5 quadrillion globally. Valuing
ecosystem services is largely subjective, so this number is fairly
meaningless other than to provide some insight into how proponents are
thinking of them.
Accounts are supposed to be grounded in something materially solid.
At the end of the day, NCAs are built on sand. University of Reading
Professor Tom Oliver points out that referring to nature as capital
implies it is equivalent to other forms of capital, while it is
fundamentally different since some natural assets are not substitutable
for other assets. He additionally highlights that while financial
capital can be invested, spent to derive benefits, or even borrowed,
the same is not true for natural capital. He stated, ``Treatment of
natural assets in identical ways to other capital would be catastrophic
for the environment.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Oliver, Tom. ``Is the concept of `Natural Capital' useful?''
Debating Naturals Value--The Concept of `Natural Capital' (2018) Ed
(Victor Anderson) Palgrave Pivot, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-99244-0,
available at https://research.reading.ac.uk/social-and-applied-ecology/
wp-content/uploads/sites/148/2020/10/Is-the-concept-of-Natural-Capital-
useful  _Palgrave-Macmillan.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, certain natural assets should not be financialized.
Public goods and common goods are and should belong to the community.
Financialization leads to ownership, and assigning ownership to public
goods like the air we breathe is a scary proposition that threatens to
benefit the most wealthy at the expense of the average citizen. In
short, financializing public goods opens the door to these becoming
commodities that are bought and sold, traded and owned.
The organization that partnered with the NYSE in pursuing the ill-
advised NAC proposal, the Intrinsic Exchange Group (IEG), proposed a
natural capital framework that relies heavily on subjective valuations,
like aesthetic value, in an attempt to attain an objective measure.
This is futile and dishonest. Even measures that are objective, like
the costs associated with flooding from not maintaining wetlands, are
difficult to quantify in any sort of real value.
Because some aspects of natural capital are subjectively quantified
and valued, NCA frameworks cater to ideological goals and would likely
mislead investors and others interested in the valuation. This bias is
most clearly seen in the fact that IEG's framework includes ``option
value,'' which it defines as benefits from nature that are ``currently
unknown.'' \5\ This plainly suggests that natural assets are, if
anything, systematically undercounted. IEG's framework doesn't consider
the possibility that it systematically over-values undisturbed nature.
This bias cannot be explained except through an ideological lens.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See page 10 of IEG. ``Ecological Performance Reporting
Framework,'' available at https://www.sec.gov/files/rules/sro/nyse/
2023/34-98665-ex3.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, ecological performance rights are not recognized as
legal property since they pertain to non-exclusive public goods. These
rights are defined as the value derived from natural assets and
ecosystem services within designated areas. Consequently, NACs would
essentially be shell entities lacking tangible assets. Since ecological
performance rights don't align with established property law
categories, any licenses granted for them would be revocable and
unenforceable. Even if entities attempted to secure rights through
leases, the lack of enforceability would render such arrangements
legally precarious and devoid of economic value.
Natural Accounting Framework Detrimental to Property Rights and Public
Land Management

The natural accounting framework is detrimental to property rights
and public land management. In the case of NACs, somebody other than
the landowner could purchase and manage the land's ecological services.
Relatedly, NCAs create the value of ecological services, and, as is
noted, ``what gets measured gets improved,'' implying management of
those natural processes.\6\ Whether through coercive regulation or
outside private entities determining land usage, this management
implies less local control and economically destructive outcomes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See page 3 of National Strategy to Develop Statistics for
Environmental-Economic Decisions: A U.S. System of Natural Capital
Accounting and Associated Environmental-Economic Statistics. (2023,
January). Office of Science and Technology Policy, Office of Management
and Budget & Department of Commerce. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/Natural-Capital-Accounting-Strategy-final.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the case of public lands, the Bureau of Land Management
(``BLM'') has put forward a ``Conservation Rule'' that attempts to
redefine the BLM's multiple-use mandate under the Federal Land Policy
and Management Act of 1976 (``FLPMA'') to include ``conservation'' as a
use, bypassing Congress to effectively amend this statute in the
process. To further ``conservation'' as a use, the BLM would then issue
``conservation leases'' to private actors to manage the lands for
undefined conservation purposes.
The current administration's ``America the Beautiful'' 30x30 land
preservation program far exceeds any efforts by prior administrations
to conserve land. This initiative incentivizes and rewards the
voluntary conservation efforts of fishers, rangers, farmers, and forest
owners, as part of an effort to preserve 30 percent of America's lands
and waters by 2030.\7\ Further, with 30x30 in mind, researchers are
exploring incorporating additional requirements to conservation
easements to enhance the environmental benefits to the public, since
the public is paying for the easements through tax breaks.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ U.S. Department of Interior. America the Beautiful. Annual
Reports. https://www.doi.gov/priorities/america-the-beautiful
\8\ Utah State University. Making Private Lands Count for
Conservation: Policy Improvements toward 30x30. (2022, March). https://
www.thecgo.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/Private-Lands-30-x-30-1.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This raises serious questions about how conservation easements,
which have been in existence for decades, could be affected by the
agenda. If ecological services are separate from landownership and the
government is introducing the valuation of natural processes, what
happens with a conservation easement that never contemplated ecological
services? The valuation of ecological services could potentially open
the door for the federal government to determine how those services are
managed and enforced on conservation easements, depending on how the
contracts are written.
Under NACs, farmland would have needed to be farmed using poorly
defined ``regenerative agriculture'' practices, and ``perpetuating
industrial agriculture'' would be prohibited as an ``unsustainable
activity.'' In conservation easements funded in part by federal funds,
the federal government retains the right to enforce the easement. That
right kicks in if the government determines the land trust holding the
easement is not appropriately enforcing it. At what point do ecological
services enter as a right over other land uses like industrial
agriculture and require a change in practice?
For instance, a landowner might be allowed to continue farming but
only use organic fertilizer and no fossil fuel-based machinery because
the use of synthetic fertilizer, machinery, and even grazing may be
considered as ``perpetuating industrial agriculture.'' As stated in a
comment letter to the SEC on the NAC proposal by Utah's Public Lands
Policy Coordinating Office (``PLPCO''), ``Generally speaking,
agricultural production, especially livestock grazing, is often falsely
viewed negatively when discussing climate change.'' \9\ As climate
change language increasingly appears in federal funding priorities, is
there a risk that industrial agricultural activities will be
challenged?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office. (2023, October 25).
Comment letter to the SEC opposing Natural Asset Companies. Pg. 7.
https://www.sec.gov/comments/sr-nyse-2023-09/srnyse202309-281221-
687202.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Potential Impact of Natural Capital Accounting

In Utah, agricultural employment represents one percent of all jobs
statewide (compared to 1.3% nationwide) and generates nearly $2.1
billion in cash receipts annually.\10\ Of this sum, the sale of cattle
contributes $378 million.\11\ These figures underscore the significant
role agriculture, particularly livestock grazing, plays in Utah's
economy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Headwaters Economics. 2019. Economic Profile System:
Agriculture, available at: https://headwaterseconomics.org/apps/
economic-profile-system/49000
\11\ 2017 Census of Agriculture. 2017. State Profile: Utah,
available at: https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/
Online  _Resources/County  _Profiles/Utah/cp99049.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to PLPCO, responsible public land use for livestock
grazing is crucial for Utah's agricultural economy, especially with
urbanization encroaching on available agricultural space. Livestock
grazing on federally administered lands is vital, constituting 73% of
Utah's 45 million acres of grazing lands (with 9% state-owned and 18%
privately owned). The federal government, particularly the BLM
overseeing 67% of federal grazing land, significantly influences the
success of livestock grazing in Utah. However, concerns arise as
grazing has declined by over 66% on BLM lands and about 50 percent on
Forest Service lands in Utah over the past century.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See generally Hayden Ballard, Killing Kaibab Industries,
Idaho Critical Legal Studies Journal, available at: https://
www.uidaho.edu/-/media/UIdaho-Responsive/Files/law/critical-legal-
studies/issues/volume-14/hayden-l-ballard-killing-kaibab-industries-13-
the-crit-critical-stud-j-
2020.pdf?la=en&hash=6343683CACC6F77FB76DDDC4D70AEBC3E621705E (2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The mixed-use approach to managing public lands in Utah and the
care farmers and ranchers have for their land are far more effective
than a proposal that involves prohibiting productive uses of the land
by assigning an arbitrary value and placing the lands under the control
of private investors, including foreign actors, who cannot possibly
care about the land more than those presently managing it.
When the federal executive branch implements measures to limit the
multiple uses of public lands, our local communities often feel the
direct repercussions. For instance, over the past few decades, Utah
communities have faced economic challenges due to administrative
decisions aimed at scaling back mining, logging, and other natural
resource-based industries. The decline of sawmills, mines, and
processing facilities has resulted in diminished employment
opportunities and investments in crucial infrastructure, both in Utah
and neighboring states.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See generally Hayden Ballard, Killing Kaibab Industries,
Idaho Critical Legal Studies Journal, available at: https://
www.uidaho.edu/-/media/UIdaho-Responsive/Files/law/critical-legal-
studies/issues/volume-14/hayden-l-ballard-killing-kaibab-industries-13-
the-crit-critical-stud-j-
2020.pdf?la=en&hash=6343683CACC6F77FB76DDDC4D70AEBC3E621705E (2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the lack of management in forests, exacerbated by the
reduction in logging and active oversight, has heightened wildfire
risks and associated costs, extending well beyond the immediate
economic impacts and contributing significantly to the creation of
economically disadvantaged rural communities in Utah.\14\ When
wildfires inevitably break out, climate change is often blamed.
However, reduced logging and management neglect are major contributing
factors.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See generally Hayden Ballard, Killing Kaibab Industries,
Idaho Critical Legal Studies Journal, available at: https://
www.uidaho.edu/-/media/UIdaho-Responsive/Files/law/critical-legal-
studies/issues/volume-14/hayden-l-ballard-killing-kaibab-industries-13-
the-crit-critical-stud-j-
2020.pdf?la=en&hash=6343683CACC6F77FB76DDDC4D70AEBC3E621705E (2020).
\15\ See generally The Senate and Congressional Western Caucuses.
``Western Conservation Principles: An alternative proposal to conserve
and restore America's landscapes,'' available at https://
westerncaucus.house.gov/uploadedfiles/10.5.2021  _western
_conservation  _principles  _final. pdf. Also see generally Little
Hoover Institute. ``Fire on the Mountain: Rethinking Forest Management
in the Sierra Nevada,'' available at https://lhc.ca.gov/report/fire-
mountain-rethinking-forest-management-sierra-nevada/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At least the executive branch operates within a system of political
accountability. Delegations from western states can write letters to
and make information requests of agencies, as well as call hearings and
witnesses to bring sunlight and local perspectives to bear on the
activity of public land managers. Short of acquiring an ownership stake
in a company holding conservation leases, it's unclear what recourse
local and state governments or congressional delegations would have to
influence public land management once it's been delegated to private
parties.
National Security Implications

The ability for foreign governments to invest in private NACs
presents serious national security and natural resource risks. What
better way for a foreign adversary to cripple the United States than by
locking up our natural resources and food supply without a fight? This
concern stems in part from recent events in Utah where foreign
corporations, such as the Chinese-owned WH Group, have caused
significant economic distress by acquiring and subsequently downsizing
major hog farming operations. Despite terminating contracts with local
hog farms and laying off a large portion of the workforce, WH Group
intends to retain ownership of vast agricultural land and water rights
and keep it out of production, preventing new farmers from entering the
market and exacerbating economic challenges.\16\ If foreign entities
are permitted to invest in NACs, they could withhold productive
agricultural resources, potentially leading to artificial food and
resource shortages nationwide. Similar situations involving energy
production could arise. This prospect is unacceptable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Amy Joi O'Donoghue, How the end of hog farming can kill a way
of life in rural Utah, Deseret News, available at: https://
www.deseret.com/2023/12/8/23992293/how-end-of-hog-farming-can-kill-a-
way-of-life-in-rural-utah (2023). And Dave Sebastian, Chinese Owned
Pork Producer Smithfield Prepares for U.S. Listing, The Wall Street
Journal, available at: https://www.livemint.com/news/chineseowned-pork-
producer-smithfield-prepares-for-u-s-listing-11697733802038.html
(2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

Natural Asset Companies, Natural Capital Accounts, and conservation
leases on public lands are deeply flawed ideas. By attempting to assign
a financial value to ecological services and performance rights, we
open the door to subjective interpretations and potential abuse.
Furthermore, attempts to value non-exclusive public goods are
incompatible with established accounting standards and property laws
and threaten the rights of property owners. The proposed Conservation
Rule by the BLM exacerbates these concerns by circumventing legislative
processes and threatening the livelihoods of those who rely on
multiple-use economic activities in rural areas, particularly in the
western United States. It is crucial that we resist these backdoor
attempts at land-use regulation. We must be cognizant of the notion
that ``what gets measured gets improved,'' particularly if it comes at
the cost of coercive regulation and diminished local input and
economically destructive outcomes. The withdrawn NYSE proposal, the
White House strategy on natural capital accounting, the BLM
Conservation Rule, and related efforts are based on subjective
valuation of non-exclusive public goods and should continue to be
scrutinized and ultimately stopped.
______

Mr. Collins. I thank the witness for his testimony. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Butcher for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROSS BUTCHER, COMMISSIONER, MEMBER DISTRICT 1,
FERGUS COUNTY, MONTANA

Mr. Butcher. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, and
members of this Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
address our concerns of Federal agency actions that are putting
our public lands in jeopardy. My name is Ross Butcher, and I am
testifying today representing Fergus County, Montana, the
Boundary Line Foundation, Montana Natural Resource Coalition of
Counties, and the Coalition of Arizona and New Mexico Counties.
In April 2023, the Bureau of Land Management proposed a
rule change of such deep significance that the public lands
counties in Montana, Arizona, and New Mexico coalitions were
compelled to provide substantive comments, demonstrating the
BLM's departure from their congressionally delegated authority.
I recognize that the discussion on the Conservation Land
Health Rule is ancillary to the specific conversation on the
natural asset class concerns. However, this particular rule
change proposal is directly linked to the ability to move
forward with that operation and that scheme. The Conservation
Land Health Rule would change dramatically the process in which
these lands that are held in reservation under the Taylor
Grazing Act and codified under FLPMA, the Federal Land Policy
Management Act, are reserved for very specific purposes.
And as it was mentioned before, this idea of conservation
as a seventh principle use, is not allowed. And when lands that
are in reservations for specific purposes, the only way to
remove them from those reservations is by congressional action,
not by a rule change. So, this Bureau is in a situation of
trying to create a legislative action without the authority to
do it, and that concerns us deeply.
The other issue that pops up is that it is very similar to
the planning 2.0 rule that was brought forth some years back
and was summarily rejected under the Congressional Review Act.
And, of course, once an action has been rejected by the
Congressional Review Act, it is not eligible for
reintroduction. Once the congressional decision has been made,
it is there. These rules can only be adjusted by you. You are
the congressional delegation that makes this decision, not the
bureaucrats that work for the BLM.
And I want to say that, generally, my experience working as
a local government official with our local Bureau of Land
Management field offices is good. We have some good people
working in the BLM that are just trying to do their job, which
is to manage and maintain these properties in the fashion that
they were set aside for. The real issue comes when you start
seeing top-down delegation pushing those local land managers to
make decisions that they themselves know are not healthy for
the range.
Some of the issues that came up are things like Indigenous
knowledge, which, once again, is being pressed. And it is a
concern because it bypasses the process of determining best
practices. Scientifically, we have spent a lot of time looking
at the best way to manage lands, and that doesn't do it.
One of the issues that also came up was local government
input. FLPMA requires that these agencies work with local
government that they coordinate with. We asked for cooperating
status on this particular rule, and we were denied. We were
denied because they said we lacked expertise. Well, I can tell
you that is taken pretty hard by my fellow commissioner in
Valley County, who spent 30 years as a range management
specialist for the very bureau that says he is not qualified to
have input as a local government-elected official, as required.
So, I believe that that is an issue at hand that needs to be
rectified. FLPMA requires coordination with local government,
and our expectation is that we get that.
The real issue comes down to how does this affect our folks
on the ground, and I see that every day. As a local elected, I
see my constituents daily. And these concerns are real. They
look at it and say, if we allow a singular use of conservation
to come into play in these leased lands, it is going to
dramatically impact how they run their operations. And if our
Ag operations, our extraction industries are unable to maintain
those economies, our local communities suffer. And that is
schools, and roads, and emergency services. All of those things
are impacted, which is why it is essential that local
government is included in these decision-making processes.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Butcher follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ross Butcher, County Commissioner,
Fergus Conty, Montana

Thank you Mr. Chairman and Members of the House Subcommittee on
Oversight and Investigations for the opportunity to address concerns of
federal agency actions that are putting our public lands in jeopardy.
My name is Ross Butcher and I am testifying today representing
Fergus County MT BOCC, The Boundary Line Foundation, The Montana
Natural Resource Coalition of Counties, and the Coalition of AZ/NM
Counties.
In April, 2023 the Bureau of Land Management proposed a rule change
of such deep significance, that the public lands counties in the
Montana, Arizona, and New Mexico coalitions were compelled to provide
substantive comments titled `` Survey of the History, Background, and
Compliance of the Proposed BLM Conservation and Landscape Health Rule
(CLHR) with The Public Land Laws of the United States'' demonstrating
the BLM's departure from their congressionally delegated authority.
A century of US public land statutes and policies enacted by the
Taylor Grazing Act (TGA), the Federal Land Policy Management Act
(FLPMA), and the Public Rangelands Improvement Act (PRIA) demonstrate
that BLM's core mission is to manage the Taylor Grazing Act CVG
District lands for the Principal Use of domestic livestock grazing,
range development, and stabilization of the US livestock industry
dependent on range access--not wildlife conservation.
The Landscape, Conservation and Health Rule proposed by the BLM has
irreconcilable flaws and should not be adopted. Fergus County and our
coalition partners point this out in the above-mentioned report which
is filed in the administrative record as official government comments
to the proposed BLM rule. The purpose of this testimony is to bring the
Boundary Line Foundation report to the attention of the subcommittee,
and give context to the gravity of the situation to all those who live
and work on these lands in the west.
We point out that one central mandate of the Federal Land Policy
and Management Act (FLPMA) is the requirement for the BLM to coordinate
land use management activities with local governments, and that statute
even requires the BLM to attempt consistency with county land use
plans. It is also important to note that during enactment of FLPMA the
Taylor Grazing Act was adopted in its entirety by the Congress, and
this includes all the policies, procedures and the 135 million acres of
mapped grazing districts throughout the western United States.
On two separate occasions the TGA lands were determined by the
Solicitor of the Interior to be classified as Reservations under the
Federal Power Act of 1920. FPA provides the authority to retain TGA
lands under reservation status, verses setting them aside as ``public
lands,'' which would make them subject to appropriation and disposal
under the public land laws of the United States. The actions of
agencies tasked with managing TGA lands held in reservation are limited
to the original purpose and intent for which those lands were reserved.
The CLH Rule is substantively the same as the 2016 BLM Resource
Management Planning (Planning 2.0) Rule that was determined by
Comptroller General to be a Major Federal Action and that was rejected
by the Congress under the Congressional Review Act (CRA). Once a Rule
has been rejected by Congress under CRA, federal agencies are
prohibited under the Administrative Procedures Act from adopting a
similar or new rule. This fact alone makes the adoption of the CLH Rule
illegitimate.
A certification by the Secretary of the Interior and the Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs that the CLH Rule would not have an
impact on a significant number of small entities is arbitrary, not
publicly verifiable, and erroneous. A Regulatory Flexibility Act impact
analysis is required to determine if the CLHR would have a significant
impact on small business or entities. The implications of landscape
level conservation would have a dramatic impact on communities whose
economies rely on the multiple use sustained yield model defined in
FLPMA. The position that there would be little impact is absurd on its
face.
The first step in monetizing and selling natural assets requires
the development of a natural asset inventory and a mechanism to hold
those assets for their conservation value. The introduction of a 7th
principal use, conservation, for these reserved federal lands aligns
well with the scheme of monetizing our public lands. Not only does this
scheme lack any authority for its action it is in direct conflict with
the statutory intent that public lands be used for productive pursuits.
These are just a few of the specific and irreconcilable flaws in
this rule, I once again point to the report filed, and on record, in
comments to the BLM. I encourage the Committee to review the report
submitted by Boundary Line Foundation and the Counties represented in
the Coalitions. Thank you for the opportunity to comment on these
important issues. I will stand for questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ms.
Sgamma.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN SGAMMA, PRESIDENT, WESTERN ENERGY
ALLIANCE, DENVER, COLORADO

Ms. Sgamma. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is interesting that the Ranking Member said that the
minority witness wouldn't attend because he was afraid of mean
questioning from Members of Congress. This individual is, as
far as I can tell, the leading proponent of natural capital
accounting. And it is a sad state of academia, if academia
can't attend to defend its academic ideas, that they can't be
challenged. So, I think that is kind of telling about the sad
state of academia today.
Anyway, I agree wholeheartedly with the comments of the
previous witnesses. I am struck by natural capital accounting
and eco-service systems valuation as another layer of
bureaucracy on top of all the different whole-of-government
initiatives from the Biden administration. And I perhaps should
be happy as they encumber themselves with all these layers of
bureaucracy within the Federal Government, because when they do
that they probably have less time to over-regulate my industry.
But I rather suspect the idea is to use all these different
layers of bureaucracy over time to stop responsible development
of oil and natural gas in America, and particularly on public
lands. And that is how natural capital accounting relates to
the BLM Conservation Rule and to the Natural Asset Companies
rule that the SEC was forced to rescind.
And I really applaud Treasurer Oaks, the excellent work
that the state of Utah did in bringing public scrutiny to that
rule which the Securities and Exchange Commission tried to
sneak through in a 21-day comment period. And then, of course,
Chairman Westerman's oversight through the Natural Resources
Committee was kind of the straw that broke the camel's back.
Ms. Hageman, your letter and your activity on this was very
much appreciated, as well.
So, it is important that we understand the interaction of
those two rules with attempts to account for natural assets
within some type of economic, environmental, statistical
system. When we look at, for example, the NACs rule, it was
intended to prioritize so-called sustainable uses on public
lands above productive uses, like ranching, mining, and energy
development. And if you do that, what happens is the things
that can actually be quantified through natural capital
accounting are really those productive uses of public lands.
So, what you are left with is some kind of qualitative
assessment of the value of a bird call or the beauty of nature.
And what you are really left with is a collapsing of revenue on
Federal lands, because energy, mining, and ranching supplies
the vast majority of revenue that comes from public lands. So,
you have the situation where, in conjunction with the BLM
Conservation Rule, it would lead to a collapse of that revenue.
And in no way does that natural capital accounting somehow,
quantifying things that are hard to quantify, confusing to
quantify, have dubious value on the marketplace, or are of such
intrinsic value to everyone like clean air and scenery that to
assign a monetary value to that is almost meaningless. So, what
you would have is a collapse of revenue from Federal lands.
And I would add that since we, in the oil and natural gas
industry, provide 94 percent of the revenue for conservation
that comes from the Great American Outdoors Act, you would also
have a collapsing of conservation funding on Federal lands.
So, I am really happy to be here today. Thank you for the
opportunity to discuss these rules, and I look forward to
questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Sgamma follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kathleen Sgamma, President,
Western Energy Alliance

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Committee Members,
thank you for the opportunity to testify. The Biden Administration has
implemented various ``whole-of-government approaches'' to climate
change, drug addiction, supply chain resilience, housing, diversity,
equity, environmental justice, and any other number of societal
problems. Countless announcements from the White House proclaim that
all government agencies will be mobilized to tackle whatever problem is
at hand. One of the outcomes of this whole-of-government approach is
that more agencies are regulating in more areas and with more
redundancy than every before. We've seen agencies beyond the
traditional energy regulatory agencies, from the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) to the Department of Labor, engaged in an
ill-fated attempt to overregulate and defund domestic oil and natural
gas if not completely out of existence, to as small and controlled an
entity as possible.
When everything is a priority for everybody, then nothing is.
Layered on top of this all-encompassing government approach are
multiple new initiatives conjured up through various executive orders.
Besides spawning their own regulatory actions, these initiatives add
more layers of bureaucratic process to both the public and private
sectors. More analysis is required for every regulatory action or
decision. Climate change risk must be assessed and each agency employee
is asked to consider their impact on the climate. Diversity, equity,
and inclusion must be factored into every decision. Environmental
justice communities must be defined and screened and the regulatory
impact determined. Each action must be assessed to ensure that good
jobs are being created.
None of this is codified in U.S. law. When government agencies are
focused on all these initiatives and requirements, when do they
actually have time to do the work they are supposed to do? If they must
spend considerable time and resources figuring out how to tie their
work to climate change and DEI while identifying underserved
communities, when do they actually have time to provide those services
to the American people, including to those underserved communities?
The initiative on natural capital accounting is but another example
of bureaucratic encrustation.\1\ Twenty-seven federal agencies are now
busily figuring out how to account for the natural resource and
ecosystem services values they control or advise on. Like other
initiatives that have no basis in U.S. law, the Biden Administration
looks outside the country for justification. The environmental-economic
statistics are to be based on the United Nations' System of
Environmental-Economic Accounting. As the federal government struggles
to provide services at a reasonable cost to taxpayers and our national
debt has swelled to nearly $35 trillion because the government cannot
keep to its means, it is now to apply a whole new accounting framework
for often subjective ecosystem services valuations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-
Economic Decisions: A U.S. System of Natural Capital Accounting
Associated Environmental-Economic Statistics, Office of Science and
Technology, Office of Management and Budget, Department of Commerce,
January 2023
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We're told that 80 other nations have adopted these U.N. standards
and that we must ``modernize'' our accounting practices. But since when
has the U.N. become a paragon of efficiency and the standard for
stewardship of economic resources? The fiasco of the U.N. sending
billions of dollars of aid money to fund Hamas terrorism is but the
latest example of U.N. ineffectiveness and lack of accountability. U.N.
technocrats not only do not set U.S. policy but helpfully provide a
model for doing the opposite. And besides pronouncements by these 80
nations of adopting the standards, I rather suspect that their level of
implementation is comparable to their compliance with Paris Treaty
climate goals, which somehow are never achieved.

I am struck by the fact that most of the elements to be addressed
by the National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-
Economic Decisions are those that are already accounted for because
they have true market value.\2\ Those that do not are to be assigned
subjective values that would be highly politicized. As quoted from the
strategy:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-
Economic Decisions: A U.S. System of Natural Capital Accounting
Associated Environmental-Economic Statistics, Office of Science and
Technology, Office of Management and Budget, Department of Commerce,
January 2023.

``Nature starts many supply chains. Critical minerals
underlie many new technologies, water and pollinators help
grow the fruits and vegetables eaten at the dinner table,
and trees create much of the timber framing American
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
houses.'' Markets already value minerals, food, and timber.

``Nature motivates many modern innovations. Plants and
wild animals inspire designs and provide critical models
and raw materials for many drugs and cosmetics.'' The
inspiration from nature is a common good that is of such
intrinsic value that to attempt to valuate it would be
imprecise at best. Yet those inspired designs are most
definitely accounted for when an artist sells a sculpture,
an architect creates the blueprints for a home nestled into
its mountain setting, or a new drug or natural supplement
is sold to consumers.

``Nature undergirds many firms' successes, across many
sectors. Natural landmarks drive much of the tourism
industry, and wild fish provide food for grocery stores and
restaurants to sell.'' The recreation and tourism services
delivered near national parks are well evaluated by the
market, and of course, food is accounted for whether sold
at the grocery store or at a restaurant.

``Nature protects property and other infrastructure.
Reefs, dunes, and forests reduce the damage caused by
storms, floods, and other extreme weather events.'' The
insurance industry is very adept at setting premiums based
on the risk a property faces in different ecosystems, where
the forces of nature are accounted for by differences in
premiums between a property in hurricane-prone Florida
compared to mild-weathered southern California.

``Nature provides recreational opportunities and community
and cultural connections. Forests, beaches, and wildlife
underpin recreational and cultural services that are
important to Americans, and these services are often free
of charge.'' Those recreational opportunities are accounted
for with every hotel room or camping ground space occupied,
while those intrinsic values of nature are rightfully
shared for free.

``Nature promotes health. Green and blue spaces and clean
air facilitate mental health, and reduce heat stress,
saving money on health care, increasing productivity, and
improving quality of life.'' The Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) already conducts cost-benefit analyses of air
and water quality regulations, although the politicization
of those analyses, use of inflated factors, and the double-
and triple-counting of environmental benefits indicate the
problems of applying subjective factors to supposedly
quantitative economic analyses. Attempting to ascertain and
assign monetary values to the portion of mental and
physical health benefits that derive from nature are
imprecise and fraught with so much subjectivity as to be
unreliable at best.

Each of those points from the Natural Capital Accounting strategy
paper essentially buttress continuing to rely on the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) and standard accounting practices instead of a revised
system. Further, in its guidance for assessing environmental and
ecosystem services, the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs
(OIRA) encourages agencies to make subjective, qualitative assessments
of value when quantitative data are lacking.\3\ If this is an exercise
in subjective assessments where true market value is not applicable,
then this is truly just another layer of bureaucracy. The point of
accounting and cost-benefit analyses is to provide the hard economic
data to decision makers, who then balance those data with their
political values and policy goals, whether that's social justice or
energy dominance. The way governmental cost-benefit analyses have been
skewed to support pre-determined policy outcomes offers a cautionary
note about how baking subjective factors into economic accounting
contorts the data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``Guidance for Assessing Changes in Environmental and
Ecosystem Services in Benefit-Cost Analysis,'' OIRA, February 28, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Natural Asset Companies

Given the complexity and additional bureaucracy that this Natural
Capital Accounting strategy would impose and the lack of statutory
authority for it, I appreciate that this subcommittee is providing
oversight. Such influential policy decisions should only be made with
full democratic debate before statutory authority is granted. Likewise,
I applaud the oversight the Natural Resources Committee provided for
SEC's ill-fated rule to list Natural Asset Companies (NAC) on the New
York Stock Exchange. I especially wish to thank the State of Utah for
its excellent work when SEC attempted to sneak in the rule in October.
The cooperation between the states and Congress is a model for ensuring
accountability over the executive branch. Utah led the charge revealing
the dangers of monetizing ecological values on public, private, and
tribal lands without any mandate from Congress or meaningful engagement
with the public, thereby convincing the NYSE to stand down.
Perhaps SEC was unaware of the impact of the NAC rule on public and
tribal lands and the interaction its proposed rule would have had with
inconvenient federal lands statutes. The Bureau of Land Management's
(BLM) organic statute, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act
(FLPMA), mandates that the ``principal or major uses'' of public lands
include ``mineral exploration and production.'' See 43 U.S.C.
Sec. 1702(l). SEC's proposed rule envisioned companies controlling
resource values on public lands rather than federal land managers.
Perhaps privatization of federal lands would be a better way to
monetize their resource values, but short of that, the NAC rule was an
ill-conceived, roundabout method of doing so in conflict with current
statute.
More likely however, given the Biden Administration's whole-of-
government approach, the rule was a purposeful effort to circumvent
existing law regarding multiple-use public lands. The NAC rule seemed
to assume that the ten-year conservation leases proposed in BLM's
conservation rule would be finalized and stand legal scrutiny such that
NACs could then hold and monetize federal conservation leases. As BLM's
proposed conservation leases are on shaky legal grounds, SEC's proposed
NACs rule assigning ecological performance rights would have been just
as susceptible.\4\ While SEC has withdrawn the rule, there are signs
that the concept is far from dead as the administration moves forward
with the Natural Capital Accounting strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  Western Energy Alliance et al. comment letter to BLM on the
Conservation and Landscape Health Rule, July 5, 2023; Western Energy
Alliance comment letter to SEC on the Natural Asset Companies Rule,
January 17, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another aspect of the interaction of the NAC rule and BLM's
conservation rule is the circumvention of FLPMA's multiple-use mandate.
Together or singly, these rules are intended to stop oil and natural
gas leasing and development on the federal mineral estate. Yet with
FLPMA, Congress directed that ``the public lands be managed in a manner
which recognizes the Nation's need for domestic sources of minerals,
food, timber, and fiber from the public lands[.]'' 43 U.S.C.
Sec. 1701a)(12). Courts have expressly recognized that one use that BLM
must balance with others includes ``the nation's immediate and long-
term need for energy resources.'' Theodore Roosevelt Conservation
P'ship v. Salazar, 744 F. Supp. 2d 151, 157 (D.D.C. 2010). Despite
FLPMA's clear mandate and case law, the Biden Administration continues
to look for ways to circumvent the multiple-use mandate on non-park,
non-wilderness federal lands that are appropriate for energy
development and other productive uses.
The ill-conceived NAC rule failed to consider how NACs would return
a fair share of their proceeds from monetizing natural resource values
on public lands with the American people. For years and continuing to
this day, politicians and special-interest groups cry that the oil and
natural gas industry does not pay its fair share, even though costs
were increased substantially by the mis-named Inflation Reduction Act.
My industry pays billions in royalties and leasing revenue back to the
American taxpayer every year from public lands. The NAC rule would have
allowed companies to profit from federal lands yet pay no royalties.
The Biden Administration seems to be on a path to allowing companies to
profit from public lands over time without paying their ``fair share.''
As a practical matter, the values on federal lands that the Natural
Capital Accounting system would track quantitatively involve productive
natural resource activities like ranching and energy development. Yet
the NAC and BLM conservation rules are intended to limit today's FLPMA-
approved principle uses on federal lands and replace them with so-
called sustainable uses. The preferred ``sustainable'' activities
contemplated by these rules would generate much less value for local
communities. It is far from clear how successful NACs would be in
monetizing ecosystem services, especially in comparison to those FLPMA
principle uses that provide resources Americans use every day and have
intrinsic value in the marketplace.
Perhaps the qualitative nature of the NCA system is intentional.
Were the BLM conservation rule to stand as proposed, revenue generated
from federal lands would fall precipitously and there would not be much
left to account for except those intrinsic, qualitative values that
nature provides. As a nation, we have already set aside hundreds of
millions of acres of public lands for preservation only in national
parks, wilderness areas, wildlife refuges, other protective
designations. The BLM conservation rule would ensure multiple-use lands
appropriate for productive activities would be treated the same. The
result would be to deprive local communities near public lands and the
American taxpayer of the jobs, tax revenue, royalties, conservation
funding,\5\ and economic impact deriving from those activities that
provide true value in the marketplace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Oil and natural gas onshore and offshore leasing revenue and
royalties provide 94% of the conservation and public lands
infrastructure funding under the Great American Outdoors Act. See
Conserving the Great American Outdoors, Western Energy Alliance, 2022.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Mr. Collins. I thank the witnesses for their testimony. The
Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes each for their
questions. The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from
Wyoming, Ms. Hageman, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you very much. Thank you for letting me
join your Committee today.
I do find it fascinating that the advocates for this type
of a radical reorganization of our Federal lands and the
relationships between our Federal and state partners refuse to
participate in something of this significance, both in terms of
the Member of Congress, as well as the witness that came up
with this, what I would describe as a harebrained idea.
While we may be tough in our questioning, when you are
attempting to literally take trillions of dollars of value out
of our economy, perhaps you should be subjected to difficult
questioning. And if you can't, then maybe the rule ought to be
you don't get to participate in this kind of a policy
discussion if you are not willing to have your ideas subject to
our scrutiny.
I want to thank each of the witnesses for being here. You
have all been instrumental in addressing these NACs and what
they portend for our economy and for the future of our ability
to produce affordable food, energy, and housing.
Mr. Oaks, your testimony refers to natural capital
accounting, ecosystem services valuation, and the proposal to
redefine conservation as a ``use'' under the Federal Land
Policy and Management Act, or FLPMA, all as backdoor land use
regulation. And I think that is a great way to put it, and
something I dealt with a lot during my career as a lawyer.
It seems the Federal Government is always attempting to
control Wyoming's resources one way or another, and through
these various backdoor regulations or guidance documents or
responses to frequently asked questions and that sort of thing.
But I would love to hear more from you on this because, from
where I am sitting, the Biden administration is trying to
rewrite the rules through executive power, and they are
attempting to bypass Congress and shove state and local
governments out of the way.
Mr. Oaks, my question for you is, can you please elaborate
on how the Biden administration is engaging in backdoor land
use regulation?
Mr. Oaks. Yes, thank you for that question.
So, of course, under FLPMA, we have that multiple use
doctrine. And FLPMA, of course, Congress is delegating the
management of public lands with that multiple use.
With the conservation lease, if you elevate conservation
leases to the same level as multiple use, then you can replace
multiple use with conservation. And I think that is really the
key issue, is that if the Administration creates a conservation
rule outside of congressional processes, then you have
effectively elevated conservation to the same level of multiple
use, and can replace multiple use with conservation, and
replace those activities that are critical to states out in the
West, certainly Wyoming and Utah, with a conservation mission
as opposed to multiple use.
Ms. Hageman. Well, and when I read the rule proposed by the
SEC related to changing the rules for the New York Stock
Exchange, they specifically state that there cannot be multiple
use. They will not allow for logging, grazing, mineral
development, mining, et cetera. It is only this concept of
conservation that is never defined.
And there are a couple of things that have struck me about
this entirely. One is, as I said, the complete reordering of
the relationship between the Federal and state government and a
complete reordering of how we manage our Federal lands. The
Federal Government owns over 600 million acres of land. The
Federal Government owns 48 percent of the surface estate in the
state of Wyoming and 65 percent of our mineral estate.
A couple of weeks ago we had a gentleman from the BLM
appear in front of the Natural Resource Committee, and I asked
him about NACs, about Natural Asset Companies, and the BLM's
involvement with this rule. And the BLM manages 245 million
surface acres in this country and 700 million mineral acres,
the largest landowner in the United States.
The way that this rule is set up is that, literally, the
BLM could lease all 245 million surface acres and the mineral
acres to China, portions of it to Bill Gates. You could have
Mr. Bloomberg come in and decide that he was going to lease the
natural assets of Shoshone National Forest, thereby stopping
all sheep and cattle grazing, all bison production, all
logging, all water development, all of those things. Someone
like Mr. Bloomberg or Mr. Gates would have the ability to do
that, which just shocks my socks off.
But what really shocked me was, when I asked the gentleman
from the BLM about this, he didn't know anything about it. Does
that surprise you?
Mr. Oaks. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Hageman. Well, it surprised me, and I kept pushing him.
``Are you telling me that the SEC never contacted you about the
idea of monetizing and securitizing all of the natural assets
of the BLM?'' And he said that they did not.
And I think that that demonstrates either maybe he wasn't
being entirely forthcoming; maybe there are people in the BLM
that they contacted, but not him; perhaps the SEC and the New
York Stock Exchange are arrogant enough to move forward with a
rule like this without actually contacting the land use
agencies.
I mean, there are all kinds of things that we could surmise
from that. But the one thing that I think is very evident is
that none of this was ready for prime time. They attempted to
move forward with a rule that was going to dramatically impact
states like ours, dramatically impact our ability to produce
food, affordable housing, produce energy, and that they never
even talked to the land agency that was responsible for
management. I think that it just demonstrates how incredibly
bankrupt this entire process was.
I just want to make one more point, and that is that I want
to read from the rule. The exchange states that the reporting
framework is based on the natural capital accounting standards
established in the United Nations system of environmental
economic accounting. So, in addition to all the other terrible
things related to this rule, it would be the United Nations
that would establish the accounting standards that we would
have to live with as they stole our lands.
Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Collins. The gentlelady yields. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Montana, Mr. Rosendale, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for all the witnesses for coming in today to try to shed
some light on this subject.
This Administration has consistently and actively sought
ways to appease the climate activists. The latest attempt
involves allowing climate activists to capitalize on the
unproductive use of Americans' cherished Federal public lands.
While certain initiatives have been temporarily halted, there
is still the looming prospect of attempting to turn America's
public lands into a commodity for extremists.
Unfortunately, these lands, the BLM lands, are held in
trust for their respective states, and these actions that they
are trying to take are in complete contrast, as Mr. Butcher
mentioned, with the Taylor Grazing Act and other statutes that
mandate that they be used for productive purposes, prioritizing
agriculture at the top of that list for food for our nation,
specifically livestock production and crops.
And this Administration continuously tries to take and
utilize rules to bypass the statutes that are in place, because
they know that they don't have the support throughout this body
to actually amend the laws. And this is where the problem is.
So, it is left to us to make sure that we shed light on these
subjects, that the general public hears what is going on, that
they have an outpouring of support throughout the rest of
Congress so that we can make sure that these rules never see
the light of day.
Mr. Butcher, it is so great to see you again. I appreciate
you traveling from Fergus County and Lewistown to come and be
with us today. I hope the family is all doing well. Could you
please elaborate for me on the potential impact of the
Conservation and Landscape Health Rule in our home state of
Montana?
Mr. Butcher. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The concern is real, and we see it in our neighborhood
because there is already a non-profit entity that has come in
and started playing a game, I would say, they purchase
commensurate properties, deeded land that are tied to BLM
leases, and the intent is to turn those acres into
conservation, whatever that means. And the BLM at this point is
being questioned in court, determining whether they have the
authority to change major use in the way that they are.
This Conservation Land Health Rule just turns it on its
end. And the reality is they do not have this authority. I am
not sure if they are going to just try to push it through, but
I put a link with my comments to our report that we put in, and
I recommend that the body look at that because it does a great
job of laying out specifically why they are out of their
wheelhouse in trying to do this.
Mr. Rosendale. So, let me ask you this. When you take those
lands out of production, forget about future opportunities that
are eliminated. But when that land gets taken out of production
now, agricultural production, how does that impact the local
sale yard? How does that impact the local implement dealer? How
does that impact the local school district and the local
hospital medical facilities?
Mr. Butcher. Yes, we have already seen that in Fergus
County, because the entity bought a large working operation. It
used to have about two families that were there managing the
operation. Now those are gone, and the implement dealership is
losing sales. I hear from them. It is felt. The school has lost
students. EMS, we rely on volunteers for our ambulance crew and
our fire crews. And those people are gone. It is losing those
folks in our communities that actually keep our communities
going.
And the dollar figure is dramatic. When you start removing
hundreds of cattle for sale that go through a ring, that is not
just steaks that you are missing, that is actual dollars that
go through our community. And as most of you know, agriculture
has a thin margin, but they run a lot of dollars. So, those
dollars are what are missing, turning through our economy, as
well as the concerns if this grows beyond a small area of
conservation where these activities are removed, it is of
national security. We need to feed ourselves. And in the 1930s,
the legislative body understood that and said these lands need
to be held for this purpose because they recognized feeding a
nation is important.
Mr. Rosendale. The last thing that I would like to ask, do
the best range management practices which have been established
over the last 70, 80 years by a lot of trial and error, range
management experts and ranchers working together to determine
how these entities and the utilization or lack of utilization
of this land, impact that range management?
Mr. Butcher. Well, it will impact it dramatically. The
proposals in conservation, you are already seeing it in this
non-profit group, is to remove the improvements on these BLM
lands. That is the water improvements. That is the fencing.
And it has been proven over time, best practices, this is
how you maintain a healthy range. And conservationists really,
at their heart, they have never gone to the Montana State
University Ag Sciences Department and really studied what does
it take to improve production on the land. And you see it. They
don't understand that.
And when you speak production, oftentimes the folks that
are worried about the environment think that somehow that is
harmful. Yet, productive landscapes are productive for
everything, the wildlife as well as the cattle or sheep that
you are grazing. And it is that symbiotic relationship that we
have developed in the last 70 years on these lands that have
improved them dramatically. And they are much, much more
productive now than they were 50 years ago.
Mr. Rosendale. What I like to say is if you take care of
the land, it will take care of you.
Mr. Butcher. Absolutely.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much. Thank you all for being
here today.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Collins. The gentleman yields. The Chair now recognizes
myself for 5 minutes for questioning. And I have a list of
questions here.
Before I get started, though, I really want to make an
observation. I am a freshman up here, but I have had the
opportunity to go across this country to hold field hearings
and to look at our witnesses and the people, the stakeholders
that are sitting behind them. And it is very evident that what
we are looking at today are people that are concerned, that
actually work in the industry, that are actually hands-on of
what is going on on your land and in your community. And I want
to tell you I appreciate you being here for that and to
testify.
Mr. Oaks, I appreciate you being here again today. In your
role as Treasurer of the state of Utah, it is very safe to say
you are familiar with the best accounting practices, correct?
Mr. Oaks. Yes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. In your written testimony, you
stated that valuing ecosystem services is largely subjective.
Can you elaborate on that?
And how is the accounting system for the ecosystem services
valuation so subjective?
Mr. Oaks. Sure. So, really, accounting is grounded on
economic activity. And that makes it very objective. And,
unfortunately, with ecosystem services there is a lot of
subjectivity because there is no underlying economic activity
associated with ecosystem services.
That is not to say that it isn't valuable. We have always
valued ecosystem services. But the question is, how do you deal
with something that does not really have economic activity
underlying it?
So, even the intrinsic exchange group that proposed the
Natural Asset Companies, or was behind Natural Asset Companies,
their framework relied heavily on subjective valuations like
aesthetic value. What is the value of a sunset, for example, to
someone?
So, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to put a value
on that. Even organizations that were supportive of that, like
Ernst and Young, highlight some of the challenges associated
with the NAC rule and this valuation issue. Basically, they
point out that accounting firms that audit these financial
statements and other disclosures required for publicly-traded
companies, they don't have the expertise to assess biophysical
measures for different types of ecosystems without relying
heavily on outside experts.
So, this would allow, really, the accounting firms to
essentially outsource that function of auditing, natural asset
accounting, to unknown actors outside the financial statement
audit process. And audits presumably would require the
involvement of scientists who are not registered with the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board and not experienced
with GAAP.
Mr. Collins. I am sure you would say that that would impact
the reliability of the numbers.
Mr. Oaks. Absolutely. It is really anybody's guess as to
what the real value is.
Mr. Collins. Do you think it is prudent to base national
policy on valuations that are so subjective?
Mr. Oaks. No.
Mr. Collins. I figured that was your answer.
Ms. Sgamma, the Biden administration has stated the
National Strategy for Natural Capital Accounting and subsequent
guidance incorporating ecosystems services valuation into
benefit cost analysis will be used to support a number of
partisan goals regarding public land management, including
America the Beautiful's 30x30 Initiative and BLM's Conservation
and Landscape Health Rule. I think many Americans have concerns
with this, given how President Biden has issued a plethora of
mandates on American consumers, kind of like a dictator.
And government bureaucrats attack domestic resource
development from every angle to satiate the rabid eco-activists
and the anti-use non-profits driving Biden's agenda.
Given President Biden's terrible track record with natural
resource development, are you concerned that the Department of
the Interior and the Bureau of Land Management will abuse a
national system for natural capital accounting to lock up
public lands and waters from resources development?
Ms. Sgamma. I do, Mr. Chair, and I think it is hand in
glove with the BLM Conservation Rule, which seeks to elevate
conservation as a multiple use, which it is not, according to
FLPMA, above productive uses on Federal lands.
Mr. Collins. All right. And I want to ask this of all the
witnesses. Let's discuss the public consultation process just a
little bit.
To your knowledge, has anyone in the Biden administration
reached out to local officials or industry stakeholders
regarding the National Strategy for Natural Capital Accounting
Ecosystem Services Valuation, or the updated guidance
incorporating natural accounting, capital accounting, and
ecosystem services valuation into the benefit cost analysis?
Mr. Butcher, I would love to start with you.
Mr. Butcher. The answer would be no. We have not heard
anything. And once again, that was an initiative that seemed to
be pushed through in the eleventh hour without much notice. So,
no, we have not been brought into this conversation.
Mr. Collins. Would anybody else like to----
Ms. Sgamma. I think the Administration has so many
different initiatives, and they are all extremely complex,
whether it is DEI, or climate change, or natural capital
accounting, that I don't think that the agencies can keep track
of it all. So, it doesn't surprise me that the BLM didn't know
about the NACs rule and what SEC was doing. How could they
possibly keep track?
Mr. Collins. I think, needless to say, the Biden
administration hasn't adequately consulted with any local
stakeholders on these issues.
Before I wrap up, oh, goodness. Well, the Chair yields
back, and the Chair now recognizes Mr. Curtis for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found myself already
prepared in the wrong committee room, and I looked around and
Marlo Oaks wasn't in the room, so I knew I was in the wrong
spot.
I am really pleased to be here today. And thank you to all
of our witnesses. Marlo, thank you for traveling from Utah. I
am thrilled to be here, and be with Treasurer Oaks, who has
been critical in Utah to push back against corporate ESG.
I am also glad we have a Western voice on this panel to
talk about the implications of Wall Street locking up our
public lands. This issue is especially relevant in Utah, where
two-thirds of our land is federally managed. Think about that
for just a minute, two-thirds. A high percentage of the
districts that I represent are over 90 percent Federal lands.
Grazers, farmers, recreationalists, the energy industry,
and more rely on access to these lands. They are critical to
our national security and our livelihoods. National Asset
Corporations are a proposed vehicle to allow Wall Street to
effectively lock up public lands to meet their ESG goals. This
is why, with Treasurer Oak's support, I introduced a bill that
would prohibit Natural Asset Companies from entering into any
agreement involving Utah's land or natural assets.
Mr. Oaks, thank you for being here. While the NAC rule is
temporarily on pause, it was a clear test to see how Wall
Street can take over public lands for their own benefits. Why
did you support my bill to ban natural asset companies or any
similar rule from impacting Utah?
Mr. Oaks. Well, thank you for that question, Representative
Curtis.
I think, really, the financialization of Mother Nature is
an incredibly scary concept. When you can financialize a public
good, and that is really what we are talking about, we are
talking about taking public goods that are a benefit to society
and financializing them, you are really creating ownership and
assigning a value to a public good like air that we breathe.
That can commoditize that public good, and that opens the door.
It is really, as I stated, a Pandora's box to ownership and
trading and valuing something that should be for the benefit of
society.
And Wall Street certainly sees a lot of dollar signs
associated with that, just given the value that they have
thrown out as what these natural processes would be worth: $5
quadrillion; in relation to financial assets globally, $1.5
quadrillion. So, we are talking three times the value. That is
a lot of money that could be made potentially from Wall Street.
Mr. Curtis. Good. And then, if you would, comment just
briefly on how that impacts the state, with two-thirds of its
land being federally owned.
Mr. Oaks. It is a tremendous impact. When we have the
growth of the state of Utah, where we are trying to create
enough housing for people, we don't have a lot of private land.
And then you add on to that all of the activity that happens in
rural Utah on the Federal land that is critical to our economy,
everything from oil extraction, to grazing, to recreation,
outdoor recreation, I think we are the No. 1 state for outdoor
recreation, these are key economic issues that will severely
impact our state negatively.
Mr. Curtis. Could you also just comment briefly on Utahns'
perspective?
Sometimes when we push back on something like this, it
gives the brand that somehow we also don't want to preserve and
protect these areas. Could you just comment on that from a
Utahn's perspective about how we feel ourselves about the
importance of preserving and protecting these lands?
Mr. Oaks. Absolutely. I think, really, in the West, we are
the original conservationists. I mean, this is the land that we
grew up on. And the people that are closest to the land care
about it the most. It is the farmers, and the ranchers, and the
people that are in rural communities. This is their
livelihoods. And we absolutely care about this land.
Mr. Curtis. You mentioned they are the original
conservationalists. I think they like that word better.
Sometimes I call them the original environmentalists.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Curtis. And indeed, they are. And perhaps they are a
little uncomfortable with that word. But thank you for that,
and thank you for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Collins. The gentleman yields back.
Before we conclude, I really wanted to end with a couple of
observations. Most notably, I said that I had attended a lot of
field hearings. And in those field hearings, there were none of
our colleagues from the other side that showed up. When we are
actually talking to people that are being affected by this
Administration's policies, and it is just a reflection of the
Administration, they don't really care what you think. They
don't care what the implications may be on you or anybody in
your area or in your community. They have an agenda that they
are going after, and they have an agenda that they are going to
try to achieve, and they are going to cram it down the throats
of the American people.
You can also see that in the witnesses that they try to
provide. I mean, we have some fellow from some elite Ivy League
school that is going to come and talk to us and know better
about your community and your area than you do. That just shows
you the arrogance and the disdain for anybody else and anybody
else's thoughts, or what they may have an opinion on.
It kind of reminds me of a lot of times, I am in the
trucking industry, and we get new trucks in, and some engineers
engineered something that they thought was just fantastic over
here. But in the real world, it doesn't work. And it is because
they sit behind a desk, or a computer screen, and they are not
actually out there in the trucking world, driving.
So, I appreciate your testimony, and I appreciate you being
here, because I can guarantee you one thing. We are not going
to stop fighting this issue, and we are looking forward to the
next administration taking over, and we will fix a lot of these
problems.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
and the Members for their questions.
The members of this Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. on March 12. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for these responses.
As there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement of the Hon. Paul Gosar
a Representative in Congress from the State of Arizona
Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

In accordance with the rules of the House and this Committee, I am
pleased to submit this statement for the record.

First and foremost, I was extremely disappointed in the Minority
for failing to produce a single witness. The failure of the Minority to
defend their party and President Biden's strategy for natural capital
accounting demonstrates the absolute absurdity of these policies when
challenged, proponents of these ideas buck under the pressure. No one
is willing to defend President Biden's policies, because they know that
they are indefensible. But because they are beholden to radical leftist
groups, they refuse to stand up against them.

Natural capital accounting and ecosystem services valuation are
described by proponents as ways to calculate and place a monetary value
on our public lands and natural resources. While there may be some
merit to a bipartisan approach to accounting for some key natural
assets, the Biden administration's National Strategy for Natural
Capital Accounting and its implementation is nothing more than a
continuation of his partisan land grab and an attempt by progressives
to circumvent Congress and grant even more arbitrary power to unelected
bureaucrats.

Natural capital accounting and ecosystem services valuation have
united the left and right, with conservative and liberal critics alike
criticizing the attempts to monetize natural activity as a shift in
property rights away from local stakeholders to nameless financiers
from the other side of the country or around the world. Natural capital
accounting and ecosystem services valuation would allow nonprofits and
other organizations funded by global financiers to lock up our federal
lands and block the use natural resources for local productive
activity. Conservatives argue that enacting these concepts will lead to
our natural resources and lands being further restricted because we are
removing stewardship from local communities and placing it in the hands
of nameless financiers. Liberals argue that removing local control will
increase injustice and abuse of our natural resources. The shared
concerns about property rights cannot and should not be ignored when
considering solutions for protecting our natural resources and public
lands.

Despite the substantive criticisms from across the political
spectrum, the Biden administration is moving ahead and formally
integrating natural capital accounting and ecosystem services valuation
across the federal government. Notably, the Biden administration has
recently published guidance directing agencies to incorporate natural
capital and ecosystem services valuation into benefit-cost analysis, a
fundamental shift to a key component of agency rulemaking.

This directive, stemming directly from the Executive Office of the
President, will have a tremendous impact on how agencies operate and
carry out their duties. Yet the Biden administration has yet to provide
Congress on the development and implementation of the guidance and the
Biden administration's strategy writ large. Indeed, last month the co-
authors of the Biden administration's National Strategy for Capital
Accounting--the Office of Budget and Management, Office of Science and
Technology Policy, and the Department of Commerce--all declined the
Committee's invitation. Meanwhile, the one witness the Biden
administration did send was a junior employee from the Bureau of Land
Management who was curiously devoid of information on the Biden
administration's policies on natural capital accounting and ecosystem
services valuation.

Proponents argue that natural capital accounting and ecosystem
services valuation will help inform policy makers as we try to craft
bipartisan environmental solutions. However, natural capital accounting
and ecosystem services valuation cannot accomplish their stated goals.
Ecosystems are impossible to accurately measure. Beyond the practical
difficulty, accounting systems fail to capture nature's intrinsic
value. And, perhaps above all, the estimates are not precise enough for
policy decisions.
Additionally, I have grave concern with how Democrats plan to use
natural capital accounting and ecosystem services valuation. The
President has made clear he is intent on locking our Natural Resources
and Public Lands from responsible uses. For example, as explained on
our February 15, 2024, hearing, The Natural Capital Accounting and
Ecosystem Services Valuation will serve to help implement the America
the Beautiful Initiative's 30x30 goal to lock up 30% of our nation's
land by 2030. Likewise, natural capital accounting and ecosystem
services valuation will also help enact more radical policies, such as
the Bureau of Land Management's Conservation and Landscape Health which
would lock off more federal lands in the name of conservation.

Natural capital accounting and ecosystem services valuation are
nothing more than a continuation of the Biden administrations assault
against our natural resources and public lands.

Protecting our natural resources and public lands is an issue which
should unite us all. However, rather than foster bipartisan cooperation
and work together to find solutions, the Biden administration is
bypassing Congress through Executive overreach to force natural capital
accounting and ecosystem services valuation on the Federal government
and American people.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Stansbury

Yale University

Tobin Center for Economic Policy

March 13, 2024

Dear Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury and Members of the
Committee:

I am David Wilkinson, Executive Director of the Tobin Center to
Economic Policy at Yale University. My written testimony is intended to
represent views of economists, affirm the long-standing consensus among
mainstream economists regarding the national statistical accounts, and
to agree with the primary theme of this hearing that for natural
capital accounting to be of value to our nation, it must continue to
remain nonpartisan.

My role at the Tobin Center is to coordinate academic economists
and help convey complex economic concepts in the fast-paced policy
process at the federal, state and local levels. We work across issue
areas offering nonpartisan and evidenced-based solutions. Since our
founding in 2018 we have partnered with and assisted the Trump and
Biden administrations (receiving appreciation and citations by both) as
well as leaders in ``red'' states and ``blue'' states to help resolve
complex issues using data and evidence.

It is important to clarify, as I would have in spoken testimony had
I been able to be present, that am not a researcher, economist, or deep
expert in the topic of natural capital accounting. Rather I was
invited, and regrettably had to decline, to speak to the core issue
presented by, and at the heart of, the hearing: the critical importance
of nonpartisanship in any effort to develop national statistical
accounts. (While I cannot speak for other invitees, I would have loved
to be there with you and regretted my inability to accept the
invitation to attend.)

On the matter of economic consensus around development of impartial
objective statistics, I am qualified to testify based on my work
collaborating with over 50 mainstream academic economists to summarize
a consensus response to the Sept 2022 Request for Information (``RFI'')
on the draft National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-
Economic Decisions (the ``National Strategy''). My testimony will
therefore quote and paraphrase heavily from that document (``The Joint
Comment of Economists'' or ``The Joint Comment''--attached in full
hereto). In addition, it reflects themes I gathered in subsequent work
assembling economists and statisticians--as well as former Republican
and Democratic appointees--on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of
the seminal paper that is credited with leading to the broadly held
academic consensus around the importance of accounting for value of the
natural assets (which mainstream U.S. economists believe is important
to our national economic growth and prosperity). A co-author of that
paper, the late Nobel laureate James Tobin is my center's namesake. The
other, Nobel laureate Bill Nordhaus, is on faculty at Yale.

The primary purpose of this testimony is to agree with key themes
expressed by Sub-Committee Chairman Gosar and Committee Chairman
Westerman in the Feb 15th hearing on this subject.

In that hearing Chairman Gosar stated that:

``We must take great care so that our natural capital
accounting system will best serve our nation, rather than serve
as a weapon to achieve partisan goals.''

Based on my work with economic experts on the subject at
universities around the country, I believe Chairman Gosar's core
statement is one that would garner unanimous and enthusiastic support
from academic economists and statisticians. As detailed below,
economists believe we must take great care and that it is essential to
do so in a way that is nonpartisan.

At the same hearing, Chairman Westerman voiced concern that the US
may fall behind the rest of the world in the development of these
statistics and that in the absence of US leadership--accurately noting
the US has historically ``been a leader in standards development''--we
may become subject to standards that are not impartial and may serve
foreign interests.

Economists also strongly insist on impartial, objective,
nonpartisan statistical accounts. They have warned against any
alternative, while also advocating for the US to be leader in their
development.

Drawing largely from The Joint Comment of Economists, the remainder
of my comments below in are intended to highlight for the committee the
consensus opinion of mainstream academic economists as related to some
of the issues raised at the heart of the hearing--and that further
substantiate and support the alignment of economists with the
priorities expressed above by the both the committee and subcommittee
chairs. Where there is emphasis added in quotes herein, it is my own,
intended to help draw out key points for the committee's consideration.
1. The motivation behind natural capital accounting is better
statistics to advance economic growth and prosperity both now
and in the future.

Economists broadly share a consensus that it is important to
reflect the key economic role of nature in our national accounts. As
stated in the Joint Comment of Economists:

Economic statistics are the lens through which we observe the
economy and are the tools for shaping its future. [The then
draft National Strategy] advances a more complete set of
economic statistics for the United States . . .

Nature offers key inputs to the US economy across sectors.
Natural resources--such as timber, water, fish, and minerals--
underpin multiple supply chains. Forests and wetlands enhance
water supplies and storm resilience while supporting outdoor
recreation and tourism . . .. In these ways and many more,
nature enables growth and prosperity in the present and is
essential to future economic success. How we manage nature
today will either enhance or deplete future opportunities.
These characteristics, among others, are why economists have
referred to nature as a form of natural capital.

Despite the fact that nature supports, and is intertwined
with, our economy, and despite the fact that environmental
change is important to economic decision making, natural assets
are not included in the tools for measuring and monitoring the
economy: our national economic accounts.
2. The Strategy is grounded in well-established research spanning over
decades and its objectives reflect the consensus of mainstream
economists.

The briefing for this hearing refers to demand for natural capital
accounts among ``pockets of economists, ecologists, and scientists.''
While would not claim to represent the sentiment of ecologists or
scientists, the question at hand is primarily around the statistical
tools of economists and statisticians. For that population support goes
far beyond pockets of support, and more resembles a consensus.

The Strategy is well-founded in the rich, well-developed
history of thinking and practice on natural capital economics.

The need to include natural assets on our nation's balance
sheet is grounded in decades of research by leading academics,
including multiple Nobel Laureate economists, federal
economists, statisticians and scientists.

Based on my experience I would say the question for U.S. economists
is not whether America should reflect nature's contribution to our
national wealth, but how, by what means and to what degree. That
important and complex question, in turn, would be answered what the
National Strategy calls for to be an open and transparent 15-year
process.
3. The approach proposed to develop statistics in National Strategy is
reasonable and prudent.

The Joint Comment expresses that the National Strategy appears to
be consistent with--and if properly executed as designed--would be true
to the long-standing consensus of economists.

The Strategy properly suggests a conservative and purposeful,
phased approach. It proposes shepherding an efficient
transition from research grade environmental-economic
statistics and natural capital accounts to Core Statistical
Products . . .
The 15-year phased approach also sets a realistic time horizon
for full adoption . . . Our national economic accounts have
continually evolved over time. The Strategy charts a realistic
path to address an important gap in our economic understanding,
strengthening our accounts and their ability to inform better,
smarter economic decision making in policy and business.

Thus, in summary, The Strategy represents a timely, actionable,
and much needed opportunity to develop and deploy a system of
account that better represents the balance of natural assets on
which our prosperity currently draws.

Some non-economists concerned about a partisan valence have
inquired ``why now''. In addition to the fact that other nations are
taking this up ( see below, #6), the Joint Comment also notes that new
technology now makes it practical and possible when it previously was
not, noting that the National Strategy:

Takes advantage of new and emerging technologies, including
secure, `big-data' techniques and developments in environmental
monitoring that were not available in earlier federal attempts
to develop environmental-economic statistics . . .
4. For statistical accounts to be useful we must have nonpartisan,
objective standards.

The briefing memo for this hearing highlights:

``There may be legitimate, nonpartisan reasons for NCA [meaning
natural capital accounting] . . . such as ensuring responsible natural
resource development, effective conservation, and stabilizing America's
economy and environment. However, instead of using NCA . . . to promote
nonpartisan aims..'' . . . the memo authors then express concern that
the Biden Administration may intend to use the future national
statistical accounts to advance partisan aims.
I know of no academic economist critique of present policy
proposals (from the left or right) that may imply partisan manipulation
of the ultimate statistics. Without speaking to current initiatives or
intentions of a time-bound administration, I can say that the National
Strategy itself--as a 15-year plan for non-partisan statistical
agencies to transparently and methodically develop statistical
standards--is something that academic economists have praised as a
sensible approach that is well-suited to yield the desired outcome
nonpartisan, objective statistics. It would seem to me any plans a
current administration may have for partisan uses of standards will be
irrelevant in a 15-year time horizon.

Indeed, economists have expressed encouragement that the 15-year
development window not only allows ample time for transparent process
to get these important statics right, but it also signals that the
current administration understands that the ultimate statistical
accounts must be nonpartisan if they are to come into existence. In
other words, it is encouraging to economists that the administration
did not seek to ``rush'' statistical development to fit its
administrative timeline, which it could have attempted to do.

Rather, it embraced the recommendation of impartial statical
leaders, `pushing the boat out to sea,' knowing that for it to succeed
it must survive partisan scrutiny on both sides. Over the course of 15
years, development of the strategy will likely pass through the
administrative leadership of both parties. This provides ample
opportunity to review, expose and eliminate unhelpful partisan agendas
from either political valence on the path to well-pruned, objective,
impartial statistics. Such a time horizon, among other aspects of the
plan (e.g., coordination by nonpartisan statistical agencies, a plan
for transparent development with feedback from communities and
industry, and the bipartisan authorities from which it stems), is thus
seen as encouraging. These factors helped motivate the Joint Statement
of Economists in praising the National Strategy as a sensible, prudent,
nonpartisan approach.

Chairman Westerman, while expressing concern that the US may be
falling behind other nations in a way that might compromise US
interests, also clearly pointed out ``the distinction between
developing standards and using those standards in a nefarious way''. By
``nefarious,'' I think the Chairman means anything that would resemble
insincere effort to hide behind standards as a ruse for partisan
objectives.
The authors of the Joint Statement offer a similar warning that the
approach to establishing and implementing the statistics must be
nonpartisan:

The Strategy, which, if executed as planned in a non-partisan
manner, will enhance the ability of government and business to
manage capital efficiently in pursuit of national prosperity.

It seems this was also the sentiment of Congressmen Gosar's
statement (as quoted above) in the February hearing on this topic.
5. Development of the Strategy should be an open, inclusive, and
transparent process.

As a nonexpert in the topic but as someone who has worked across
the aisle on nonpartisan initiatives in a partisan environment, I also
submitted a comment in response to the RFI on the National Strategy
alongside a colleague who has worked in administrations of both parties
(see attached ``Tobin Center Comment''). With the blessing of
mainstream economists interested in the development of objective
statistics, we made recommendations on effectively executing an open
transparent process:

Be transparent in goal setting and execution: The Strategy is
exemplary in its transparency and accessibility. Each aspect of
each phase of the initiative will involve similarly significant
complexity and detail. In execution of each aspect, the federal
government should strive for a similar level of transparency
and accessibility where practical and allowable. A lead
communicator should be identified for each relevant
subcomponent and whether the same entity or varying should
adhere to a somewhat standard reporting format and cadence with
actions, objectives and target timelines so that industry,
researcher, and the public may easily access and interpret the
ongoing work and results . . .

Engage relevant, affected, interested and expert communities:
We encourage the involvement of the private sector in the
development of the accounts to ensure that the accounts are
also useful by business and financial decision makers. This
engagement process will also contribute to having consistency
between natural capital information produced by business and
finance and facilitate the flow of information among private
and public sectors . . . Federal leaders should be aware of the
appropriate mechanisms of such engagement and plan for it from
the beginning. In addition to compliance with relevant statute,
this should include user-cantered [sic --(centered)] approaches
to engagement and information sharing.

The ultimate strategy sets out a path that calls for just such
transparency and multi-stakeholder engagement, as called for by
multiple commenters.
6. It is in American interests for the United States to lead, as it
has historically done in statistical standard development.

Natural capital accounting is an American idea. Despite rich
bipartisan history advancing these concepts dating back to the Nixon
Administration, the US has more recently fallen behind. This has
occurred on the watch of administrations of both parties. In the Joint
Statement, economists expressed the importance of a return to US
leadership:

While the US has [historically] been a catalytic leader in
recognizing the untapped potential value in accounting for
natural assets, the concept is also underpinned by a broad
research community and considerate academic and policy
leadership internationally, with over 80 countries formalizing
natural capital accounting in economic-statistical systems . .
.. It is once more time for the U.S. to lead its peers in this
area and this practical strategy positions the United States to
do so.

At the February hearing, Chairman Westerman noted:

And I do want to make a clarification here. The idea of valuing
our natural assets I don't think is a bad idea, and I think the
US is probably behind in that, in creating standards. And my
understanding is that some foreign entities, even China, are
working on international standards that could be used against
us, be used against products produced in America.
He later stated:

I am concerned that we are getting behind, and we are allowing
people who don't have our best interests at heart to develop
these standards, where the US has generally been a leader in
standards development around the world.

Some have expressed concern about a partisan agenda in development
of the Strategy or the intended use of the resulting statistics. If
there are partisan designs on either side, the evidence does support
the case that such partisan goals are the intention of the economists
and statisticians who would actually develop and use the resulting
statics to advance growth and prosperity. Further, the multi-year,
transparent design does not support the conclusion of partisan intent.
Rather, these characteristics have been applauded by economists as
partisan insulation. I suspect economists would also applaud any
sincere concern about the objectivity of standard development and would
welcome oversight that helps keep partisan agendas out of the process.

For their part, if there is any agenda here, it is this: for half
a century, US economists and statisticians have seen an obvious and
significant gap in how we account for and assess our national wealth.
New technology has begun to make it practical to correct this long-
standing shortcoming in our national accounts. Statistics and
accounting being universal languages, economists and statisticians in
other countries see the same problem in their statistical systems as
well as the new opportunity to solve for them. And they are acting.

The US has historically led the world in developing standards and
statistics--something that has widely been seen as working in US
national interests. This is not a case where inaction is
inconsequential. If America does not lead, other nations will.
Economists I have spoken to believe the result may compromise US
interests, for instance in international trade (as well as the quality,
accuracy and impartiality of the statistics themselves). I would
venture to say many would agree with Chairman Westerman's concerns, as
he framed them.

______

Yale School of the Environment

March 12, 2024

House Committee on Natural Resources
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Dear Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury and members of the
Subcommittee:

I am a professor of natural resource economics at Yale. For over a
decade, I have done research on how to measure the changing value of
natural resources, by applying capital theory to them. I was cited
multiple times in your briefing memo. In June 2021, I took leave from
Yale to serve the country in the Office of Science and Technology
Policy. I returned to Yale at the end of January 2023, and this
statement should not be interpreted as a statement for OSTP or for
Yale.
I believe that nonpartisan, careful accounting for our natural
resources elevates the conversation and is a useful tool in economic
decisions and in natural resource decisions. This is why I have spent
so much of my career working on the methods to measure the changing
value of natural resources as assets. In November 2016 I was invited to
Kansas to speak at the Governor's Water Conference about a groundwater
natural capital account that colleagues and I had built. The farmers at
the conference were interested in the account and told me they found it
helpful to structure their conversations about how the farmers
themselves managed the groundwater in Kansas. They also expressed
interest in having a regularly updated account. I offered to work with
economists from Kansas to do so, but I did not have the capacity to
maintain the account myself at the time. My experience in Kansas
convinced me that it is possible to do natural capital accounting in a
way that helps local decision makers who are closest to the resource.
Treating natural resources as assets is not a new idea. Teddy
Roosevelt famously said, ``The nation behaves well if it treats the
natural resources as assets which it must turn over to the next
generation increased, and not impaired, in value; and behaves badly if
it leaves the land poorer to those who come after it.'' \1\ Roosevelt
was advised by leading thinkers of his time: Gifford Pinchot, a founder
of American forestry, and Irving Fisher, a founder of American
economics. The writings of those two foundational American scholars
make it clear that Roosevelt likely took this statement literally. Yet,
it is only recently that we have had the data and methods to provide
the type of measurements to formally be accountable to the standard
Roosevelt called for. And, accounting helps with accountability.
Accounting facilitates resource management in the form of wise use,
i.e., conservation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Roosevelt, T. 1910. Conservation: Speech at Denver before the
Colorado Live Stock Association in A. H. Lewis, editor. Compilation of
the Messages and Speeches of Theodore Roosevelt.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The idea of treating natural resources as assets and accounting for
them is well established in economic thought. At least half a dozen
Nobel laureate economists have written on the topic. Many prominent
American economists went on record in the public comments in favor of
the national strategy for natural capital accounts, which they
characterized as ``well-founded in the rich, well-developed history of
thinking and practice on natural capital economics.'' The National
Research Council, The National Bureau of Economic Research, and the
Government Accountability Office have all said we need some form of
environmental-economic and/or natural capital account. And, for
national statistics to be useful they, of course, must be nonpartisan
and adhere to high standards.
I was heartened watching the first hearing, because I saw consensus
on a common theme: accounting for natural assets is important, and it
must be nonpartisan. Chairman Gosar said, ``we must take great care so
that our natural capital accounting system will best serve our Nation,
rather than serve as a weapon to achieve partisan goals.''
Representative Stansbury laid out a compelling case for natural capital
accounts. Chairman Westerman said, ``The idea of valuing our natural
assets I don't think is a bad idea, and I think the U.S. is probably
behind in that, in creating standards. And my understanding is that
some foreign entities, even China, are working on international
standards that could be used against us, be used against products
produced in America.'' I believe that the 15-year process is itself a
mechanism for nonpartisan development since neither party is likely to
control the Presidency for a 15-year run.
I would like to clarify some relationships related to international
accounting standards for national accounts, prior to relaying a story
about their development. The System of National Accounts and the System
of Environmental Economic Accounting (SEEA) are developed through a
process of negotiation among national statistical offices; the role of
the UN is merely as a convener and secretariat--the UN Statistics
Division does not make statistical policy. Traditionally, the United
States has provided international leadership on statistical standards.
Other countries have followed the examples that the United States
implements. The United States co-led (with the UK) the establishment of
the System of National Accounts in the wake of the second World War
(the U.S. began work in the wake of the Great Depression). Historians
and economists credit this system with helping contain the Soviet Union
during the cold war.
Around 2019, I was invited as an expert to advise on the System of
Environmental Economic Accounting, which I would characterize as a
daughter standard to the System of National Accounts. Many of the
people in the conversations that I was involved with around the System
of Environmental Economic Accounting were delegates from various
national statistical offices. I watched the experts from the U.S.
Government work to make sure the standards adhered to the high,
nonpartisan standards of the U.S. statistical system. I had colleagues
from other European countries say things to the effect of, ``The U.S.
ideas sound nice, but it is hard to back them and convince our
governments to adopt the high quality standard because the U.S. is not
actually implementing environmental-economic accounting.'' I saw the
penultimate draft, and there are many reasonable features within SEEA.
While many of these reasonable features were retained in the final
version, I was shocked in 2021 when China's ``Gross Ecosystem Product''
idea was included in the final standard. It had not been in the draft
that I saw. I don't think the ``Gross Ecosystem Product'' idea is
broadly supported by economists. I believe this is why the U.S.
national strategy says, ``Incorporate the internationally agreed-upon
SEEA to guide development of U.S. natural capital accounts and
environmental-economic statistics, where the SEEA standards are
relevant and robustly developed.'' I believe the approach in the US
strategy is good. It enables the U.S. to lead from within, but being
very clear that there are elements of SEEA that are not relevant or
robustly developed for use in the United States. The proposed approach
will enable the U.S. to steer the future development of SEEA.
Other countries will use an international standard, multilateral
development banks will use an international standard, sovereign credit
rating agencies will use the data based on the international standard.
It appears that either the United States can resume its traditional
leadership role of leading on statistical standards, leading by
example, or it seems likely China will attempt to step in.
In the first hearing, Chairman Westerman asked about the
relationship of U.S. natural capital accounts to other countries. About
three months ago, a student and I took data from the OECD--for
countries that report to the OECD and looked at which countries report
non-financial, non-produced assets (and produced assets called
cultivated biological assets, like orchards and plantation forests) on
their official national balance sheets. To be clear, this is part of
the main System of National Accounts that lead to internationally
comparable measures of GDP (not the SEEA Ecosystem Accounts). The
categories are the headline categories. Fish and non-plantation forests
would be non-cultivated biological assets (assuming there is a
management plan). Chile, Iceland, Colombia, Turkey, and Switzerland
also report to the OECD, but report no data. These are official, not
experimental or pilot accounts. You can see the U.S. is indeed behind.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

A consensus opinion among U.S. economists and statisticians is
that the omission of natural resources from our national balance sheet
is a shortcoming in the system of national accounting, and it should be
rectified. New technologies and increased computing power are now
making it possible to fill the hole and address this well recognized
problem.
In 1972, Nobel laureates Nordhaus and Tobin pointed out that when
something is omitted from the accounts, it is treated as if it is free,
and they write, ``There are serious consequences of treating as free
things which are not really free. This practice gives the wrong signals
of the direction of economic growth.''
A common way this shows up is that following a forest fire, some
media pundit says, ``The fire was good; the rebuilding will boost
GDP.'' It is technically correct that rebuilding boosts GDP (though
usually only for the quarter of, or the quarter immediately after, the
disaster). But, uncontrolled forest fires clearly can't make good
economic sense. This happens because GDP is a measure of how much money
we spend (though studies show that disasters generally depress GDP
starting 3 or more quarters after the disaster, because of the loss of
the unaccounted-for capital base). What we should be looking at instead
is the change in the balance sheet. It records the stock of national
wealth, rather than the flow of spending. Putting natural assets on the
balance sheet will show how failure to manage forest fire reduces
national wealth.
High quality economics requires robust economic information about
the role of natural assets in supporting economic development through
industries such as forestry, fishing, mining, and tourism or helping
lower costs elsewhere, like the role of forests in lowering costs for
water treatment facilities or the role of clean air in boosting worker
productivity and lowering health care costs. Importantly, natural
resources do contribute to our economy even when they are not used up
in the process. This is similar to the way produced capital, like
machines, boost production without being used up (though may require
maintenance like ecosystems).
In the first hearing, Chairman Gosar, asked about mining having
something to sell, but clean air is not something to sell. I understand
why someone would ask that question. First, a land manager who owns
land with a mineral resource should record the income from selling a
mineral, but should also record the decline in value of the land from
selling the resource, because the opportunity to mine certainly
capitalizes into land value and that land value is reduced after the
mineral is extracted. This is simply how double entry accounting works.
Right now, we don't keep track of the decline in land value from
separating the land from the mineral, including potential impairments
(e.g., tailing piles) that may leave the land less suitable for
alternative uses. Second, with respect to air quality, cleaner air
reduces health care costs and increases worker productivity (sort of
like computers). So, there is something to show for it as far as real
financial flows. The challenges of measuring it are not that different
from assessing the value of a firm with specialized capital assets that
must be repaired from time to time--just as the U.S. has greatly
improved air quality over the last 3-4 decades (and for which our
national accounts don't give us credit: see Muller 2014, Science).
Importantly, the U.S. strategy lays out a plan for separating these
processes through developing accounts that adhere to a small number of
accounting boundaries. This small number (3 in the strategy) of
accounting boundaries will enable people to disagree about what is
important, and then see if that disagreement actually matters or if
even though they don't agree perfectly, they would ultimately reach a
similar decision.
Also to be clear, as I understand it, national economic statistics
are almost never directly used for regulatory benefit-cost analysis. I
would expect the same to be true of environmental-economic statistics.
There seemed to be some mixing of these two, admittedly confusing,
topics in the briefing memo. I would expect the statistics to be used
in ways similar to the way that our current economic statistics are
used.
I am willing to spend some time with Republican and Democratic
staffs to have a conversation on technical details of natural capital
accounting. I realize there are questions, and I doubt that I can do
justice to these technical questions in this letter. I will simply say
that the methods are very similar to the way we already account for
owner occupied housing, computers, and forms of specialized capital for
which there are not large markets. I believe we can do for natural
assets as well as we do for many other sectors of the U.S. economy, and
we can avoid highly subjective measurements. Moreover, the fact that
not all the value of nature can be measured, does not mean that
measuring some value is not important. It is important to value the
parts that we can and strive to improve over time. That is what we have
done over the past 70 or so years of national accounting.
It may well be that a great winner from establishing natural
capital accounts is congressional oversight of land and resource
management agencies. Imagine being able to ask the head of the US
Forest Service, `how did our forest portfolio perform last year?' Or
ask the Administrator of NOAA, `how did our fish portfolio perform last
year?' Once the national strategy is fully implemented, the information
to answer these sorts of questions will be in official U.S. statistics
that will enable Congress and the American people to look and see if we
are turning over our natural assets ``increased, and not impaired, in
value.''
I believe the implementation details in the national strategy
document from OMB, OSTP, and DOC lay the foundation for a data-driven,
nonpartisan process for accounting for the changing value of our
natural assets as well as the flows of income from those assets.

Sincerely,

Eli Fenichel
Professor of Natural Resources Economics

______

Statement for the Record
Ranking Member Melanie Stansbury
March 7, 2024

After I left the hearing, some of my majority colleagues
mischaracterized my words by claiming that the minority-invited
witness was unwilling to answer questions. That is incorrect.
In fact, he was on the way to DC to do exactly that, but had to
return home due to a family illness.

[all]
