- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON SECURING OUR BORDER, SAVING OUR NATIONAL PARKS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURING OUR BORDER,
SAVING OUR NATIONAL PARKS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, October 18, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-68

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-812 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                       CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

PAUL GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
MIKE COLLINS, GA, Vice Chair
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, NM, Ranking Member

Matt Rosendale, MT                   Ed Case, HI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Mike Collins, GA                     Susie Lee, NV
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, October 18, 2023......................     1

Statement of Members:
Gosar, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.................................................     1
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:
French, Chris, Deputy Chief, National Forest System, USDA
Forest Service, Washington, DC.............................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Questions submitted for the record.......................     9
Reynolds, Michael, Deputy Director, National Park Service,
Department of the Interior, Washington, DC.................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Axelrod, Julie, Director of Litigation, Center for
Immigration Studies, Alexandria, Virginia..................    29
Prepared statement of....................................    31

Jose, Hon. Verlon M., Chairman, Tohono O'odham Nation, Sells,
Arizona....................................................    32
Prepared statement of....................................    34
Questions submitted for the record.......................    38
Nores, John, Lieutenant (Retired), Special Operations,
Marijuana Enforcement Team, California Department of Fish
and Wildlife, Morgan Hill, California......................    41
Prepared statement of....................................    42

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Government Accountability Office, Statement for the Record...    61

Submissions for the Record by Representative Gosar

Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, Statement for the
Record.................................................    66

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

Washington Post article, ``Trump's border wall has been
breached more than 3,000 times by smugglers, CBP
records show''.........................................    19
Washington Post article, ``Biden says the border wall is
ineffective. Here are key things to know.''............    21
U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Seizures at Ports of
Entry..................................................    23
Center for American Progress, ``The Extremist Campaign to
Blame Immigrants for U.S. Environmental Problems''.....    70
Southern Poverty Law Center, ``Center for Immigration
Studies''..............................................    78
Sky Island Alliance, ``Pedestrian Traffic Highest Near
Roads at the U.S.-Mexico Border in Southeastern
Arizona''..............................................    89
Sky Island Alliance, ``No Trash Detected on Four Federal
Land Units along U.S.-Mexico Border in Arizona''.......    90

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON SECURING OUR
BORDER, SAVING OUR NATIONAL PARKS

----------

Wednesday, October 18, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3 p.m. in Room
1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Gosar
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gosar, Rosendale, Collins,
Westerman; and Grijalva.
Also present: Representatives Ciscomani and LaMalfa.

Dr. Gosar. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
securing our border and saving our national parks.
I ask unanimous consent that all Members testifying today
be allowed to sit with the Subcommittee, give their testimony,
and participate in the hearing from the dais.
I ask that the gentleman, Mr. Ciscomani from Arizona; the
gentleman from California, Mr. LaMalfa; and the gentlewoman,
Ms. Chavez-DeRemer from Oregon, be allowed to sit with the
Subcommittee and participate in the hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
There may be others that appear, too, and we will do those
on an individual basis.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
the hearing are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking
Minority Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all
other Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing
record if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule
3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for my opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Thank you to our witnesses and to the
Administration officials for testifying before the Subcommittee
on an issue that is very important for my constituents and,
increasingly, for all Americans. And thank you to Chairman
Westerman when he joins us later today for this discussion.
We also have the Ranking Member for the Full Committee
here, Representative Grijalva, sitting to my left, as well.
For those living in border states, this hearing might sound
all too familiar. Sadly, due to the incompetence of the Biden
administration, there really is no such thing as a border
community these days. Illegal immigration and its impacts, from
drug cartels to human trafficking, to the increases in violent
crimes and environmental degradation, are impacting communities
from Arizona to New York these days, thanks to President
Biden's irresponsible and ineffective border policies.
President Biden has totally lost operational control of the
border, allowing thousands of migrants, as well as those who
wish to traffic human beings and to illicit drugs across our
public lands. The last thing on the minds of those illegally
crossing the border is to ``leave no trace'' attitude. There
are well documented environmental impacts associated with
illegal immigration, including trash accumulation, human waste,
degradation of public lands, and destruction of critical
habitats, and the list goes on and on.
The environmental problems with illegal immigration have
persisted for decades on our public lands, costing taxpayers
millions each year to clean up the tens of thousands of pounds
of trash and human waste littered across our public lands and
waterways. The massive amount of trash and waste leads to
watershed degradation, soil erosion, infrastructure damage,
loss of local vegetation and wildlife, including endangered
species, and can even increase the risk of wildfires.
Meanwhile, Mexican criminal cartels are establishing
illegal marijuana growing operations on our public lands. Not
only are these illegal operations extremely harmful to the
environment, they pose a grave threat to Americans who seek to
use their public lands for recreation. The cartels are even
trafficking people into our nation as essentially modern-day
slaves to work these operations in our national parks, national
forests, and other protected Federal lands.
These same cartels are distributing the fentanyl that is
killing our youth and some of our others, and it is crippling
our nation, with over 100,000 Americans dying from drug
overdoses this past year alone. Unsurprisingly, fentanyl and
other synthetic opioids accounted for nearly 70 percent of the
deaths. We must put an end to this national tragedy.
President Biden has brought the nation to a breaking point
with his reckless immigration policies. My state of Arizona has
shouldered the burden of illegal immigration for far too long,
and the damage to our lands and livelihoods has devastated our
communities. Now, Democratic cities that want us to claim
sanctuary city status for illegal immigrants are experiencing
the same problems.
Unfortunately, with the recent leasing of the Floyd Bennett
Field and Gateway National Recreation Area, which is a national
park unit, to house a flood of illegal migrants coming to the
United States to New York City, the Biden administration has
demonstrated that they stand ready and willing to give up our
public lands to cover for their failed immigration policies
that have let millions of people into our nation just this year
alone.
I share the concerns of many of my colleagues here on the
Committee, that this is not a one-off incident. Instead, it
sets a blueprint for migrant housing on public lands
nationwide. Nowhere is safe.
We must establish responsible immigration policies like
those found in Republicans' H.R. 2, the Secure the Border Act:
to restrict the flow of illegal immigrants crossing our
southern border, reduce the abuse of the asylum process, and
ensure that America's public lands remain intact for the use
and enjoyment of current and future generations. Otherwise, the
migrant crisis will continue and just spiral out of control.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
the many environmental impacts of illegal immigration on public
land, and to the Administration officials with us here. I hope
you came prepared, because the American people deserve answers
for the failures of this Administration.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his statement, Mr.
Grijalva.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Very brief, this is
a continuation of the hearing that we had regarding the
airfield, and that it was going to be used for temporary
shelter in an emergency.
The unprecedented number of refugees and asylum seekers
that are coming to the border is a reality. It is a
humanitarian crisis, and it needs to be dealt with. But today's
hearing is not about doing that. Today's hearing is about using
this platform and this forum to continue to talk about
immigration as perceived by the Republican Majority as the
definitive political issue going into 2024. I realize that, and
I think the vast number of the American people realize that, as
well.
What is needed to manage this humanitarian crisis is for
the House of Representatives, in a bipartisan way, to move
forward some common-sense pieces of legislation that begin to
reform and deal with the reality of what we have on the border.
No. 2, to have a supplemental that begins to deal and
provide resources for the management of that crisis. It is not
right, nor is it proper, that local communities bear the
burden, financially and otherwise, for the processing, shelter,
and transition of those seeking refuge and asylum in this
country. And we will have plenty of time going forward to
debate this issue in its proper place on the Floor and at the
hearings when legislation comes up.
But the backdrop to this whole discussion today is the fact
that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have failed
again to find a Speaker to lead and to make the House of
Representatives function and govern and to have the Floor work.
It is kind of like a Stockholm syndrome has set in. We have
become part of the prisoners here.
And I say that because this issue, as important as it is to
manage this crisis, if you want to talk about security,
fentanyl and human trafficking, let's do that. We have
suggestions and recommendations on that. This is about
organized, well-financed crime on both sides of the border. And
we need to put the focus and the attention on breaking that up.
Our history in this country, we are able to do that. It is
not about, as some Members of this Congress have said on the
Republican side, sending in the troops and having military
actions inside the sovereign nation of Mexico. That is not a
solution. That is a way to try to seek attention, politically.
And I agree with that, and we should do that, we should
modernize our ports of entry so that they continue to be
economic engines for our region, but at the same time build up
the staffing at Customs so that we can do the inspections and
the interventions where 70 percent of unauthorized entry, be
they drugs or people, that is where they are stopped.
The other issue that I think is of great importance is how
do we deal with the issue of workforce, and how do we process
that? We are willing to sit down and talk about that. But to
just continue to beat the political drum, what are the
solutions? Continue the wall. It has failed. It didn't do its
job. As much as it was ballyhooed and talked about, it has
become political rhetoric and a political symbol. In terms of
deterrence, it does not work.
The other issue is, I think the Cato Institute said that
0.2 percent of those seeking asylum had fentanyl in their
possession, 0.2 percent, which leads one to the conclusion that
this is organized, it is real. It is billions and billions of
dollars, and that is where the focus needs to be.
I say all that because everything else in terms of
responding will happen at the hearing when we deal with the
pieces of legislation. Today, it is about people making their
proclamation, their political statement. My political
statement: until this House is functional, these kind of
hearings are not only redundant, but pointless. Once this House
gets organized, and once we have hearings that have the
potential to go to the Floor, then that is when the debate
happens. And I hope that facts and I hope that science play a
role in how we go forward.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. You have to be kidding
me. Facts? Facts are a hard thing. You are only applicable to
the ones you want.
This immigration process is broken. It is the way this
Administration has actually taken care of it. They were trusted
with it, and they allowed everything to break down. The wall
doesn't work? Yes, walls do work. They actually do work. But
that is what happens when you don't finish it.
And I have to tell you----
Mr. Grijalva. This is not a debate.
Dr. Gosar. I just have to tell you, I am a little bit upset
because, when you look at the process, it is out of hand. When
you look at New York City, I went there, Raul, and so did the
Chairman. It is out of whack. We are not going to do a NEPA, we
are not going to do anything on a national park? That is
outright disgusting.
I now recognize the gentleman from Arkansas, the Chairman
of the Full Committee, Mr. Westerman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, and thank you to
you gentlemen for coming here today. I love to see the
uniforms. I have a tremendous amount of respect for you and the
work that you and your colleagues do across the country.
I live in Hot Springs National Park. That is what I think
of when I think of a national park, and I am surrounded by the
Ouachita National Forest. And I am quick to point out when we
need to have oversight, but also quick to praise people when
they do a good job. And the folks back at home and all across
this country are doing a good job, and I appreciate your
service to our country. And I think this is something that you
would be interested in, as well, and that is the title of this
hearing to secure our border and save our parks, or save our
Federal lands.
And when I think about Federal land, when I think about a
trip we made out to Yosemite, where we did a field hearing this
year, how beautiful that is, I think about going to the Grand
Canyon, I think about Hot Springs National Park, but I don't
think about what is in the photographs behind me. That is Floyd
Bennett Field. That was last night and this morning, where
migrant shelters are being built on National Park Service land,
where NEPA was waived, where it was essentially declared an
emergency to build migrant shelters on Federal land. That is
not my vision of the national park, or the purpose of the
national park, and I don't think it is what many Americans
consider that to be.
This is happening, and I think it sets a horrible
precedent, and it is a travesty that this Administration, and I
know this comes from much higher levels than where you all
work, where they have pushed this through.
But we have five national park units, not to mention other
types of Federal lands that share space with our southern
border. It is equally beautiful, and these areas face
challenges that, unfortunately, are becoming increasingly
familiar across the United States, from piles of trash to
concerns about human trafficking. It is just not what America's
idea was supposed to be.
Back in September, as Chairman Gosar mentioned, he and I
traveled to New York City to see firsthand the impacts of the
migrant crisis on this great city. And park officials told us
that this was happening. Well, it is happening right now, where
they are building these shelters. When we got back to DC, the
Committee held a hearing to investigate this abuse of the
National Park System. We hosted local officials from both sides
of the aisle who put politics aside to fight the
Administration's reckless decision to lease Floyd Bennett Field
and focus on how the migrant crisis has affected their
communities.
Unfortunately, the Administration has now set a terrible
precedent to use our public lands across the country to house
migrants. This is a place where a million people recreate a
year: New York City, where there is limited green space,
limited opportunities for parents to take their children to run
and play, and now there are migrant shelters there.
If there were ever a time for bipartisanship on Capitol
Hill, it is now. Instead of continuing down this path, the
Administration must wake up to the illegal immigration crisis
and come to the table to work with Congress on securing our
border and addressing the dangers and environmental impacts of
our public lands.
I have grown up in and around Federal lands. As a forester,
I see firsthand why we have the protections in place to keep
our public lands and waters healthy and accessible for all
Americans. However, with record numbers of migrants crossing
into the United States, we are seeing increasingly harmful
impacts on the environment, including trash accumulation,
habitat destruction, disturbance of lands and waters, and many
other issues.
Approximately 35 percent of the land along our southern
border is Federal and Indian land, administered by seven
different agencies, six of which are managed by the Department
of the Interior and Agriculture. These are some of the most
treasured lands and waterways in our nation. They are home to
many unique habitats, endangered species, and host popular
recreational activities for Americans.
Unfortunately, the crisis is no longer contained to our
southern border. Unmitigated illegal immigration has allowed
for criminal cartel organizations to operate more freely in the
United States. In addition to bringing humans and drugs across
the border, cartels have been operating illegal marijuana-
growing operations on public lands, especially up in Northern
California, in Mr. LaMalfa's district.
I do again appreciate your presence here, I look forward to
hearing your testimony, and I look forward to this Committee
working to protect our Federal lands for all future Americans.
I yield back.

Mr. LaMalfa [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate that. Let's go ahead and move to our first panel of
witnesses.
We have Mr. Chris French from the National Forest System,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service; and we have Mr.
Michael Reynolds, Deputy Director for Congressional External
Relations, National Park Service, with the U.S. Department of
the Interior.
So, our witnesses, you know the drill. You must limit your
oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire statement will be
available in the hearing record. Press the ``on'' button of
your microphone. With the timing lights, you will see green.
Then, at the end of the 5 minutes, it will turn red and you
will have to complete your statement.
All witnesses on this panel will testify before Member
questioning. The Chair now recognizes Mr. French for 5 minutes.
Thank you.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS FRENCH, DEPUTY CHIEF, NATIONAL FOREST
SYSTEM, USDA FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. French. Good afternoon, Chairman and Ranking Member
Grijalva. My name is Chris French. I am the Deputy Chief for
the National Forest System at the USDA Forest Service.
I have been an employee with the Forest Service for nearly
30 years, including work that I have spent on the Douglas
District on the Coronado National Forest on our international
border. I am pleased to be here to discuss the United States
Department of Agriculture's views on border security on the
National Forest System lands.
As a Federal agency in service to the American people, the
Forest Service cares for the shared natural and cultural
resources in ways that promote lasting economic, ecological,
and social vitality. We manage 155 national forests and 20
national grasslands, comprising 193 million acres in 41 states
and Puerto Rico. Our partners include land management agencies
across all levels of government, tribes, non-profit groups,
for-profit entities, and communities.
Since the Agency's founding in 1905, partnerships have made
significant contributions to our nation's natural resource
management. These partnerships extend to our work with the
Department of Homeland Security, Customs and Border Protection,
and the Border Patrol. The Forest Service fulfills the Agency's
mission and provides support to Border Patrol on their mission
to secure the nation's borders.
Our work with Border Patrol is highly collaborative. We
rely on each other's strengths to advance our distinct goals.
The Forest Service has established full-time liaison positions
with the Border Patrol for both the Tucson Sector based in
Tucson, Arizona, and for the Spokane Sector based in Kalispell,
Montana. The liaison positions are important for coordinating
joint patrol efforts, facility development, environmental
analysis, and long-term staffing needs.
Another critical collaborative effort is the Forest Service
membership in the Department of Homeland Security Alliance to
Combat Transnational Threats. Forest Service law enforcement
provides routine patrol support and assistance to Border Patrol
when requested. Additionally, we have coordinated with Border
Patrol on special operations that combined the limited
resources of Forest Service law enforcement with the Border
Patrol's substantial presence on the Coronado National Forest
to address border management impacts.
The national forests in the Lower 48 share a border of
nearly 400 miles with Canada, and approximately 60
noncontiguous miles with Mexico. The Forest Service, through
the United States Department of Agriculture, is statutorily
charged with managing all the National Forest System lands
along this international border. The Forest Service shares law
enforcement responsibility over these lands with Federal,
state, and local partners. While it is fully recognized that
the Department of Homeland Security has the primary mandate of
controlling and guarding the nation's borders, Forest Service
stewardship and law enforcement responsibilities are vital to
assisting the Border Patrol with effectively defending national
security, responding to terrorist threats, safeguarding human
life, and stopping the degradation of natural and cultural
resources on National Forest System lands.
In 2006, the United States Department of Agriculture
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Department
of Homeland Security and the Department of the Interior
regarding cooperative national security and counter-terrorism
efforts on Federal lands along the United States borders. Our
collaborative work has aligned our agency priorities with these
partners in pursuit of our shared objectives.
This year the Border Patrol and the Forest Service entered
into a Memorandum of Agreement to strategically align our
collective law enforcement resources. The Forest Service will
continue to provide Border Patrol with additional support and
resources as appropriate and authorized.
The Department takes very seriously the need to address
emergencies involving human health and safety and preventing or
minimizing environmental damage on public lands. The Department
is committed to working with the Subcommittee and with Congress
on all of these issues.
Chairman and Ranking Member Grijalva, that concludes my
statement. I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. French follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chris French, Deputy Chief, National Forest
System, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to provide the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) views on border
security on National Forest System Lands.
As a Federal agency in service to the American people, the Forest
Service cares for shared natural and cultural resources in ways that
promote lasting economic, ecological, and social vitality. The agency
manages 155 national forests and 20 national grasslands, comprising 193
million acres in 41 states and Puerto Rico. Our partners include land
management agencies across all levels of government, nonprofit, for-
profit entities, and communities. Since the agency's founding in 1905,
partnerships have made significant contributions to our nation's
natural resource management. These partnerships extend to our work with
the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP). The U.S. Forest Service
fulfills the agency's mission to sustain the health, diversity, and
productivity of the nation's forests and grasslands and provides
support to CBP on their mission to secure the nation's borders.
Proactive partnership management

The U.S. Forest Service and CBP rely on each other's strengths to
advance our very distinct goals. For example, the U.S. Forest Service
has established full-time liaison positions with the U.S. Border Patrol
(USBP) for both the Tucson Sector, based in Tucson, Arizona, and for
the Spokane Sector, based in Kalispell, Montana. The liaison positions
are important in coordinating joint patrol efforts, facility
development, environmental analyses, and long-term staffing needs.
U.S. Forest Service Law Enforcement and Investigations (LEI) is a
member of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Alliance to
Combat Transnational Threats, which is a multi-agency initiative. LEI
provides routine patrol support and assistance to CBP when requested.
Additionally, LEI has coordinated with USBP on special operations that
combined the limited resources of LEI with USBP substantial presence on
the Coronado National Forest to address the impacts of migration as
well as narcotics and other drugs smuggling.
Joint operational activities have included long-term (multiweek)
missions targeting armed criminal activity or smuggling routes and
activities on the National Forest. To mitigate safety risks to
employees working in the forest, the agency takes precautions such as
providing law enforcement escorts for management and fire suppression
activities, while also regularly offering border awareness training.
Overview of the US Forest Service footprint and capabilities

The national forests in the ``lower 48'' share a border of over 400
miles with Canada and approximately 60 non-contiguous miles with
Mexico. The U.S. Forest Service, through the USDA, is statutorily
charged with managing all National Forest System lands along the
international border. The U.S. Forest Service shares law enforcement
responsibilities over these lands with federal, state, and local
partners. While it is fully recognized that CBP has the primary mandate
of controlling and guarding the nation's borders, U.S. Forest Service
stewardship and law enforcement responsibilities are vital to assisting
USBP with effectively defending national security, responding to
terrorist threats, safeguarding human life, and stopping the
degradation of the natural and cultural resources on National Forest
System lands.
In 2006, the U.S. Forest Service entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding between DHS, the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI),
and USDA regarding cooperative national security and counterterrorism
efforts on federal lands along the United States' borders. Our
collaborative work has aligned our agency priorities with these
partners in pursuit of our shared objectives.
This year, CPB and U.S. Forest Service entered into a Memorandum of
Agreement to strategically align CBP and U.S. Forest Service law
enforcement resources for the purpose of providing support to CBP. The
U.S. Forest Service will continue to provide CBP with additional
support and resources as appropriate and authorized. The USDA takes
very seriously the need to address emergencies involving human health
and safety and preventing or minimizing environmental damage on public
lands. The Department is committed to working with the Subcommittee and
the Congress on these issues.
Chairman Gosar and Ranking Member Stansbury, that concludes my
statement. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Chris French, Deputy Chief,
National Forest System

Mr. French did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva
Question 1. House Republicans' FY 2024 Interior funding bill
proposes a $312 million cut to the U.S. Forest Service budget. How
would such a cut impact the National Forest System's ability to manage
illegal marijuana grow sites and other operations related to border
security?

Question 2. A recent report by the Government Accountability Office
on the southern border wall's impacts to natural and cultural resources
features the construction of a large staging area for a border fence
near the top of a mountain in the Pajarito Mountains on the Coronado
National Forest in Arizona. According to the Forest Service, this
project has created an issue of silt draining down the side of the
mountain and filling a human-made pond, threatening to eliminate the
pond as a drinking source for cattle and wildlife. What steps are being
taken by the Forest Service and other agencies to address this and
prevent other erosion issues from construction along the southern
border from occurring in the future?

______

Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. French. Let's now recognize Mr.
Reynolds for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL REYNOLDS, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL PARK
SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Reynolds. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grijalva, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
present the Department of the Interior's views about how border
security might affect national parks.
The National Park Service, along with the Department's
other land management bureaus, recognizes the significant
ecological and cultural values of the lands managed by the
Department, including those along the United States
international borders. And we take very seriously our
responsibility for protecting and conserving these lands on
behalf of the American people.
We also work closely with the Department of Homeland
Security, in particular the U.S. Border Patrol, who have been
given the responsibility for securing these international
borders. However, the Department does not have jurisdiction
over immigration policy, and we therefore defer to Homeland
Security regarding broader questions about immigration and
border security policy.
Regardless of proximity to our national borders, National
Park Service actions are ultimately based on a commitment to
protect and conserve resources in accordance with the law.
Conservation, a core National Park Service mission, occurs
regardless of the immigration status of individuals who enter
the lands we manage.
Our National Park System has been called ``America's best
idea,'' because it represents the first decision by any nation
to conserve land in this way, both for the enjoyment of it for
the public, and also for its own sake. Our goal is to provide
for the conservation of natural and cultural resources in our
425 national parks, as provided by law for this and future
generations.
Each year, the National Park Service responds to a wide
array of emerging challenges that include not only the impacts
of migration, but also extreme weather events, overcrowding,
and staffing challenges. Examples of these challenges include
the 2021 Dixie mega-fire that impacted Lassen Volcanic National
Park, the major flooding at Yellowstone National Park last
year, and then the recent 1,000-year flood event at Death
Valley National Park, and the unprecedented post-pandemic
increase in visitation at many of our parks.
Although the National Park Service faces many of the same
resources and funding constraints that other Federal agencies,
cities, towns, organizations, and businesses face across the
country, we will continue to rise to meet the challenges, and
work daily to sustain these remarkable places that the American
people have entrusted to us.
When managing lands along our international borders, the
National Park Service, along with other bureaus, closely
coordinates with Homeland Security agents on the ground to
ensure that field operations are conducted in a manner that
avoids or minimizes environmental impact on Federal lands in
accordance with law. As part of the Biden administration's all-
of-government response to the influx of migrants and asylum
seekers, we work with these agencies and with the Forest
Service on a cohesive, cooperative approach to border security,
while Congress and others work to comprehensively address
immigration policies generally.
We are proud of this strong working relationship, which is
based on cooperation and mutual commitment to accomplishing our
important agency missions.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, thank you again for the
opportunity to appear today, and I would be happy to answer any
questions that you could have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Reynolds follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael T. Reynolds, Deputy Director for
Congressional and External Relations, National Park Service
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the Department
of the Interior's (Department) views about how border security might
affect national parks.
The National Park Service (NPS), along with the Department's other
land management bureaus, recognizes the significant ecological and
cultural values of the lands managed by the Department, including those
along the United States' international borders, and we take very
seriously our responsibility for protecting and conserving these lands
on behalf of the American people. We also work closely with the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), in particular the U.S. Border
Patrol, a component of Customs and Border Protection, who have been
given the responsibility for securing these international borders.
However, the Department does not have jurisdiction over immigration
policy and therefore we defer to DHS regarding broader questions about
immigration and border security policy.
Regardless of proximity to U.S. national borders, NPS actions are
ultimately based on a commitment to protect and conserve resources in
accordance with the law. Conservation--a core NPS mission--occurs
regardless of the immigration status of individuals who enter the lands
we manage.
Our National Park System has been called ``America's best idea''
because it represents the first decision by any nation to conserve land
in this way--both for the enjoyment of the public and for its own sake.
The goal of the National Park Service is to provide for the
conservation of natural and cultural resources in 425 national parks as
provided by law, for this and future generations.
Each year the National Park Service responds to a wide array of
emerging challenges that include not only the impacts of migration, but
also extreme weather events, overcrowding, and staffing challenges.
Examples of these challenges include the 2021 Dixie megafire that
impacted Lassen Volcanic Park, the major flooding at Yellowstone
National Park last year, the recent 1000-year flood event at Death
Valley National Park, and the unprecedented post-pandemic increase in
visitation at many of our parks. Although the NPS faces many of the
same resource and funding constraints that other federal agencies,
cities, towns, organizations, and businesses face across the country,
we will continue to rise to meet these challenges and work daily to
sustain these remarkable places that the American people have entrusted
to us.
When managing lands along our international borders, the NPS, along
with the Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, closely coordinate with DHS agents on
the ground, to ensure that field operations are conducted in a manner
that avoids or minimizes the environmental impact on federal lands in
accordance with the law. As part of the Biden Administration's all-of-
government response to the influx of migrants and asylum seekers, we
work with these agencies and with the U.S. Forest Service within the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, on a cohesive, cooperative approach to
border security, while Congress and others work to comprehensively
address immigration policies generally. We are proud of the strong
working relationship based on cooperation and a mutual commitment to
accomplishing our important agency missions.
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, thank you again for the
opportunity to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any
questions that you may have.

______

Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Reynolds, for the testimony. I
will now recognize Members for 5 minutes for questions, and I
would like to start with our Chairman, Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. LaMalfa. Again, thank you to
the witnesses for being here.
Mr. Reynolds, I just want to get a clear answer for the
Committee and for the American people. Do you have any plans or
discussions ongoing regarding housing migrants at additional
sites located in the National Park System?
Mr. Reynolds. There is no other request for use of sites
beyond the Floyd Bennett Field that you have mentioned, or any
plans that I can offer or speculate on.
Mr. Westerman. Can you assure concerned Americans that
their national parks will not be used to house any additional
migrants?
Mr. Reynolds. I can assure you that we will review
everything for a legal basis and conservation protection as job
one.
Mr. Westerman. On August 21, the Daily News reported that
New York Governor Hochul stated that she had ``been in
negotiations with the White House for months'' over the lease
at Floyd Bennett Field, and that ``the Federal Government had
previously taken the position that shelters cannot be built on
Interior Department property.''
For the record, can you please provide the Committee the
names of the employees at the White House, Office of the
President, Department of the Interior, and the National Park
Service that participated in these months-long negotiations, as
well as an explanation for what made them change their mind
about the policy?
Mr. Reynolds. At my level of the organization, what I can
tell you is that we knew the state of New York approached the
Administration. After they had done so, the Department of
Homeland Security had visited Floyd Bennett Field, I think,
last spring and again maybe in late summer. And when you have
such a complex set of decisions, as well as how fast the
humanitarian crisis seemed to be, there have been so many folks
in the middle of this, Mr. Westerman, I am not sure there is
one person. But I know that the state of New York approached
the Administration. We were asked to get the job done.
Mr. Westerman. Was there some kind of an emergency declared
so that NEPA could be waived?
Mr. Reynolds. My understanding is no emergency was
declared, but there was a humanitarian crisis of some urgency.
Mr. Westerman. Could this be a pattern in other Park
Service lands, where there is no emergency but NEPA and ESA and
other environmental protections could be waived?
Mr. Reynolds. I can't speculate on what might come, but I
would imagine that there are very few circumstances that are as
unique as the Floyd Bennett Field situation, being in downtown
New York.
Mr. Westerman. In your opinion, does that follow all laws
and regulations, to waive NEPA without an emergency
declaration?
Mr. Reynolds. I can say that we actually didn't waive NEPA.
It was done under a special provision called Alternative
Arrangements, and it is in the CFR. It is unusual. I would be
happy to also detail that out more. We have attorneys that
would explain and walk through the CFR steps that were used
for----
Mr. Westerman. How long did it take to do that process?
Mr. Reynolds. I can't recall exactly, but it was very
quick. I would say a matter of weeks.
Mr. Westerman. When we were at Floyd Bennett Field we were
told within a week it was pushed through, record time, as you
are probably aware, for any kind of environmental analysis to
take place, which makes it sound like somebody very high in the
Administration said, ``Get this done.''
What changed the Park Service's mind? According to Governor
Hochul, initially the Park Service or Interior Department said
we don't do things like this, but all of a sudden there was a
change of mind.
Mr. Reynolds. I am not privy to those negotiations, but I
can assure you, sir, and the American people, that there is a
basis in law for how this went about. And we have posted all of
those things up on the nps.gov website. If you go there and
look, there are the Director's decision memos and also the
environmental analysis.
Mr. Westerman. So, this could be a precedent if somebody
wants to do something, say, in my hometown of Hot Springs
National Park. We could just go through a less-than-a-week
process to waive all regulations and make that happen.
Mr. Reynolds. I think that the health and safety
humanitarian crisis is what drove this. If those conditions
were to exist, I think there would, obviously, be reviews. But
again, I think this is a very unique situation that happened
there.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. French, at which sites are the Forest
Service observing the most foot traffic by illegal migrants
through the National Forest System?
Mr. French. Generally, the most foot traffic we have is
through the Coronado National Forest and the Cleveland National
Forest.
Mr. Westerman. What environmental impacts are being
observed as a result of illegal immigration through Forest
Service lands?
Mr. French. There is some natural resource degradation, but
primarily it is dumping trash.
Mr. Westerman. Yes, I have seen a lot of that myself down
there, and it is amazing. I think the statistics were 8 or 9
pounds of trash per migrant. So, multiply that times a couple
of million. That is a lot of trash to be picked up.
I am out of time and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Westerman. I will go ahead and
recognize our Ranking Member, Mr. Grijalva, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I was
remiss in not thanking our witnesses.
I appreciate you being here.
And also, if I may, Mr. Chairman, to extend our collective
condolences to Ranking Member Stansbury, whose mom, Bunny,
passed away, and extend to her our condolences and our
heartfelt sympathy.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you for telling us.
Mr. Grijalva. Mr. Reynolds, let me ask you a question.
Organ Pipe. What percentage of the border in Organ Pipe has a
wall on it?
Mr. Reynolds. Let me put it to you this way, without
percentage, all of its boundary now, except for about a half-a-
mile stretch.
Mr. Grijalva. OK, but from what we hear in terms of what we
know and what we continue to hear is the number of border
crossings are increasing. It is unprecedented. It continues to
increase.
Why hasn't this border wall prevented migrants from
entering the country? Has it been the deterrent that everybody
talked about when it was being discussed?
Mr. Reynolds. Well, sir, I will say that we have seen still
a continuation of crossings.
Not to deflect from you, but we are not the border or
immigration policy or operators the way CBP is. But I can tell
you that what we are doing is we have a great cooperative
relationship with Homeland Security, with Mr. French and his
colleagues in the Forest Service, and we try to mitigate and
help manage with them the crossings as they occur.
We have seen an uptick in certain human trafficking things,
but we have also seen concentration of crossings at different
areas where the road network is, things like that.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Reynolds.
And more of a comment, I think that one of the centerpieces
that my Republican colleagues have promoted as a solution is
H.R. 2, Secure the Borders Act. And effectively, it is to turbo
charge the waiver of laws in terms of the construction of the
wall, including NEPA, which is kind of like a love-hate thing
with NEPA here on this Committee among the Republicans. When it
is convenient to use it as an issue, NEPA is wonderful. When it
is in the way of a mine or an extraction or a drill, then it is
absolutely awful and we have to get rid of it.
And I mentioned the partnerships that we have in
communities, I think there is a potential with H.R. 2 of the
financial burden falling on local communities all across the
Southwest because what this does is effectively cuts programs
and it cuts the funding and the resources for those programs.
It ends asylum entirely as a concept and as a legal
responsibility in this country and internationally. And it
doesn't deal with the root cause. It doesn't deal with the
crisis that we are seeing globally. It doesn't deal with the
demographic change of those folks coming up here and families
seeking asylum. It is not the people running from Border Patrol
and trying to hide to get here. It is people that are turning
themselves in. And it is a different phenomenon, and from
talking to Border Patrol agents and the Chief in the Tucson
sector, it is a phenomenon that is unprecedented.
So, as these demands increase, and the only alternative out
there being promoted by the Republican Majority is H.R. 2,
which shifts the burden to local communities, ends all the
partnerships, cuts funding to this area, and mandates an end to
asylum and refugee laws as we know them and we have known them
historically.
So, I think that the debate is important, but I think
central to that are the things that respond to the needs on the
border. And I said it earlier: (1) providing the resources with
the supplemental that continues to deal and manage the
humanitarian crisis; (2) to deal with security and refocus and
re-energize and resource that effort to break what is
syndicates and organized crime; and (3) to properly staff our
Park Service so that they are able to provide not only the
coordination with Homeland Security that Mr. Reynolds
mentioned, but also for the safety and security of our
visitors, and that visitorship has ticked up across the
country.
Those are discussion points that I think there is common
and middle ground on. But to say that H.R. 2 is the panacea and
fundamentally will not solve the issue, neither will a wall, I
think we are missing the target. The target is not only the
security of the border, but managing what is an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis before us.
With that, I yield back because I have no more questions.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right, thank you, Ranking Member Grijalva.
I will turn now to Mr. Rosendale from Montana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, I will tell you that walls do work. We see them
around yards, we see them around communities, and we see them
around countries. And walls do work. When you have an
incomplete wall, when you have construction that has not been
concluded, then you certainly have gaps and areas where folks
can go around those walls. And therein is where we have our
problem.
Mr. Reynolds, what measures has the National Park Service
taken to combat illegal marijuana cultivation within the
national parks, and what successes have been achieved so far?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, hello, Mr. Rosendale. This is a pretty
active, cooperative venture that we do, again, with our
colleagues in the Forest Service, in particular in Western
parks, as well as state and local sheriff, folks like that.
We are continuously finding, mapping, doing intel, finding
these places. I can tell you from an experience I had in
Yosemite, we would helicopter these things out if we could. We
deal with poisons that are left behind. And others have
mentioned there are cartels, so there is danger to the hiking
public and things like that. So, we are very, very serious
about it. We don't do it alone, and we ask all of our partners,
state and local, Federal, to----
Mr. Rosendale. Do you have any kind of numbers as far as
the amount of area that you have been able to remove these
cultivated plants from, or the number of plants, or anything
like that, and how that trajectory has looked over the last 5
years or so?
Mr. Reynolds. I know we will have those numbers, and I will
get those to you very quickly, but I don't have them handy in
front of me, Mr. Rosendale.
Mr. Rosendale. Very good, very good. Can you provide
statistics on the number of illegal marijuana growers
discovered within the national parks since the start of the
Biden administration in 2021?
If you don't have those, if you can include that with the
balance of information.
Mr. Reynolds. We will do that. I am sorry I wasn't prepared
for that, but we will get it to you right away.
Mr. Rosendale. That is OK, thank you. Could you describe
the coordination process between the National Park Service and
the Department of Homeland Security with regard to the border
crossings in national parks situated near the U.S.-Canada
border, such as Glacier National Park?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, we definitely work with the Border
Patrol folks, just as we do on the southern border. We are not
aware, nor are there reports when we looked into this this week
about problems at Glacier. But there is a vigilance to it, and
a cooperative venture just like the southern border. It is much
like Mr. French described. There is the different stationing of
our law enforcement folks, along with CBT. We let them do the
immigration work, and we follow up on resource damage or
humanitarian help and aid as they ask.
Mr. Rosendale. Have you seen any type of an increase over
the last 3 years since the Biden administration has taken over?
Mr. Reynolds. Not in the northern boundary. We haven't seen
much of an increase at all.
Mr. Rosendale. That natural barrier called climate seems to
be helping us a lot up there on the northern border.
One thing that I am really concerned with, we had a hearing
here 2 weeks ago about the Floyd Bennett Field, the national
park up there in New York. And it was very telling to me to
have City Council members who were sitting here, bipartisan,
Republicans, Democrats, talking about the problems that
building that facility would pose on their community, not only
from a safety aspect, but from a lack of infrastructure aspect,
and then from what it was going to do to their local economy of
having this population of young males there with not a lot to
do, and to be able to just wander around.
What bothered me is, in addition to that, was the fact that
we were going to be taking one of our national parks, something
that, quite frankly, all taxpayers have an investment in, we
invest in those properties by keeping the infrastructure up, it
is an investment in the country because it doesn't have a tax
base, so we are literally subsidizing those areas, and then to
have people located there for extended periods of time, a year,
2 years, we don't really have a deadline, a proposed deadline
on their occupation, if you will, when an American citizen is
only allowed to stay there for 14 days at a time.
Do you have any kind of opinion about the impact of long-
term relocation of illegal immigrants on the National Park
System?
Mr. Reynolds. I am not an immigration expert at all. We
leave that to the Department of Homeland Security, as well as,
in this case the city----
Mr. Rosendale. Let's leave the immigration end of it out. A
long-term occupation of a population of individuals in the
national park.
Mr. Reynolds. In this case, which is listed publicly, we
have a lease for this situation. In other words, the property,
1,300 acres is what makes Floyd Bennett Field. About 20 acres
have been leased to the city. The lease requires them to
improve and benefit the park through various projects, so it
totals somewhere between $12 to $14 million for those projects.
So, in this case there is a very, very carefully thought-
through plan on the runways where the camp is, and trying to
maintain and keep open everything that Floyd Bennett Field has.
We keep an eye on this. We will keep watching it.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. That is all the data about what is
actually going to happen. And we know what is going to happen.
What I am trying to determine is what is the impact on that
facility, as opposed to the people that had been going there
before.
I am sorry, Mr. Chair. I see that I did go over my time. I
will yield back.
Dr. Gosar [presiding]. Yes, we will let the witness answer.
Mr. Reynolds. Yes. The short answer, Congressman Rosendale,
is it is a very defined area on a tarmac, on a runway, a
historic runway. And we have tried to avoid all the heavy use
areas of Floyd Bennett Field.
Dr. Gosar. I will have follow-ups for you, just in case.
Mr. LaMalfa from California is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, I appreciate it,
and to our witnesses for being here.
So, there are a lot of facets to this issue here. I mean,
we have, so far this year, approximately 2.8 million, they call
them `encounters of illegal immigration', at our border, and
only about 230,000 this year have been deported is the stats
that I have. So, we can see that, when we are using our
national parks, I suppose, as a temporary landing zone for
folks like this, maybe that would be a discussion if the border
was controlled, and you would have a finite number of people
already in country, but it is ever expanding. We reach a new
milestone every month of people coming into this country. And
it looks unstoppable presently.
So, as we also see it come in another direction with more
expansions of wilderness areas and monument areas, there is
going to be less and less park land available to people to
enjoy the great outdoors if it is coming from both ends with
illegal immigration on those lands and then less access to the
other lands. So indeed, it makes me wonder how temporary are
these thoughts of housing people in these places, and what term
would that look like, then what do you do at the end of that
term.
But what I want to drill down to is something that Chairman
Westerman touched on as well in my Northern California
district. In Siskiyou County, for example, which is about 700
miles from the Mexican border, the illegal marijuana grows are
just vast. Many, many hundreds of greenhouses are there. And
the efforts of Sheriff LaRue up there, and many allies there
have been valiant, but it is overwhelming when we need more
help from the Federal Government to help take care of their
lands, as well as be a part of where it is happening on the
private lands on those areas. It is overwhelming to have these
cartels. California, of course, being a border state, it is not
going to slow down very much. Interstate 5 is a pipeline for so
many things, including that.
The Forest Service owns about 45 percent of the Federal
land in the area, BLM 33 percent, National Park Service has
about 16.
So, the explosion of these marijuana grows with cartels,
the illegal chemicals that farmers can't even use in this
country, not even produced here, are polluting the soil and the
groundwater. And there are workers there that are being
effectively employed, so to speak, as indentured servants.
People trafficking, the whole works.
So, the caches of illegal weapons that have been found and
how they are a threat to local residents just trying to live a
good life and do their farming and ranching, threaten those
residents, threaten our sheriff's officers and other police
officers. It is not a good situation, even that far from the
border. So, me and my team have been following, trying to help
our locals, Sheriff LaRue and our district attorney, and
others. But the invasion is so huge, we need much more help
from the Federal Government to curb this destruction of our
public lands and our way of life up there.
So, how are your agencies, in partnership with BLM, working
to support our local law enforcement who have become the de
facto frontline responders to drug smuggling, human
trafficking, and international criminal activity?
Let me throw that to you, Mr. Reynolds, first.
Mr. Reynolds. Yes. Again, let me just say, Mr. LaMalfa, we
appreciate those comments. We want to keep working with you and
your team on these issues. We are aware of some of the closure
issues that have also perhaps come up with these fires.
A big part of what we do is work with other agencies that
have better intel. A lot of times our local sheriff department,
our local law enforcement are really big partners in this. And,
again, especially in the parks that you mentioned, it is Forest
Service usually around us, almost always, sometimes BLM up in
that part of the world. And we work as closely as we can so
that both uniforms, if you will, are out on site whenever they
find these places and start to remove them, document them.
Mr. LaMalfa. Getting to maybe more of the core of the
issue, is there any lack of Federal authority that you need for
you to work with Homeland Security, the FBI, or other local and
state agencies to do more, to go farther, to be able to
enforce? Because these grows are not hidden. They are right out
in front of everybody. Their greenhouses dot the landscape. And
whether it is in Siskiyou County or other surrounding counties,
whether they are illegally on Federal land, or somehow have the
cover of legality with who owns the land, they are blowing
through county ordinances. What more could we be doing? What
other authorities do you need?
Mr. Reynolds. I think the authorities are there. I can let
Mr. French comment on any gaps that we may have. It just may be
a staffing and a continuing prioritizing that we need to focus
on.
Mr. LaMalfa. Please, Mr. French. I am a little out of time
already. It flies by here, but go ahead.
Mr. French. No worries, thank you.
Yes, I think it fundamentally comes down to a staffing
issue. We work incredibly closely with our other Federal
partners, states, counties. It is a manpower issue. In the last
5 years, we remediated more than 330 grow sites, took out 370
miles of pipe. It is a big issue.
Mr. LaMalfa. We are talking thousands, thousands of grow
sites right in people's face. So, if you are talking staffing,
we need to partner with more agencies that already have staff.
And we will work with you some more.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it and I will yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Arizona has a request.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Just a unanimous consent request
to enter into the record two articles that detail why the wall
doesn't work, in part by demonstrating that it has been
breached so often that there are full-time welding crews down
there to do the repairs.
The other one is I ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record Border Patrol's own data that shows that Fiscal Year
2023, 90 percent of the almost 26,000 pounds of fentanyl seized
along the Mexican border have been at the ports of entry.
I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I didn't know I got you so riled up there to get
all that in there.
Mr. Grijalva. The facts----
Dr. Gosar. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
Trump's border wall has been breached more than 3,000 times by
smugglers, CBP records show

Washington Post, March 2, 2022 by Nick Miroff

https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/03/02/trump-
border-wall-breached/

*****

NACO, Arizona--Mexican smuggling gangs have sawed through new segments
of border wall 3,272 times over the past three years, according to
unpublished U.S. Customs and Border Protection maintenance records
obtained by The Washington Post under the Freedom of Information Act.

The government spent $2.6 million to repair the breaches during the
2019 to 2021 fiscal years, the CBP records show. While the agency has
acknowledged that smugglers are able to hack through the new barriers
built by the Trump administration, the maintenance records show damage
has been more widespread than previously known, pointing to the
structure's limitations as an impediment to illegal crossings.

Smuggling gangs typically cut the barrier with inexpensive power tools
widely available at retail hardware stores, including angle grinders
and demolition saws. Once the 18-to-30-foot-tall bollards are severed
near the ground, their only remaining point of attachment is at the top
of the structure, leaving the steel beam dangling in the air. It easily
swings open with a push, creating a gap wide enough for people and
narcotics to pass through.

A spokesman for CBP, Luis Miranda, said effective border security
``requires a variety of resources and efforts, infrastructure,
technology, and personnel.''

``No structure is impenetrable, so we will continue to work to focus
resources on modern, effective border management measures to improve
safety and security,'' Miranda said in a statement.

Along one 25-mile segment of new border wall between Naco and Douglas,
Ariz., The Post recently counted 71 bollards with visible repairs and
welds. In most instances, crews repaired the breaches using a sleeve-
like steel coupler, referred to as a ``boot,'' to patch over the hole.

Some of the bollards were marked ``BREACH'' in white lettering, and
most had the date of their repairs scrawled just above the welded
segments.

John Kure, a photographer and filmmaker who spent months documenting
border wall construction, said he has seen extensive repairs along the
wall in Arizona and California.

``I look for little slivers of light at the base of the wall,'' said
Kure, who said he has seen sawing crews attack the bollards in broad
daylight, sending showers of sparks.

President Donald Trump built 458 miles of new barriers, primarily in
remote areas of New Mexico and Arizona. Trump planned to complete
roughly 250 additional miles, but President Biden halted construction
after taking office.

The Biden administration ``continues to call on Congress to cancel
remaining border wall funding and instead fund smarter border security
measures that are proven to be more effective at improving safety and
security at the border,'' said Miranda.

Trump promised Mexico would pay for the structure, but his
administration spent roughly $11 billion in taxpayer funds, most of
which he diverted from Defense Department accounts. At rallies, Trump
likened his wall to a ``Rolls-Royce,'' but he stopped claiming the
barrier was ``impenetrable'' in 2019 after The Post reported smugglers
had learned to saw through it with conventional power tools.

``We have a very powerful wall,'' Trump said when asked about the
breaches. ``But no matter how powerful, you can cut through anything.''

People familiar with the smuggling crews' tactics say they typically
work at night, covering themselves with blankets to hide the sparks and
muffle noise. They use radios and lookouts who alert cutting crews when
Border Patrol vehicles approach.

The wall's square bollards are six inches in diameter, with a layer of
steel 3/16 of an inch thick. Contractors were required to fill their
lower portions with concrete, and in some cases steel rebar, to make
sawing more difficult.

A Post reporter encountered bollards at multiple locations that appear
to have been left hollow.

After smuggling crews cut through, they often disguise the breaches
with tinted putty, making it difficult for agents to recognize which
bollards have been compromised. The smugglers can return again and
again to the site until the damage is detected, using the breach like a
secret entrance.

``They cut it with a fair amount of precision,'' said one person with
detailed knowledge of the sawing tactics who, like others, spoke on the
condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to
reporters. ``You have to look really closely to see it.''

The CBP maintenance records show the cutting crews have been most
active in California. The Border Patrol's El Centro sector has recorded
the largest number of breaches with 1,867, followed by the San Diego
sector, with 866. The records provided by CBP are a count of breaches
along newer bollard fencing, most of which was added under Trump, not
the older ``mesh'' style fencing that has been even easier for
smugglers to cut through.

In March 2021 smugglers hacked through an entire segment of bollard
fencing in the El Centro sector, creating an opening wide enough for
two SUVs loaded with migrants to drive through. One of the vehicles
collided soon after with a truck near Holtville, Calif., killing 13.

CBP maintenance records show the frequency of cutting activity
increased as the Trump administration's pace of construction picked up.
CBP recorded 891 breaches during fiscal 2019, 906 during fiscal 2020
and 1,475 during fiscal 2021.

``Every bit of infrastructure that I've ever worked around over the
past 26 years gets tested,'' said John Modlin, chief of the Border
Patrol's Tucson sector. ``At some point, people will try to get past
it.''

CBP officials say the bollard fencing remains a valuable border
security tool when combined with surveillance technology and sufficient
personnel. Many of the wall segments where breaching has occurred lack
the sensors, cameras and other detection tools called for in original
designs, they say. Once those tools are in place, agents will be able
to respond faster, they say.

During his presidency, Trump took a personal interest in the
construction and design elements of the border wall, seeking frequent
progress updates from CBP officials and the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. He ordered contractors to coat the steel structure in black
paint, insisting it would make the barrier hotter to the touch and
scald the hands of would-be climbers and cutters, according to his
aides.

Advisers warned the paint would drive up maintenance costs and not
significantly increase the thermal properties of the steel, but Trump
waved them off. The Post observed several locations west of Sasabe,
Ariz., where the wall's black paint is already peeling off, less than
18 months after it was applied.

The Border Patrol's El Paso sector announced a ``Fence Cutter
Initiative'' last year in partnership with Mexican prosecutors in
Ciudad Juarez to crack down on sawing activity, primarily along an
older segment of barrier whose wire mesh design has long made it an
easy target.

So far the effort has led to two prosecutions in Mexico, resulting in
modest fines but not jail time, said Gloria Chavez, chief of the El
Paso sector.

``It's a program that just started,'' said Chavez. ``They go to court,
and the judge tells them you either go to jail or you pay a fine. So
they pay a fine. But it's something--compared to nothing,'' she said.

U.S. agents and ranchers who live along the border say climbing, not
cutting, has become the most common way smugglers and migrants attempt
to get past the barrier in areas where there are no gaps.

The smugglers build tall ladders using scrap wood or metal rebar thin
enough to pass between the bollards. They use the ladder to go up the
structure, then pass it through the gaps and use it again to climb down
onto the U.S. side. They also frequently employ ropes with knots to
climb down, and videos on social media show the most athletic climbers
have learned to squeeze the bollards between their legs and slide down
it like a fire pole.

Along the span between Naco and Douglas, most of the repair welds
appear to be dated to last year, with the most recent marked November
2021. At other locations nearby, there were pieces of rope dangling
from the top of the barrier, dancing and snapping in the wind.

______

Biden says the border wall is ineffective. Here are key things to know.

Washington Post, October 12, 2023 by Nick Miroff

https://www.washingtonpost.com/immigration/2023/10/12/border-wall-
biden-trump-policies/

*****

The Biden administration last week placed itself in the position of
trying to explain how its decision to fast-track new construction of
barriers along the U.S.-Mexico border--which officials called an urgent
necessity--did not amount to a policy reversal.

After all, the president pledged during the 2020 campaign that he would
not build ``another foot'' of the barrier. One of Biden's executive
orders on his inauguration day brought President Donald Trump's
signature project to a grinding halt, with the new president calling
that effort to keep migrants from crossing into the United States a
waste of money.

The environmental groups and others who cheered that decision were
dismayed to see Biden officials announce Oct. 5 that they would waive
environmental and conservation laws for the first time to install
roughly a dozen segments totaling 17 miles of new barriers in South
Texas.

When reporters asked Biden whether he thought border barriers were
effective, the president flatly said ``no.'' His certainty seemed
squarely at odds with the Department of Homeland Security's notice
calling new border wall segments urgently needed ``to prevent unlawful
entries into the United States.''

Does the border wall reduce illegal entry into the U.S.?

The Trump administration installed more than 450 miles of new border
fencing during Trump's 2017-2021 term. Along most of that span, the
project consisted of replacing low-rise barriers, designed to stop
vehicles, with 30-foot-tall steel bars, or bollards, anchored in a
concrete base.

At a cost of $11 billion, it was one of the most expensive federal
infrastructure projects in American history. Despite that steel and
concrete, illegal border crossings have soared from about 500,000 per
year in 2020 to more than 2 million per year, the highest levels ever.

Biden's critics primarily blame his decision to reverse Trump's
measures for the surge. In addition to halting wall construction, Biden
reduced deportations, ended Trump's ``Remain in Mexico'' program and
canceled agreements that allowed U.S. authorities to send some asylum
seekers to Central America.

The fact remains that the U.S. government spent a lot of money to build
new barriers to keep migrants out and did not get the result it wanted.

Trump said the wall would be 'impenetrable.' It's huge. Don't walls
work?

Trump used a lot of hyperbole to promote his pet project and was prone
to describe the barrier as the personification of his presidency. He
took a keen interest in its aesthetic appearance and design features,
often urging aides to make it look as imposing as possible. He told
supporters his wall would be ``impenetrable.'' He also said Mexico
would pay for it (Mexico did not).

U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials didn't make such claims
and weren't surprised when criminal smuggling organizations in Mexico
began sawing through the steel bars--using ordinary power tools--almost
immediately.

The border wall has been hacked through thousands of times since then,
so often that the government has had to deploy welding crews full-time
to shore up the structural integrity of the barrier. Smugglers have
figured out a cheaper and even easier way to defeat it, fashioning
cheap, disposable ladders out of scrap wood or metal rebar. They send
migrants and drug couriers up and over the top, then use ropes to lower
them down the other side. Experienced fence-jumpers have developed a
technique using the steel bars like fire poles, sliding down onto the
U.S. side in seconds.

Is the border wall actually along the border?

In New Mexico, Arizona and California, the border wall is located at
the international boundary with Mexico.

In Texas, the border is defined by the long, looping path of the Rio
Grande, presenting a major challenge to engineers trying to build a
steel-and-concrete fence in a straight line.

At some locations in South Texas where the Rio Grande is especially
sinuous, the government has built the wall more than a mile from the
international border. That has left hundreds, if not thousands, of
acres of U.S. territory--mostly farmland--in no man's land that is
inside the United States but outside the border wall.

The river's topography has made the structure essentially useless for
addressing one of the most taxing challenges facing the U.S. Border
Patrol: large groups of migrants, often parents with children, crossing
illegally to surrender and seek humanitarian protection.

Once migrants cross the river and reach U.S. soil, they have a right to
seek asylum under U.S. law. The Border Patrol has little choice but to
take them into custody, even if they're on the opposite side of the
wall.

The United States has no intention of ceding that territory or allowing
makeshift migrant camps to form on the U.S. side of the river. So
border agents open the gates and bring migrants through the wall by the
busload.

If the border wall is ineffective, why do U.S. agents say they want it?

CBP officials were asking for more physical barriers long before Trump
promised a ``big, fat, beautiful wall'' when he ran for office in 2016.
Such projects enjoyed bipartisan support a generation ago; the Secure
Fence Act of 2006 passed the Senate and House by large margins.

There's a big difference between how Trump and some Republicans talk
about the wall and the more technical way CBP officials describe
physical barriers--as a tool but not the only tool. Agents assigned to
work in difficult conditions along the border would rather have some
sort of barrier than nothing at all. It gives them a way to channel and
redirect some illegal activity, control crowds and block vehicles.

Just as important, the barriers create new access roads, increasing
agents' ability to quickly arrive to locations where smuggling and
illegal entry are detected.

Ronald Vitiello, the former Border Patrol chief who helped develop
plans for the wall, said the structure ``in and of itself, is
nothing.''

``But it's an anchor for all the other things you need to do,''
Vitiello said, including technology such as cameras and sensors. ``It
doesn't stop things, but it slows them down,'' he said.

And at a time of record crossings and a fair amount of border chaos,
many agents say they are relieved to have some sort of structure in
place to help them manage a desperate and frustrating situation.

Will this be the first time Biden has built new border wall?

No. Biden's ``pause'' on the border wall in January 2021 left
unfinished gaps in the structure and construction materials lying
around in the desert. DHS has been spending barrier funds appropriated
by Congress to close some of those segments, and officials have spent
about $1 billion on environmental remediation to reduce erosion and
restore some of the areas torn up by bulldozers and dynamite.

In June, Biden officials announced plans to build the new segments in
South Texas, but the controversy flared up last week when they laid out
plans to waive more than two dozen environmental and conservation laws.

Why is Biden building the wall if he thinks the barrier is ineffective?

Biden officials say they are compelled by law because Congress
appropriated money for these border wall segments in 2019 as part of
the deal to end the last government shutdown. The Biden administration
tried to reprogram those funds, but that attempt was rejected by
lawmakers. The deadline to spend the money was Sept. 30.

CBP officials said they had no choice but to waive the environmental
and conservation laws because it is the only way the agency has been
able to build barriers in the past. And they insist the new segments
will mitigate environmental impacts by using a design consisting of 18-
foot bollards on a movable base that can be easily repositioned.

The new segments, which will cost about $140 million, will be located
outside the flood plain of the Rio Grande, nearly a mile from the
river, and mostly positioned along existing roads, according to a CBP
official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss
construction plans that have not been publicly announced.

Luis Miranda, a DHS spokesman, said the administration's description of
the barrier as an urgent necessity was a legal formality tied to
Congress's 2019 border wall appropriation.

``It is not a statement of the Administration's policy,'' Miranda said
in a statement. ``As a matter of policy, the Administration disagrees
with Congress's 2019 mandate and continues to oppose further border
wall construction.''

``Nevertheless, DHS must and will comply with the law,'' he said.

Is the wall harmful?

Dozens of migrants have been killed and hospitalized after falling from
the structure, often with horrific spinal trauma and broken legs.
Immigrant advocates also say the barriers force migrants toward more
remote desert areas, contributing to more deaths from heat stroke and
exposure. CBP reported 568 migrant deaths along the border during the
2021 fiscal year, the most recent for which data is available--nearly
twice the amount of the previous year.

The border wall has a devastating toll on animals too, advocates say.
The steel bars have essentially cut in half the habitat of animal
species, in some cases cutting off their access to water and grazing
areas. Trail cameras set up by researchers have shown pumas, bobcats
and other large mammals blocked and searching fruitlessly for some way
to get through.

______

U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

Dr. Gosar. The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Ciscomani, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, for the
opportunity, and members of the Subcommittee for allowing me to
waive on and join you here today. I appreciate that.
And thank you to our witnesses for your time and testimony.
It has been brought to my attention, Mr. French, that you
attended ASU. Representative Grijalva and I won't hold that
against you in this hearing, being from Tucson and a U of A
grad.
Mr. French. Fair enough.
Mr. Grijalva. Speak for yourself.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Ciscomani. Never mind, he talked me into it. We will
probably give you a little bit of a hard time, but thank you,
sir, for being here.
I do want to give you a special thanks, Mr. French, for
your service here in Arizona's Coronado National Forest. Thank
you for that.
I represent Arizona's 6th Congressional District.
Representative Grijalva and I share the city of Tucson. My
district sits along the southwest border, and contains a
significant amount of Federal land. Around 39 percent of the
state's land is federally owned and operated. Of approximately
2,000 miles of the border, almost 40 percent is on Federal
lands.
I hear constantly from my constituents back home about the
impact of the Biden administration's failed border policies,
and I am very concerned about the impact that it is having on
our local environment, as well.
I will start with Mr. Reynolds here. Which sites are the
National Park Service observing the most foot traffic by the
illegal crossings through the National Park System?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, thank you, Congressman. Of the 380-ish
miles of boundary that I am aware of the parks touch over time,
or over space, Organ Pipe near you in Tucson and Coronado are
our big foot-traffic areas. But Organ Pipe probably has the
highest.
Mr. Ciscomani. And how is the National Park Service working
with law enforcement to shut down these pathways and mitigate
the damage being done in the National Park System lands?
Mr. Reynolds. We watch carefully with particularly our
Border Patrol colleagues in those parks that we just mentioned.
A little bit of Forest Service and BLM is down in there, as
well. And we just try as best we can to have a seamless
approach. If there are concerns at all that you have heard, we
will be happy to follow up on it.
Mr. Ciscomani. Yes, I would love that. Can you also touch a
little bit on the cost associated with remediating National
Park Service lands along the southern border that have been
utilized by these crossings as they enter our nation?
Mr. Reynolds. We carefully document the cost. There are
special project monies for this, and I will be happy to follow
up tomorrow with you on the budget numbers.
Mr. Ciscomani. I would like to get that information, as
well, so thank you.
Mr. French, how many pounds of trash would you say have
been picked up in the National Forest System lands located
along the southern border this year?
Mr. French. Along the southern border, I am not entirely
sure. I know we have worked with the Border Patrol and
apprehended about 40,000 individuals, but I don't have
estimates on the amount of trash.
Mr. Ciscomani. Are you able to at least compare the
previous years to this year? Is that on the rise? Are they the
same? Where are we on that?
I mean, the crossing numbers speak for themselves. It is
tenfold of what it used to be on a daily basis on the worst day
before of what it is now. So, can you give me the guesstimate
on that?
Mr. French. I would say that in my experience in the past
25 years, we have seen ebbs and flows of border crossings
across multiple administrations, depending on what is
happening. And I don't have the data right now to say whether
or not this year is higher than previous years.
Mr. Ciscomani. Well, the data is there from Border Patrol.
The data is there from our border agencies of the numbers. I
mean, in the last 1\1/2\ to 2 years we have seen about over 6
million crossings and encounters. So, the data is there, and I
want to get to the bottom of how this is impacting our natural
resources, how this is impacting our natural forest land on the
Federal side.
And I understand you may not have specific data. I know Mr.
Reynolds is going to follow up with me on some of these
questions on your side, as well, which I am looking forward to
receiving. But I am hoping that, at least anecdotally, you can
give me some evidence of what you have been able to see.
Mr. French. I mean, we have asked, and we didn't have any
specific data on the amount of trash that has occurred that is
different this year than previous years.
Again, there were about 40,000 individuals apprehended on
National Forest System lands this year. That is the best data
that I can give to you. What I can tell you is that this has
been a continuous problem for decades of us removing trash and
other natural resource and visitor effects that occur on our
international border along the Coronado.
Mr. Ciscomani. I want to squeeze in one more question. I
don't want to go over time, because I want to be invited back
by Mr. Gosar and the Committee.
The National Forest System, it is home for many threatened
and endangered species. Can you describe the impacts of what is
happening right now at the border on them and their critical
habitat as the last question?
Mr. French. The Coronado has the highest number of
endangered species of any national forest across the country.
There are some species that travel in between Mexico and the
United States that are impacted at times, as well as water
sources that are dependent for certain endangered species that
are impacted in these crossings, as well.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, sir, and bear down.
Dr. Gosar. OK, I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. French, how many illegal marijuana growing operations
have you identified over the last year on Forest Service
properties?
Mr. French. In the 5 years previous to this year----
Dr. Gosar. No, just this last year.
Mr. French. I don't have the numbers for this year because
we don't have them all put together yet. But in the last 5
years, it has been about 330.
Dr. Gosar. And you can get us those new numbers for the
last year?
Mr. French. Yes, when we get them.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Recently, we came across reports of the
cartels participating in human trafficking and all types of
horrific behavior where they employ these illegal grow sites.
What has the Forest Service found evidence of, and what are you
currently doing to both monitor and prevent this from happening
in the future?
Mr. French. So there is information that has come into us
that cartels are involved in some of the illegal grow sites
that are occurring on national forests. The extent and scope of
that I can't speculate on. What I can tell you is in the
previous 5 years we have remediated 336 grow sites. About 350
miles of irrigation pipes have been removed. About 300,000
pounds of trash have been removed from those sites. And we
found a lot of toxic, frankly, banned substances that have to
be removed from those sites, as well.
Dr. Gosar. Yes, I am just kind of curious, though. I mean,
most of these sites have cartel bearings to them. So, when you
find one of these, how do you go about the interdiction? How do
you employ a law enforcement, and what other assets do you have
for that law enforcement activity?
Mr. French. Yes, we work very closely with other Federal
agencies, state and local agencies, in both the monitoring of
sites that pop up or occur on National Forest System lands and
then for essentially addressing those.
Dr. Gosar. Do you go through a local prosecutor? You are
looking at warrants, I am sure. How do you work with that, the
gentleman from California kind of hit on it. How do you work
those assets together? Because you don't want to be put in
harm's way, either.
Mr. French. No, we have MOUs and agreements in place, all
the way from local law enforcement up through other Federal
agencies, and they work as task forces.
Dr. Gosar. Let me ask you something. On these assets that
we are utilizing up there in New York, I actually went there
with the Chairman, Mr. Westerman. Tell me how you tend to
mitigate 2,200 single men in a compound on a runway? And you
have playing fields for kids all the way around it. How are you
going to keep them on there?
I mean, these are 2,200. The only person I can actually
think of that might be able to do it is Joe Arpaio. Tell me
more about this, because it doesn't seem right. And it also
doesn't seem like it fulfills the NEPA process, even in an
extensive service, if you catch my meaning.
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, I appreciate that concern, Mr. Chairman,
and it was a topic of conversation which I will lump, if you
will allow me, into safety, right? The safety and management.
We have left the management of the migrant camps to the
city, to the folks that are leasing the property. The U.S. Park
Police, who I know came and spoke here, at least the union,
they are on site to protect the park resources and the normal
operations. We asked in the lease for 24-hour protection from
NYPD for the camp itself and all of its operations, as well as,
to your point, anything that comes from that camp that would
impact people or park resources.
So, we have a full protection strategy in the lease is the
short story.
Dr. Gosar. Have you ever seen a success rate on any process
like this at all?
I mean, it is very extensive, and it is going to be almost
impossible to keep those people on that limited site.
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, there is a fence, there are security
procedures. But I appreciate your concern, and I think we just
need to keep very focused on this with those partners.
Dr. Gosar. Now, let me also ask you. The Chairman asked
this, and I want to reiterate it because it is that important.
We are doing this as a benefit to the Governor and the Mayor.
Why wouldn't that stop us from doing this as a precedent? Tell
me why this is not going to stop right here. Doesn't it set a
precedent? Because it does.
Mr. Reynolds. I think the way I would look at it is there
was a unique ask from the state of New York in this one
location, a very unique place that had a resource area that a
lease made sense on. I am not sure that would make sense at a
lot of other parks. I am not aware of any other asks or any
other interest anywhere else that we would do this.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Well, my time is up. I am going to recognize
the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Reynolds, at the end of Fiscal Year 2022, the National
Park Service reported a $22.3 billion deferred maintenance
backlog. How much additional money is going to be needed to
cover the wear and tear of the housing of these migrants on
Federal land?
Mr. Reynolds. In this case, 100 percent of all costs are
borne by the lease in order to mitigate the site, as well as
the park improvements that I had a chance to mention earlier.
So, there will be no additional cost to the Service's operating
budget from this.
Mr. Collins. OK. In the NPS' lease with New York City, the
only agreement this Administration will be making to the
housing migrants on Federal lands, or will we be seeing tent
cities?
I mean, what about along the GW Parkway here in DC?
Mr. Reynolds. No, I think the GW Parkway is pretty crowded
already. Right, sir?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Mr. Reynolds. No, again, there is no other interest, no
other planning efforts underway. And this, again, is a unique
area with certain criteria that the lease met.
Mr. Collins. OK. One other thing I wanted to ask you real
quick. Man, they have us strung out. Even though we are voting
like crazy, we are also in hearings like crazy.
For the issuance of the lease for the Floyd Bennett Field,
the National Park Service refused to conduct a public process
to listen to the residents of nearby communities in New York.
Will you commit to providing any sort of public forum, or at
least to listen to the concerned residents of Brooklyn and
Queens?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, we have an excellent superintendent and
team there at Gateway. They are working hard to interface with
all of the various and numerous numbers of partners and
concerns up there.
Mr. Collins. Good. I look forward to coordinating with you
and your staff on this public forum, too.
Mr. Reynolds. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. Mr. Chairman, oh, a different Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, that is all I had. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Westerman [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
I do want to again thank the witnesses for your valuable
testimony and for the time that you spent here today.
The witnesses, Mr. French and Mr. Reynolds, are dismissed.
And as soon as they are seated, I will introduce our second
panel of witnesses.
[Pause.]
Mr. Westerman. I would like to welcome our second panel of
witnesses, and I am going to yield to Ranking Member Grijalva
to introduce one of our witnesses who hails from his district.
Mr. Grijalva. Chairman Verlon Jose, welcome, sir.
Congratulations to you as the Chairman of the Nation. I think
it is a great achievement for you, but your work as Vice Chair,
your work on education and on cultural and traditional issues
dealing with the Tribe have been remarkable. I am glad to
welcome you here. Thank you very much, and I look forward to
working with you going down the road. Welcome, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Ranking Member Grijalva.
I also want to introduce Ms. Julie Axelrod, who is Director
of Litigation for the Center for Immigration Studies, and
Lieutenant John Nores, Jr., who is a retired California
Department of Fish and Wildlife Marijuana Enforcement Team,
Special Operations.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all the witnesses in this panel to
testify before Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Axelrod for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JULIE AXELROD, DIRECTOR OF LITIGATION, CENTER FOR
IMMIGRATION STUDIES, ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA

Ms. Axelrod. Thank you, Chairman Westerman and members of
the Subcommittee, for inviting me here today to discuss the
environmental impacts of the Biden administration's immigration
actions. I am the Director of Litigation at the Center for
Immigration Studies, and I have spent the past few years
litigating against the Department of Homeland Security for its
failures to comply with NEPA.
As discussed today and in your last hearing, the Biden
administration bypassed their obligations under NEPA before
placing migrant camps on Park Service land. But this failure is
only the tip of the iceberg of this Administration's violation
of NEPA. It started in January 2021, when the Administration
failed to conduct NEPA on the actions that created the migrant
crisis in the first place.
NEPA requires Federal agencies to prepare environmental
impact statements and hold public hearings for all major
Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the
human environment. It has no exceptions for immigration.
Indeed, when one goes back and looks at the reasons NEPA
became law, it is clear it never contemplated an exception for
actions that bring millions of people into the country. Such
actions, by definition, are population growth. And population
growth was the very first concern addressed in NEPA's
Congressional Declaration of National Environmental Policy,
which explained that Congress had decided to pass NEPA because
it recognized ``the profound impact of man's activity on the
interrelations of all components of the natural environment,
particularly the profound influences of population growth.''
Population growth inevitably has impacts like increased
traffic congestion, energy consumption, waste management, water
use, encroachment on wildlife habitats, urban sprawl, carbon
dioxide emissions, degraded soil and air quality, noise
pollution, and loss of recreational areas: the bread and butter
of routine NEPA analysis.
Upon taking office, the Biden administration carried out a
number of policies: halting construction of the border wall,
ending Remain in Mexico, releasing border crossers into the
interior with parole, policies described by a district judge in
Florida as ``akin to posting a flashing `Come in, We are Open'
sign on the southern border.'' Predictably, a flood of
migration followed. By some estimates, 5 to 6 million foreign
nationals have entered the country illegally since 2021.
This Committee has rightly pointed out that the
Administration failed to hold hearings of the National Park
Service's lease to house 2,000 of the migrants invited in by
the Biden administration in the Floyd Bennett Field. But all 5
or 6 million people who crossed the border need housing and use
resources when they get to this country, not just 2,000.
The Administration equally had the duty to hold hearings
before taking the actions that created the crisis, which it
could not justify as based on an emergency, since there was no
emergency existing before it did what it did. The idea that
NEPA mandates the discussions of the inevitable consequences of
population growth but not the causes of population growth turns
the purpose of NEPA on its head, which is to encourage
environmentally enlightened decision making before irrevocable
action is taken.
Even if the Administration believes opening the floodgates
was desirable policy, NEPA requires that agencies must look
before they leap. The Biden administration did not. The
environmental effects of the open border will continue, and
Americans across the interior will continue to feel the effects
of overcrowding in their daily lives.
The Administration's excuse for failing to conduct NEPA
essentially is that NEPA doesn't apply to actions whose
environmental impacts are unknown. This is nonsense. NEPA's
purpose is to stop Federal agencies from taking major actions
whose environmental effect they don't understand, and it is
desperately needed. The very shock expressed in the last
hearing at the idea that the Natural Resources Committee, of
all places, would seek to talk about the migrant challenge is
telling.
A good question is why would anyone claiming to care about
the environment be surprised open borders have profound
environmental consequences?
An even better question is why would an administration that
insists it values NEPA spark an environmental crisis without
even a modicum of NEPA compliance?
At the same time that President Biden signed Executive
Orders opening the border, he signed orders purporting to
strengthen environmental protection that called for the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions across the country, the
conservation of land, water, biodiversity, transitioning to a
clean energy economy, advancing environmental justice, and
investing in disadvantaged communities.
Proclaiming we have only a narrow moment to avoid the most
catastrophic impacts of climate change, President Biden
instituted a government-wide approach to the climate crisis.
This government-wide approach apparently excludes the
Department of Homeland Security. Boosting illegal immigration
by millions of people, largely economic migrants rather than
refugees, directly prevents all of these supposedly urgent
policy goals.
The Committee on the Judiciary recently found only 6
percent of those released into the United States by the Biden
administration were even screened for credible fear. They are
not coming to claim asylum, but to improve their standard of
living, which means their carbon emissions decrease when they
settle into the United States, and they fully intend to use
resources, including land and water, while here.
Furthermore, economic migrants generally do start at the
bottom of the economic ladder, and their social and economic
effects are felt disproportionately by disadvantaged
communities. The point is not to blame them for using
resources, but to recognize that all people do.
NEPA compliance would end the Administration's delusion
that foreign nationals cease having an ecological footprint the
minute they cross the U.S. border.
No administration that truly cared about natural resources,
environmental justice, or urgently reducing carbon emissions
would flagrantly disregard the environmental degradation that
its actions have unleashed on the United States. Thanks.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Axelrod follows:]
Prepared Statement of Julie Axelrod, Director of Litigation, Center for
Immigration Studies
Chairman Westerman and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss the environmental impacts of the
Biden Administration's immigration actions. My name is Julie Axelrod
and I am the Director of Litigation of the Center for Immigration
Studies. I've spent the past few years litigating against the
Department of Homeland Security for its failures to comply with NEPA.
As discussed in your last hearing, the Biden Administration
bypassed their obligations under NEPA before placing migrant camps on
park service land. But this failure is only the tip of the iceberg of
this Administration's violation of NEPA. It started in January 2021
when the Administration failed to conduct NEPA on the actions that
created the migrant crisis in the first place.
NEPA requires Federal agencies to prepare environmental impact
statements and hold public hearings for all ``major Federal actions
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment''. It has
no exceptions for immigration. Indeed, when one goes back and looks at
the reasons NEPA became law, it's clear it never contemplated an
exception for actions that bring millions of people into the country.
Such actions, by definition, are population growth, and population
growth was the very first concern addressed in NEPA's ``Congressional
declaration of national environmental policy,'' which explained that
Congress had decided to pass NEPA, because it recognized, quote ``the
profound impact of man's activity on the interrelations of all
components of the natural environment, particularly the profound
influences of population growth.'' Population growth inevitably has
impacts like increased traffic congestion, energy consumption, waste
management, water use, encroachment on wildlife habitats, urban sprawl,
carbon dioxide emissions, degraded soil and air quality, noise
pollution, and loss of recreational areas--the bread and butter of
routine NEPA analysis.
Upon taking office the Biden Administration carried out a number of
policies, halting construction of the border wall, ending Remain in
Mexico, and releasing border crossers into the interior, policies
described by a district judge in Florida as ``akin to posting a
flashing `Come in, We're Open' sign on the southern border.''
Predictably, a flood of migration followed--by some estimates 5 to 6
million foreign nationals have entered the country illegally since
2021.
This committee has rightly pointed out that the Administration
failed to hold hearings over the National Park Service's lease to house
2000 of the migrants invited in by the Biden Administration in the
Floyd Bennett Field. But all five or six million people who crossed the
border need housing and use resources when they get to this country,
not just 2000. The Administration equally had the duty to hold hearings
before taking the actions that created the crisis.
The idea that NEPA mandates discussion of the inevitable
consequences of population growth but not the causes of population
growth turns the purpose of NEPA on its head--which is to encourage
environmentally enlightened decision making before irrevocable action
is taken. Even if the Administration believes opening the floodgates
was desirable policy, NEPA requires that agencies must ``look before
they leap.'' The Biden Administration did not. The environmental
effects of the open border will continue, and Americans across the
interior will continue to feel the effects of overcrowding in their
daily lives.
The Administration's excuse for failing to conduct NEPA,
essentially, is that NEPA doesn't apply to actions whose environmental
impacts are unknown. This is nonsense. NEPA's purpose is to stop
federal agencies from taking major actions whose environmental effect
they don't understand, and it's desperately needed. The very shock
expressed in the last hearing at the idea that the ``Natural Resources
Committee'' of all places would seek to talk about ``the migrant
challenge'' is telling. A good question is why would anyone claiming to
care about the environment be surprised open borders have profound
environmental consequences? An even better question, is why would an
Administration that insists it values NEPA spark an environmental
crisis without even a modicum of NEPA compliance?
At the same time that President Biden signed executive orders
opening the border, he signed orders purporting to strengthen
environmental protection that called for the reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions across the economy, the conservation of land, water, and
biodiversity; transitioning to a clean-energy economy; advancing
environmental justice; and investing in disadvantaged communities.
Proclaiming we have only a ``narrow moment'' to avoid the ``most
catastrophic impacts'' of climate change, President Biden instituted
``a government-wide approach to the climate crisis.''
This government wide approach, apparently, excludes the Department
of Homeland Security. Boosting illegal immigration by millions of
people, largely economic migrants rather than refugees, directly
prevents all of these supposedly urgent policy goals. The Committee on
the Judiciary recently found only six percent of those released into
the United States by the Biden Administration were even screened for
credible fear--they are not coming to claim asylum but to improve their
standard of living--which means their carbon emissions increase when
they settle into the United States and they fully intend to use
resources, including land and water, while here. Furthermore, economic
migrants generally do start at the bottom of the economic ladder--and
their social and economic effects are felt disproportionately by
disadvantaged communities. The point is not to blame them for using
resources, but to recognize that all people do. NEPA compliance would
end the Administration's delusion that foreign nationals cease having
an ecological footprint the minute they cross the U.S. border.
No Administration that truly cared about natural resources,
environmental justice, or urgently reducing carbon emissions would
flagrantly disregard the environmental degradation that its actions
have unleased on the United States.

______

Mr. Westerman. Thank you for your testimony, Ms. Axelrod.
The Chair now recognizes Chairman Jose for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. VERLON M. JOSE, CHAIRMAN, TOHONO O'ODHAM
NATION, SELLS, ARIZONA

Mr. Jose. [Speaking Native language.] Good afternoon,
Committee Chair, distinguished members of the Subcommittee. I
am Verlon Jose, the Chairman of the Tohono O'odham Nation.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today.
I also want to extend a special greeting to the Nation's
Congressional Representative, Ranking Member Grijalva. We
really appreciate that you are here with us today.
The Tohono O'odham have lived in what is now Arizona and
northern Mexico since time immemorial. Our reservation today
comprises only a small portion of our ancestral territory. Our
original homelands include the Organ Pipe Cactus National
Monument, Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge, the San
Bernardino National Wildlife Refuge, and the Coronado National
Forest.
In 1854, the international boundary between the United
States and Mexico was drawn through the middle of our ancestral
lands, without consideration for our people's sovereign rights
or the impact it would have on our religious and cultural
traditions.
Because we share a 62-mile border with Mexico, we have long
been at the forefront on border issues. The Nation spends about
$3 million a year of our own tribal funds to help meet the
United States' border security responsibilities. We also are
responsible for taking care of migrants who have perished on
our reservation. Since 2003, our Nation's law enforcement has
spent nearly $6 million on over 1,500 migrant deaths,
investigation, and recoveries. Our police force spent more than
a third of its time on border issues, including the
investigation of immigrant deaths, illegal drug seizures, and
human smuggling.
Over the years, we have developed a long-standing
cooperative relationship with the U.S. Customs and Border
Protection, immigration and customs enforcement, and other
Federal law enforcement agencies. We have supported CBP efforts
on our reservation by authorizing their checkpoint forward-
operating bases and integrated fixed towers to facilitate
electronic surveillance efforts.
The Nation leads a multi-agency anti-drug smuggling task
force staffed by our own police, detectives, ICE special
agents, Border Patrol agents, and the FBI. In addition, the
Nation has officers that are part of the Shadow Wolves, a
tactical patrol unit based on our reservation.
The Shadow Wolves are the only Native American tracking
unit in the country, and its officers apply traditional
tracking methods that apprehend countless smugglers and seize
thousands of pounds of illegal drugs.
Thanks to the bipartisan legislation championed by
Representative John Katko in the 117th Congress, the Shadow
Wolves are now classified as ICE special agents.
While the Tohono O'odham Nation shares the Federal
Government's concerns about border security, we have a very
deep concern about the substantial cost and ineffectiveness of
using a border wall in rural areas like ours. GAO found that
more than $10 billion of taxpayers' money was set aside for a
border wall construction by the end of 2020. Billions more will
continue to be needed to address the environmental and cultural
harms caused by the wall. Despite the amount of money spent,
CBP records reveal that the border wall is ineffective in
remote geographical areas like the desert southwest, where the
wall is regularly breached.
Most disturbing for us is the permanent damage that the
border wall has inflicted on our sacred areas, culturally
sensitive sites, and the negative impact on our religious
rights and cultural practices. Construction of the wall
destroyed human burial sites at Monument Hill and Oregon Pipe
National Monument, a desecration that cannot be undone.
Construction of a wall on Federal lands near our
reservation also interferes with the flow of scarce, vital
water resources on which plants and wildlife depend. Our Tribal
Members rely on these plants for food, medicine, and cultural
purposes.
The Nation wholeheartedly agrees with GAO that the Federal
agencies must do a better job coordinating with each other and
with the Nation on a strategy to mitigate the harm that the
wall has caused.
In conclusion, I want to thank you for giving the Nation
the opportunity to share our perspective on these difficult and
pressing issues. I am happy to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Jose follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Verlon Jose, Chairman, the Tohono
O'odham Nation of Arizona

INTRODUCTION & HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Good afternoon Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. I am Verlon Jose, the
Chairman of the Tohono O'odham Nation of Arizona. It is an honor to
have the opportunity to testify before you today on behalf of my Nation
and our more than 36,000 enrolled Tribal citizens.
The Tohono O'odham Nation shares a 62-mile border with Mexico--the
second-longest international border of any tribe in the United States,
and the longest on the southern border. The Nation has long been at the
forefront on border issues. Over the years we have developed a long-
standing cooperative relationship with U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and other
federal law enforcement agencies. Working in concert with CBP, our own
Tohono O'odham law enforcement officers are regularly involved in drug
interdiction and immigrant apprehension actions. Every year, the Tohono
O'odham Nation spends its own funds to help meet the federal
government's border security responsibilities. We have supported CBP
efforts on our Reservation by providing lands for a checkpoint, forward
operating bases, and integrated fixed towers to facilitate critical
electronic surveillance efforts.
That being said, the O'odham have lived in what is now Arizona and
northern Mexico since time immemorial. In 1854, the international
boundary between the United States and Mexico was drawn through the
middle of our ancestral territory without any consideration for our
people's sovereign and historical rights, or the impact it would have
on traditional and sacred practices. Today, the international border
continues to separate our people and our traditional lands. Seventeen
O'odham communities with approximately 2,000 members are still located
in our historical homelands in Mexico. O'odham on both sides of the
border share the same language, culture, religion and history, and we
continue to cross the border for sacred pilgrimages and ceremonies at
important religious and cultural sites.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Map of Tohono O'odham Ancestral Territory

Our Reservation today includes only a small portion of our
ancestral territory. Our original homelands ranged well beyond these
boundaries and included what the federal government later made into the
Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument and Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife
Refuge to the west of our Reservation, and the San Bernardino National
Wildlife Refuge and the Coronado National Forest to the east. The
Nation's ongoing significant connections to these lands and the
religious, cultural and natural resources located there are well-
documented.
THE NATION IS ACTIVELY ENGAGED IN BORDER SECURITY EFFORTS

Over the past decade the Nation has spent an annual average of $3
million of our own tribal funds on border security and enforcement to
help meet the United States' border security obligations. Further, the
Nation is responsible for the recovery and disposition of immigrants
who have perished on our Reservation. Since 2003, our Nation's law
enforcement has spent nearly $6 million dollars on over 1,500 migrant
death investigations and recoveries without any federal financial
assistance. The Nation's police force typically spends more than a
third of its time on border issues, including the investigation of
immigrant deaths, illegal drug seizures, and human smuggling.

The Nation also has entered into several cooperative agreements
with CBP and ICE, and pursuant to numerous Tohono O'odham Legislative
Council resolutions has authorized a number of border security measures
on its sovereign lands to help CBP. Some examples include:

High Intensity Drug Trafficking (HIDTA) Task Force: The
Nation leads a multi-agency anti-drug smuggling task force
staffed by Tohono O'odham Police Department detectives, ICE
special agents, Border Patrol agents, and the FBI. This is
the only tribally-led High Intensity Drug Trafficking
(HIDTA) Task Force in the United States. In 2018, the
Nation's Task Force Commander W. Rodney Irby received an
award recognizing him as the National Outstanding HIDTA
Task Force Commander.

ICE office and CBP forward operating bases: Since 1974,
the Nation has authorized a long-term lease for an on-
reservation ICE office. The Nation also approved leases for
two CBP forward operating bases that operate on the
Nation's lands 24 hours, 7 days a week. One of these
forward operating bases (at Papago Farms) was recently
renovated and upgraded with state-of-the-art improvements
and technology, including an expanded perimeter fence,
helipad, and new officer living quarters and administrative
facilities.

Shadow Wolves, an ICE tactical patrol unit: The Nation has
officers that are part of the Shadow Wolves, a tactical
patrol unit based on our Reservation which the Nation
played a role in creating. Thanks to recent bipartisan
legislation championed by Representative John Katko in the
House and enacted in the 117th Congress, the Shadow Wolves
are now reclassified as ICE Special Agents. The Shadow
Wolves are the only Native American tracking unit in the
country, and its officers are known for their ability to
track and apprehend immigrants and drug smugglers using
traditional tracking methods. The Shadow Wolves have
apprehended countless smugglers and seized thousands of
pounds of illegal drugs.

Vehicle barriers on our lands: CBP has constructed
extensive vehicle barriers that run the entire length of
the Tribal border and a patrol road that parallels it.

CBP checkpoint on our lands: The Nation has authorized a
CBP checkpoint on the major highway that runs through the
Nation.

Integrated Fixed Towers: The Nation approved a lease of
its lands to allow CBP to build an Integrated Fixed Tower
(IFT) system that includes surveillance and sensor towers
with associated access roads on the Nation's southern and
eastern boundaries to detect and help interdict illegal
entries.

BORDER WALL CONSTRUCTION IN REMOTE AREAS LIKE OURS IS INEFFECTIVE AND
WASTES TAXPAYER DOLLARS--AND HAS BEEN DEEPLY HARMFUL TO THE
NATION

The Nation shares the federal government's concerns about border
security, and we believe that the measures we have taken to assist CBP
and our own law enforcement efforts are necessary to protect the
Nation's members specifically and the United States generally.
Respectfully, however, we have serious concerns about the cost and
ineffectiveness of a border wall. Most importantly the Nation is deeply
concerned about the severe impact the border wall has had/will have on
wildlife corridors, culturally sensitive/sacred areas, and on our
ability to freely practice our customs and religion.

Constructing the Border Wall was Wasteful and Ineffective. Border
wall construction came at great cost to the American taxpayer in this
era of a skyrocketing federal deficit. Thanks to the no-bid contracts,
diversion of badly needed drug interdiction and defense resources, and
the massive environmental mitigation efforts required to address
construction damage, we may never know the true cost. The Government
Accountability Office found that by the end of 2020, the Army Corps of
Engineers had obligated more than $10 billion to border wall
construction alone.\1\ Billions more have and will continue to be
needed to mitigate the environmental and cultural harms caused by
construction. Worse yet, this wall has been an absolute failure in
terms of deterring illegal immigration and drug trafficking. As
reported by the Cato Institute, following a lull in illegal entries
during the early part of the Covid-19 Pandemic, illegal entries
actually increased as border wall construction increased.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Government Accountability Office, Southwest Border: Award and
Management of Border Barrier Construction Contracts, GAO-23-106893, at
6 (July 23, 2023).
\2\ David J. Bier, ``The Border Wall Didn't Work,'' Cato Institute
(February 10, 2022), available at https://www.cato.org/blog/border-
wall-didnt-work.

As the Nation and others have warned for years, the border wall is
ineffective in remote geographic areas like our homelands (including
neighboring wildlife refuges) where the wall can easily be circumvented
by climbing over, tunneling under, or sawing through it. And that is
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
precisely what has taken place. Again, the Cato Institute found:

The Trump border wall failed for all the predictable reasons.
Immigrants used cheap ladders to climb over it, or they free
climb it. They used cheap power tools to cut through it. They
cut through small pieces and squeezed through, and they cut
through big sections and drove through. In one small section in
2020, they sawed through at least 18 times that Border Patrol
knew about in a month. They also made tunnels. Some tunnels
were long, including the longest one ever discovered, but some
were short enough just to get past the barrier.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Id.

CBP records have revealed that the border wall is breached with
staggering (but unsurprising) regularity--between more than 2,000 times
and more than 4,000 times per year between 2017 and 2022.\4\ These
breaches typically are performed with ``inexpensive power tools widely
available at retail hardware stores,'' \5\ or with $5 ladders.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ David J. Bier, ``Border Wall Was Breached 11 Times Per Day in
2022,'' Cato Institute (December 30, 2022), available at https://
www.cato.org/blog/border-wall-was-breached-11-times-day-2022-2.
\5\ Nick Miroff, ``Trump's border wall has been breached more than
3,000 times by smugglers, CBP records show,'' The Washington Post
(March, 2, 2002), available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-
security/2022/03/02/trump-border-wall-breached/.
\6\ Jenna Romaine, ``Trump's $15 billion border wall is being
easily defeated by $5 ladders,'' The Hill, April 22, 2021), available
at https://thehill.com/changing-america/resilience/refugees/549758-
trumps-15-billion-border-wall-is-being-easily-defeated/.

Damage Already Done to Our Ancestral Lands by Construction. Of
paramount importance to the Nation is the damage that wall construction
has caused to the religious, cultural and environmental resources on
which our members rely and which make our ancestral land sacred to our
people. In several amicus briefs filed in litigation in 2019
challenging construction of the wall,\7\ the Nation detailed the
negative impacts it knew would be caused by the prior Administration's
use of diverted federal funds to construct the border wall in Tucson
Sector Projects 1, 2 and 3 and Yuma Sector 3, extending through Cabeza
Prieta National Wildlife Refuge and Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument
(ending less than two miles from the western boundary of the Nation's
Reservation) and through the San Bernardino National Wildlife Refuge
(to the east of the Reservation). These projects have caused
significant and irreparable harm to religious, cultural, and natural
resources of great importance to the Nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See, e.g., Sierra Club and Southern Border Communities
Coalition v. Donald J. Trump, No. 4:19-cv-00892-HSG, Amicus Curiae
Brief of Tohono O'odham Nation in Support of Plaintiff's Motion for
Supplemental Preliminary Injunction (June 18, 2019, N.D. Ca.) (Dkt. No.
172); Amicus Curiae Brief of Tohono O'odham Nation in Support of
Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (October 18, 2019)
(Dkt. No. 215).

The federal government itself repeatedly has acknowledged the
significance of the Nation's interest in the areas that are being
impacted by the ongoing and contemplated construction in the Tucson and
Yuma Sector projects. For example, the National Park Service (NPS) in
its General Management Plan for the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument
(a UNESCO biosphere reserve) \8\ acknowledged the importance of
Quitobaquito Spring, which is located 200 yards from the border:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Biosphere reserves are areas with unique ecosystems recognized
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) as special places for testing interdisciplinary approaches to
managing social and ecological systems. Each reserve promotes solutions
reconciling the conservation of biodiversity and sustainable use.
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/ecological-
sciences/biosphere-reserves/.

There are 11 springs in the monument, eight of which are
located at Quitobaquito, by far the largest source of water.
The pond and dam at Quitobaquito were constructed in 1860, and
the resulting body of water is one of the largest oases in the
Sonoran Desert. The site is also sacred to the O'odham, who
have used the water from this spring for all of their residence
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in the area.

. . .

There still exist sites within the monument which are sacred to
the O'odham, including Quitobaquito Springs . . . Even to the
present day, the O'odham continue to visit the monument to
collect sacred water from the Springs, to gather medicinal
plants, and to harvest the fruit of the organ pipe and saguaro
cactus.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. National Park Service, Organ Pipe Cactus National
Monument, Final General Management Plan, Development Concept Plans,
Environmental Impact Statement (Feb. 1997), at 30, 33, available at
https://www.nps.gov/orpi/learn/management/upload/fingmp.pdf.

NPS also has recognized that there are O'odham burial sites within
Quitobaquito.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Id. at 158, citing Anderson, Keith M., Bell, Fillman and
Stewart, Yvonne G., Quitobaquito: A Sand Papago Cemetery, Kiva, 47, no
4 (Summer, 1982) at 221-22; see also Bell, Fillman, Anderson, Keith M.
and Stewart, Yvonne G., The Quitobaquito Cemetery and Its History, U.S.
National Park Service, Western Archeological Center (Dec. 1980),
available at http://npshistory.com/series/anthropology/wacc/
quitobaquito/report.pdf.

In a 2019 study, published shortly before construction was to
begin, NPS identified five new archeological sites (of pre-contact
Native American artifacts) and additional archeological resources
within a 60-foot wide federal easement that runs along the border in
Organ Pipe, noting that many existing archeological sites would be
impacted or destroyed by the border wall construction, and that many
areas along the Organ Pipe border have not yet been surveyed to
identify archeological and culturally sensitive sites.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Veech, Andrew S., Archeological Survey of 18.2 Kilometers
(11.3 Miles) of the U.S.-Mexico International Border, Organ Pipe Cactus
National Monument, Pima County, Arizona, U.S. National Park Service,
Intermountain Region Archeology Program (July 2019), available at
https://games-cdn.washingtonpost.com/notes/prod/default/documents/
cbd7ef6a-3b5b-4608-9913-4d488464823b/note/7a429f63-9e46-41fa-afeb-
c8e238fcd8bb.pdf (discovery of five new archeological sites and 55
isolated finds; recommending additional evaluation of sites, noting
that 17 identified archeological sites will be destroyed by the border
wall construction, and that many areas along the border within the
Monument remain unsurveyed).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similar expert reports show archeological sites of significance to
the Nation in the immediate vicinity of Tucson Project 3 in the San
Bernardino Valley, as well as the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife
Refuge, although these areas are less well surveyed so the extent of
cultural and natural resources potentially affected by construction of
a border wall is even less well known.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Fish, Paul R.; Fish, Suzanne K.; Madsen, John H., Prehistory
and early history of the Malpai Borderlands: Archaeological synthesis
and recommendations, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
(2006) at 29-30, available at https://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/
rmrs_gtr176.pdf; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Cabeza Prieta National
Wildlife Refuge: Comprehensive Conservation Plan, Wilderness
Stewardship Plan and Environmental Impact Statement (Aug. 2006) at 172,
586, available at https://www.fws.gov/uploadedFiles/CPNWREIS.pdf; U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Assessment of the Malpai
Borderlands Habitat Conservation Plan (July 26, 2008) at 17, available
at https://www.fws.gov/southwest/es/arizona/Documents/HCPs/Malpai/
MBHCP%20EA%20w%20FONSI.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As border wall construction progressed, construction activities
resulted in immeasurable damage to areas of significance to the Nation
within Organ Pipe, including the blading of an area near Quitobaquito
Springs and blasting in an area called Monument Hill, which has
disturbed human remains.\13\ In its aftermath, federal officials
documented significant damage to environmental and water sources in the
Arizona borderland area. According to a U.S. Fish and Wildlife study,
``water from an artesian well in the San Bernardino National Wildlife
Refuge in Arizona no longer naturally flows to the surface, in part, as
a result of barrier construction.'' \14\ In 2019, the Nation warned
that border barrier construction would exacerbate flooding in these
areas, irreparably altering an ecosystem that depends on annual monsoon
rain flows.\15\ As the GAO found, these concerns proved correct: border
wall road construction in Organ Pipe National Monument has in effect
created a ``natural dam by impeding water flow during rain events.''
\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Firozi, Paulina, The Washington Post, Sacred Native
American burial sites are being blown up for Trump's border wall,
lawmaker says (Feb. 9, 2020) https://www.washingtonpost.com/
immigration/2020/02/09/border-wall-native-american-burial-sites/.
\14\ GAO, supra n. 1, at 23.
\15\ Sierra Club, Amicus Curiae Brief of Tohono O'odham Nation at
7-8.
\16\ GAO, supra n. 1, at 23-24.

GAO confirmed also that the damage has been exacerbated by the
failure of federal agencies to adequately coordinate on border wall
mitigation efforts. The Nation wholeheartedly agrees with the GAO's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion that:

The Secretary of the Interior should document, jointly with
CBP, a strategy to mitigate cultural and natural resource
impacts from border barrier construction that defines agency
roles and responsibilities for undertaking specific mitigation
actions; identifies the costs, associated funding sources, and
time frames necessary to implement them; and specifies when
agencies are to consult with Tribes.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Id. at 52.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONCLUSION

Construction of the wall on federal lands to the east and west of
our Reservation already has disturbed and even destroyed human remains,
sacred sites, religious and culturally significant sites and cultural
resources, and tribal archeological resources, and there is no way to
repair or restore this damage to us. Wall construction also adversely
impacted our wildlife, including endangered species like the jaguar
that are sacred to American Indian tribes. Construction of the wall
near our Reservation is interfering with the flow and use of scarce and
vital water resources, including seasonal washes, on which plants and
wildlife depend. The plants adversely impacted are relied on by tribal
members for food, medicine, and cultural purposes, as well as being
critical food sources for animals.

The Nation genuinely appreciates the Subcommittee's interest in the
impact of border wall construction on federal lands, and appreciates
the opportunity to share with you our deep concerns about the damage
that the wall has caused to the Nation's religious and cultural
heritage, our way of life, and our environment. We welcome a continued
dialogue with you on these issues.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Verlon Jose, Chairman,
the Tohono O'odham Nation

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. How would the Nation's sacred sites be better protected
if the laws waived by the Department of Homeland Security had been in
effect? For example, would these sites be better protected if the
National Environmental Policy Act and the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act were not waived?

Answer. There are a number of federal laws, including but not
limited to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), that protect
the environment and cultural and archeological resources and would have
better protected the Nation's sacred sites had they not been waived by
DHS.
Archaeological Resources Protection Act

The Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) requires federal
agencies to obtain a permit from the federal land manager \1\ before
excavating or removing archaeological resources from public or Indian
lands.\2\ This required permitting process includes notification to
relevant tribes of anticipated harm to religious or cultural sites,\3\
and an opportunity for the federal land manager and tribal officials to
meet and discuss tribal interests and proposed mitigation measures
prior to issuance of the permit.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For purposes of ARPA, the ``federal land manager'' is the
federal agency with primary management authority over the relevant
lands. 16 U.S.C. Sec. 470bb(2).
\2\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 470cc(a).
\3\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 470cc(c).
\4\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 7.7
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Had these ARPA protections been in place during construction of the
border wall through the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge, the
Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, and the San Bernardino National
Wildlife Refuge, the widespread desecration of the Nation's religious
and cultural sites in these areas could have been avoided. The Nation
could have worked collaboratively on a government-to-government basis
with the Department of Homeland Security to identify and exclude
certain sensitive areas, and to propose additional mitigation measures.
However, because ARPA's protections were waived, there were no
meaningful procedural checks to protect the Nation's archaeological
resources, and sites of great religious and cultural importance were
severely and permanently damaged.
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA)

Together with the ARPA permitting process, the procedural
requirements of NAGPRA provide significant safeguards for tribal human
remains, funerary objects, sacred objects, and objects of cultural
patrimony.\5\ Under NAGPRA, federal agencies planning intentional
excavations are required to: (1) take reasonable steps to determine
whether the planned activity may result in the excavation of human
remains or other cultural items; (2) engage in consultation with
relevant tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations regarding the planned
activity; and (3) complete and follow a written plan detailing the
planned treatment, care, and disposition of human remains and other
cultural resources in connection with the planned activity.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3001 et seq.; 43 C.F.R. Sec. 10.1(b)(2).
\6\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 10.3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The waiver of these important procedural safeguards during border
wall construction allowed the Department of Homeland Security to blast
unfettered through the historic tribal gravesite at Monument Hill with
no forethought to tribal impacts, no tribal consultation, and no plan
for mitigation of the irreparable damage to tribal human remains and
sacred objects.\7\ If NAGPRA had been properly applied, the known
tribal burials and protected tribal objects at Monument Hill would have
been identified and actively protected through consultation and careful
planning, rather than senselessly destroyed. NAGPRA would also have
protected inadvertently discovered remains and objects by requiring
notification, halting of work in the impacted area, and reasonable
efforts to safeguard the resources.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Firozi, Paulina, The Washington Post, Sacred Native
American burial sites are being blown up for Trump's border wall,
lawmaker says (Feb. 9, 2020) https://www.washingtonpost.com/
immigration/2020/02/09/border-wall-native-american-burial-sites/.
\8\ 43 C.F.R. Sec. 10.4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Historic Preservation Act

Certain cultural resources protected by ARPA and NAGPRA are also
protected by the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), which
requires federal agencies to consult with tribes when agency
undertakings affect properties of religious or cultural
significance.\9\ To comply with NHPA, federal agencies must follow a
four-step review process prior to expending federal funds or issuing
licenses.\10\ This review process requires the federal agency--in
consultation with the relevant tribes--to evaluate the applicability of
section 106 of the Act,\11\ identify historic properties, and assess
and resolve potential adverse effects.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 54 U.S.C. Sec. 300101 et seq.
\10\ 36 C.F.R. Sec. 800.
\11\ Section 106 requires federal agencies to account for the
effects of their undertakings on properties listed or eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places and provide the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation a reasonable opportunity to
comment on such undertakings. 54 U.S.C. Sec. 306108.
\12\ 36 C.F.R. Sec. Sec. 800.3-800.6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the religious and cultural significance of the sacred sites
destroyed during the border wall construction, it is likely that NHPA
and the Section 106 review process would have applied to the project if
they had not been waived. Accordingly, the Nation and the Department of
Homeland Security would likely have engaged in extensive consultation
pursuant to Section 106, and entered into a Memorandum of Agreement
outlining the measures the Department would take to avoid, minimize, or
mitigate the adverse effects of the undertaking. With this Memorandum
of Agreement in place, the Nation could have dramatically reduced the
harm caused by the project and preserved more of our cultural resources
for future generations.
Endangered Species Act

Other laws like the Endangered Species Act obligate federal
agencies to, for example, consult and at least consider impacts on
specific species and habitat, that may be crucial to the Nation's
historic and cultural existence. The waiver of all these laws allowed
the Department of Homeland Security to destroy tribal gravesites at
Monument Hill and bulldoze in the area near Quitobaquito Springs,
another site of cultural and religious significance to the Nation,
without any consideration of the impacts to tribal cultural and
archeological resources and sacred sites, not to mention the serious
impacts to environmental resources, including wildlife and habitat of
significance to the Nation.
National Environmental Policy Act

NEPA requires federal agencies to consider the potential
environmental impacts and consequences of their proposed actions before
they make decisions to undertake those actions.\13\ Environmental
effects or impacts are broadly defined to include aesthetic, historic,
cultural, economic, social and health effects, whether direct, indirect
or cumulative (so NEPA sweeps in impacts and consultation under other
statutes like NAGPRA, NHPA and the ESA).\14\ NEPA and its implementing
regulations require that federal agencies, before taking action,
consult with other interested agencies and tribal governments, consider
the affected environment and environmental consequences, document the
analysis of potential impacts in environmental assessments or
environmental impact statements, consider reasonable mitigation
measures to offset or avoid the environmental impacts, and make this
information available to the public for comment before the
implementation of the proposals.\15\ Tribes may participate in the NEPA
process as cooperating agencies, to ensure that tribal resources are
protected.\16\ NEPA also requires the Environmental Protection Agency
to review and comment on environmental impacts described in NEPA
documents and if the analysis is unsatisfactory, refer the matter to
the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ); NEPA also allows federal
agencies involved in the NEPA process to refer matters to CEQ where
there are disagreements with the lead agency about potential adverse
environmental impacts.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ 42 U.S.C. Sec. 4332; 40 C.F.R. Sec. 1500.1-3.
\14\ 40 C.F.R. 1508.1.
\15\ 40 C.F.R. Sec. Sec. 1500-1507.
\16\ 40 C.F.R. Sec. 1501.8, 1508.1(e).
\17\ 40 C.F.R. Sec. 1504.2-3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEPA compliance would have required that the Department of Homeland
Security consider all potential environmental impacts, comments from
the Nation and the public, and mitigation of those impacts, before
deciding to construct a border wall. The waiver of those requirements
allowed the Department of Homeland Security to take action and
recklessly construct that wall with absolutely no consideration of the
impacts to the Nation's cultural, archeological, historic, and other
resources and sacred sites--and no meaningful consultation with the
Nation beforehand.
The Nation underscores that in 2017, the Nation met with senior
Department of Homeland Security officials in Washington, D.C. on two
separate occasions. In both meetings, the Nation reiterated its
opposition to a border wall and requested more information on the
Department's plans to formally consult with the Nation on the
issue.\18\ DHS did not grant the Nation's request for formal
consultation, but rather proceeded with construction without it. The
unnecessary destruction of culturally sensitive and sacred sites was
the result.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ In these meetings, the Nation provided DHS with a copy of a
Resolution enacted by the Tohono O'odham Legislative Council,
Resolution of the Tohono O'odham Legislative Council: Border Security
and Immigration Enforcement on the Tohono O'odham Nation, No. 17-053
(Feb. 7, 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. Are there other sacred sites or resources of
significance to the Nation that could be negatively impacted by
additional border wall construction?

Answer. Aside from the cultural resources previously identified in
Tucson Sector Projects 1, 2 and 3 and Yuma Sector 3, the Nation
anticipates several additional sites and resources will be identified
as future surveys are taken along the Organ Pipe border, and in other
parts of our ancestral territory. We also anticipate frequent
inadvertent discoveries of tribal human remains and cultural objects
throughout the course of the construction project, given the Nation's
extensive history in the region. In light of these concerns, it is
imperative that NEPA, ARPA, NAGPRA, NHPA, and other applicable laws
protecting the Nation's sacred sites and cultural and natural resources
be applied strictly to any future border wall construction to prevent
further irreparable harm.

______

Dr. Gosar [presiding]. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I now recognize Lieutenant Nores for his 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN NORES, LIEUTENANT (RETIRED), SPECIAL
OPERATIONS, MARIJUANA ENFORCEMENT TEAM, CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT
OF FISH AND WILDLIFE, MORGAN HILL, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Nores. Good afternoon, Chairman Gosar and esteemed
Members of Congress. It is an honor to speak with you all today
in our nation's capital, and I am grateful for the opportunity
to speak on a subject we are all very passionate about.
I was a game warden in California for 28 years, part of our
nationwide thin green line of conservation officers protecting
our country's wildlife, waterways, and wild lands. I am also
the author of the book ``Hidden War,'' that goes into greater
detail on today's topic.
The cartels from Mexico, along with other worldwide
transnational criminal organizations, what we call TCOs, have
become the biggest domestic public safety threat and some of
the greatest destroyers of our natural resources throughout
America.
Our first violent encounter with the cartels was during an
allied agency raid on an illegal trespass cannabis grow on
public land in the Silicon Valley foothills, where I was born
and raised. When ambushed by cartel gunmen, my young warden
partner was near fatally shot through both legs by an AK-47.
This was also the first time we would see and learn of the
highly toxic EPA-banned insecticide and rodenticide poisons,
nerve agents, and anticoagulants with trade names like
carbofuran, furadan, and Metaphos being smuggled into the
United States through our southern border by cartel operatives,
along with the massive amounts of water stealing and water
pollution, the anti-personnel traps like Vietnam-era punji pits
throughout some of these clandestine grow sites, and the
killing of numerous wildlife and aquatic species.
These public land grow sites can be as remote as 10 miles
in the back country of a national forest wilderness area or as
close as a few hundred yards from a children's outdoor science
camp and Silicon Valley hillside homes.
After four more officer-involved shootings and other
violent encounters during anti-cartel grow operations, I was
honored to co-develop and lead the Marijuana Enforcement Team,
the MET, in 2013, a specialized tactical unit of game wardens
dedicated to fighting this problem statewide. MET's first 6
years of operations paints a very ominous picture of public
land wild land illegal grow operations. Through 800 missions,
our team eradicated 3 million cannabis plants, most all of
those plants toxically tainted with EPA-banned chemicals;
destroyed 29 tons of processed cannabis for sale on the black
market nationwide; and made 973 felony arrests on growers, many
classified as deportable felons with extensive criminal
histories.
On the environmental damage front, our team removed 450
tons of gross site waste, 455 miles of water-diverting pipe,
756 gallons of illegal and toxic chemicals, and dismantled and
restored waterways being diverted by 793 dams accounting for
millions of gallons of water being stolen from our pristine
wild lands.
Fast forward to today, as we are seeing more black market
cannabis operations on not only public land but on rural
private land tracks, as well, causing just as much if not more
egregious water depletion and environmental destruction
throughout California and other states. These operations are
being run not only by the Mexican cartels, but now dominated by
the Chinese and Hmong organized crime groups. These Asian TCOs
are now smuggling in their own highly toxic grow site poisons.
And because of these grow operations, rural communities are now
experiencing human trafficking, animal cruelty, and
intimidation while being run out of their home towns by cartel
growers, as we witnessed in California's remote Siskiyou County
as just one example.
As poly-criminals, the cartels are involved in more crimes
than just illegal cannabis. These groups are also running the
fentanyl and methamphetamine production that is killing
hundreds of thousands of Americans annually, in addition to
multibillion-dollar human and child sex trafficking operations
throughout our great nation.
Given everything we have seen while combating these
criminal groups, stopping them from operating within America to
poison our citizens, prey upon our children, and destroy our
wild land resources must be a top priority.
Thank you, and happy to answer any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Nores follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lieutenant John Nores Jr. (ret.), California
Dept. of Fish and Wildlife, Marijuana Enforcement Team (MET), Special
Operations
My name is John Nores, and I am a retired special operations game
warden Lieutenant from the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
(CDFW). It was an honor to be a game warden and serve 28 s protecting
our nation's wildlife, waterway and wildland resources and stopping
wildlife and environmental protection law violators was a privilege.
California game wardens are statewide police officers while also
being federally deputized to enforce Federal wildlife protection laws.
I began my journey with the police training academy in 1992 and at that
time I could never have anticipated that the end of my operational
career two decades later would be spent leading a specialized unit of
game wardens dedicated to combating Transnational Criminal
Organizations (TCO's), aka ``cartel'' infiltration of our nation's
pristine public and rural private lands to grow toxically tainted
black-market cannabis for nationwide distribution.
This proved to be true as drug cartel operations within and outside
of our nation's border have become some of the most egregious
environmental and wildlife resource crimes and public safety threats we
have seen throughout America. These crimes are occurring not only on
our border, but throughout the rest of America with many of these
crimes committed by non-citizens here illegally.
Through their use of US EPA banned chemical insecticides and
rodenticides (carbofuran, Metaphos, Q-Furan, etc.) and massive amounts
of water theft (especially alarming during recent peak drought years in
the country) throughout tens of thousands of clandestine cannabis grow
sites on both public and private land, cartel cells are poisoning
waterways, killing numerous wildlife species, destroying wildland
trees, vegetation and grass lands while posing a severe threat to our
public's safety.
The public safety threats posed by these criminal cells are evident
in cartel grow sites we have encountered with firearms, stabbing
blades, and various anti-personal traps (i.e., Vietnam war era punji
pits) as well as toxic poisons and other public safety threats common
throughout these sites.
The cartel's propensity for violence, however, was first witnessed
on a deadly cannabis grow arrest and eradication mission in the Silicon
Valley foothills we conducted with the Santa Clara County Sheriff's
Office on August 5th, 2005.
While entering the grow site, our allied agency enforcement team
was ambushed by cartel gunmen defending their multi-million dollar
complex and a gunfight ensued. A near-fatal bullet from a grower's AK47
struck our young warden teammate, penetrating both of his legs before
an agonizing three hour wait for his helicopter evacuation to the
hospital.
That incident was the first time a law enforcement officer in
America had been hit and nearly killed by a clandestine marijuana
grower's bullet, and our first violent encounter with tactically savvy
cartel operatives from Mexico running their operations in the US, in
this case within the Silicon Valley.
We would have four more officer involved shooting incidents and
numerous other violent encounters with cartel grower groups defending
their black-market cannabis operations throughout California before I
was tasked with co-developing and leading a special operations group of
game wardens within our agency called the Marijuana Enforcement Team
(MET).

Comprised of officers with extensive tactical experience,
wilderness fieldcraft, (stalking, apprehension, and survival skills),
amazing lifesaving apprehension and detection K9 partners, a sniper
unit, national guard, and allied agency law enforcement helicopter
teams, the MET's mission was clear:

Apprehend and prosecute illegal and dangerous growers to
protect our public.

Eradicate their black market (in many cases poisonous and
highly toxic) crop before reaching the national black
market.

Environmentally restore illegal outdoor trespass grow
sites by removing water diversions, restoring waterways,
removing grow site poisons, encampments, and other waste to
reclamate the site back to its natural state on pristine
public and private lands.

I led the MET until operational retirement in December 2018 and
between July 2013 and December 2018, our documented production levels
paint an ominous picture during those first five years:

800 arrest, eradication, environmental reclamation
missions.

Destroyed three million toxically tainted cannabis plants.

Destroyed 58,677 pounds (29 tons) of toxically tainted
processed cannabis for sale and distribution.

Made 973 felony arrests (approximately 90% of those
arrests made on cartel or cartel affiliated Mexican
nationals operating in the US illegally).

Seized and destroyed 601 firearms.

Removed 899,945 pounds (450 tons) of grow site waste and
other pollutants.

Removed 2.35 million feet (455 miles) of irrigation pipe.

Removed 91,728 pounds (46 tons) of fertilizers.

Removed 756 gallons of illegal toxic chemicals.

Dismantled 793 water stealing dams from these clandestine
grow complexes with these dams (and many other illegal
cannabis water diversions) depleting billions of gallons of
water during California's peak drought period.

Having seen numerous cartel generated public safety, wildlife, and
waterway destruction threats in my home state of CA for decades, it was
not until February 2020 that I would witness these same threats on and
near our remote southern border. While hosting and producing the pilot
film for our Thin Green Line documentary series we were big game
hunting on a remote 50,000-acre ranch near Candelaria, Texas. Our
outfitters for that project were well aware of the cartel trafficking
routes through this ranch, having had several violent encounters with
trafficking groups moving drugs and people into the US through the
property.
During filming, we witnessed and documented canyonland caves on the
property being used for cartel trafficking way-stop camps, all littered
with trash, human excrement, other waste, and graffiti delineating gang
and/or cartel group affiliation. When contacted by a border patrol
helicopter shortly after this find we learned that approximately 20
cartel affiliated drug and human traffickers were being pursued by
border agents on another area of the ranch. I was informed by the
border patrol pilot that these trafficking operations through the ranch
(and many other ranches along that area of the border) were happening
weekly, and often more frequently.
While our MET unit's production figures between 2013-2018 and the
trafficking activity we witnessed on the Texas/Mexico border are
alarming, we must be cognizant of the disturbing reality this relates
to today. These statistics were generated during a period when some
form of border security measures was in place, and more were in the
works in an effort to slow down TCO members from entering and
committing crimes throughout the US. Now five years later and lacking
any effective border security policy and the recent expiration of Title
42, our border has never been easier to cross with threats to our
public's safety and wildland and water resources continuing to
escalate.
I witnessed this first-hand in May 2022 when being interviewed for
and assisting on the production of Daily Caller's Narcofornia
documentary film in northern California's Siskiyou County. One of the
most remote and pristine counties on the west coast, Siskiyou County
contains a handful of small towns comprised of families that have lived
there for generations. Livestock ranching, agricultural farming, trade
jobs and a love for community prevail throughout the region.
Shortly after California's new recreational cannabis regulations
under Proposition 64 were passed in 2016 that demographic began to
change. While Prop 64 was hailed as a law to eliminate the black market
and drive the cartels out of the weed market, the new law has done just
the opposite. With unregulated outdoor public and private land cannabis
production now watered down from a felony to a misdemeanor (and bumped
down from a misdemeanor to an infraction for juvenile offenders) under
the new law, the cartels have faced little, if any, penalties for mass
producing illegal cannabis for our nation's black market. This law
structure is incentivizing illegal cannabis production for a lucrative
nationwide black market while driving legitimate and environmentally
regulated cannabis growers out of business.
This has led to massive increases of unregulated private land grow
sites throughout California and other states now dominated by the Asian
(Chinese and Hmong) crime groups. According to my colleagues at the
Drug Enforcement Administration, and just like Mexican cartel
operatives, many Chinese nationals are currently entering the US
through the flooded open border to conduct crimes for their
organization.
These illegal Chinese cannabis production operations are not only
widespread throughout California but other states including Oklahoma,
Oregon, and Maine, with diverted and stolen water used for their black-
market plants. We are also seeing new Chinese poisons that are being
smuggled across the border and may be even more toxic than the
Carbofuran type insecticide poisons traditionally used by the Mexican
cartels with widespread human trafficking and coerced labor of grow
site workers (primarily Mexican and Chinese nationals) throughout these
private land sites being the norm.
While raiding grow sites throughout Siskiyou County with the
Sheriff's Department we learned of approximately 10,000 illegal,
outdoor private land grow complexes that have taken over the rural
county. These grow sites are depleting millions of gallons of above
ground and under-ground water table resources daily and stealing city
water supplies for their grow operations. We saw numerous well drilling
rigs and illegal wells throughout these grow complexes along with tons
of trash, waste, and other pollutants in and around pristine streambeds
adjacent to these sites.
Very alarming were the thousands of gallons of unknown chemical
poisons in 55-gallon drums at every grow complex and the Tyvek hazmat
like suits and respirator mask systems within each site. The growers
were using these suits when spraying or smudge pot burning these
insecticide poisons onto their cannabis plants indicating the toxic,
and potentially deadly, nature of this cannabis reaching our nationwide
black market.
Many Siskiyou County farmers, ranchers and other community members
have been threatened with violence by cartel growers to look the other
way as their farm and ranch water supplies are now being depleted and
emptied by these criminal groups. Feeling over run and in danger, many
long time Siskiyou County community members have moved out of the area.
Other crimes we saw throughout these grow operations included human
trafficking, animal cruelty, water pollution and streambed alteration
to name a few.
These travesties are not isolated to this specific region. Cartel
generated crimes are occurring far beyond our northern and southern
borders in every state and impacting us all. While I have outlined the
wild land, waterway and wildlife resource crimes engendered by these
criminal groups and the associated dangers to our public's safety from
my experiences, we must remember that these TCO's are poly-criminals
whose organizations engage in other damaging crimes beyond toxically
tainted black market cannabis production.
DEA officials point out that the Mexican cartels (Sinaloa and
Jalisco New Generation) are now partnered with the Chinese cartels to
the benefit of both organizations. Chinese crime groups supply the pre-
cursor chemicals the Mexican cartels need to produce and distribute
fentanyl and meth-amphetamine killing hundreds of thousands of
Americans annually, while the Chinese have virtually taken over the
black market cannabis trade using America as the middle man to launder
billions of untraceable cash dollars (https://youtu.be/
xMsLDv4M0VM?si=Bkk8Iq HS5F4DEZsH).
In all cases our nation's people and our pristine wildland,
waterway and wildlife resources are poisoned and destroyed in the
process. Even more disturbing is the multi-billion-dollar human and
child sex trafficking networks these TCO's are running not only
throughout America but across the globe and growing rapidly.
With growing awareness of these embedded cartel crimes, I am
witnessing more interest and outrage from fellow Americans like never
before as evident from a 100 times wider distribution rate of the 2022
second edition release of my latest book, Hidden War compared to
distribution levels of the first edition published in 2019. High reach
public figures like Joe Rogan are alarmed and networking these issues
in an effort to make Americans aware of the criminal activities
transpiring across our nation and their support and passion is
inspiring.
Given everything we have seen while combating these criminal
groups, stopping TCO's from operating within America to poison our
citizens and to prey upon our children must be a top policy priority.
With the doorway for these groups to begin operations throughout our
nation is our border, that door must be closed and controlled
carefully.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Cartel gunman in national forest grow complex

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Carbofuran grow site poisoned Mountain Lion

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Cartel grower with poisoned golden eagle

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mexican cartel EPA banned grow site poisons

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Vietnam era anti-personnel punji pit in National Park

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Outdoor cartel grow site in state park

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mexican cartel grow--public river water stealing

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Northern CA National Forest cartel grow site waste

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Tyvek poison protection suit in Chinese private land outdoor grow
site

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mexican cartel gunmen in outdoor grow complex--CA

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Cartel grow--EPA banned poison killed grey fox

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

One of several new and highly toxic Chinese grow site poisons

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Massive cartel illegal private land cannabis complex--LA County

Note: Each red circle is a water truck pumping in stolen water with
trucks running 24/7

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Poisoned water and illegal well drilling operation on private land
cartel grow site

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hidden War Edition 1--Forward by Congressman Jared Huffman

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hidden War--Updated Edition 2--Forward by Jack Carr

______

Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. I am now going to go to
questions from the dais. We are going to start with the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Axelrod, the Biden administration hasn't conducted
public notice and comment periods under the Administrative
Procedure Act before taking many actions that have opened the
southern border and damaged our environment. Why does a rancher
who wants to graze 100 cattle on public land need to go through
some sort of NEPA process, but the Administration can decide to
let millions of people cross through our public lands on the
border without any NEPA process at all?
Ms. Axelrod. Thank you. That is a very good question. I
mean the answer is really that nobody has made them.
When NEPA was first passed in 1970, it contemplated
thinking about the environmental impacts of people coming into
the country, the population growing. And very early on, people,
a lot of cases said, yes, population growths are what we have
to think about. Obviously, immigration is part of this.
But no one sued. So, when NEPA first started being enforced
it was because people started suing. And a lot of environmental
groups sued over atomic energy. And the initial response from
an agency is, like, well, we don't really need to do it. And
the court said, ``No, you need to do it. If there is a big
environmental impact, you need to do something.''
But what happened was INS said, and before Homeland
Security, the Department of Homeland Security was INS. So, INS
promulgated NEPA procedures, which every agency has to do, as
mandated by law. And INS said, ``I think all of our NEPA
process is if we build a detention center, because then we are
building a building. So, we have to think about the
environmental effects of the building.''
Well, NEPA doesn't say you do NEPA if you build a building
or you lease a building. It says you do NEPA if you affect the
environment. And in 2003, the Department of Homeland Security
replaced INS and it later developed NEPA procedures. And its
NEPA procedures don't say anything about immigration at all.
They don't even think about it, even though it is a large part
of their mandate and it is one of the most environmentally
impactful mandates. So, basically, they just don't do it and
they should.
Mr. Collins. What did the Administration say in response to
the comment that it needed to do NEPA analysis in the few times
it did conduct one for immigration policies, maybe such as the
new rule on asylum?
Ms. Axelrod. Yes. They used to just ignore it altogether.
When people started to comment, they started to actually reply
in the administrative process. And what they would do was they
would cite a categorical exclusion, which is in the NEPA
process, where you say this category of actions doesn't need
NEPA.
So, they would say, ``Well, we don't really think you need
to do NEPA on immigration because it is impossible to predict
the effects of it. It would require a lot of speculation.''
Well, OK, that is what NEPA is for.
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Ms. Axelrod. NEPA is for doing the analysis when you don't
know what the effects are going to be.
Mr. Collins. Right.
Ms. Axelrod. Of course, it is extremely predictable in this
case. With these, if you open the border, it is extremely
predictable that you will have environmental effects. I don't
think anyone can really listen to what we hear today in a
hearing and say there are no environmental effects to this,
this is nothing. But they say, ``Well, you know, we don't know.
We are not really sure.''
Mr. Collins. Yes, I think you can even see that. Everybody
can see the environmental effects. Thank you.
Lieutenant Nores, you mentioned the cartels in black market
cannabis production are shifting significantly from public land
operations to rural private lands on the West Coast. Why the
recent shift?
Mr. Nores. Yes, thank you, Congressman. The shifts largely
come from our regulation structure in California under
Proposition 64. That regulation structure for regulated
cannabis recreational use has been in place since 2016, and we
are on our 7th or 8th year of it. And because under Prop 64 we
lowered the penalty for outdoor trespass growing or even
private land growing illegally by these cartels, we lowered it
from a felony to a misdemeanor and for a juvenile offender an
infraction, which basically put very little deterrent bite in
growing illegal cannabis anywhere in our private or public
lands.
So, now the cartels are basically going to private lands,
where they don't have to go as far into the woods, if you will,
in the backcountry, and just putting thousands and thousands of
grows, like in Siskiyou County that we referenced that
Congressman LaMalfa also mentioned in his question previously.
And at this point now we have a lot of enforcement action
out that my previous agency is working hard through their
cannabis enforcement program to stop, as well as other
agencies. But it is a matter of numbers and playing whack a
mole. We are just outnumbered and really outresourced from the
standpoint of these private land grows because of an
incentivized black market through the new law.
Mr. Collins. Right. OK. I know I am over.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Collins. Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Grijalva, the
Ranking Member of the Full Committee, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Axelrod, I agree with you on the sanctity of NEPA, I
really do. I think that is fundamental to many things, to
transparency and to the public. And the fact that Biden in this
latest fence wall construction waived 18 laws, including NEPA,
I opposed that, and I feel that a process with NEPA would have
been appropriate and necessary regarding the airfield, because
that is the sanctity of that law.
Do you specify it just to the issue of population and
immigration, or is NEPA the broader concept that I am talking
about right now?
Ms. Axelrod. NEPA is not just population growth. NEPA
applies to any action that is likely to have a major
environmental impact. So, the fentanyl coming across the
border, I mean, when it comes to the border, the people coming
across the border have immediate physical impacts, but they
also have impacts when they----
Mr. Grijalva. So, we shouldn't waive or affect NEPA with
regard to that important legal process and public process when
it comes to the siting of a mine, the permitting of particular
drilling and extraction, the building of a wall.
Ms. Axelrod. Well, I am a lawyer, so I am talking about
what is legal and what is not legal. In the law we have been
given, all administrations have been given the right to waive
NEPA if they build a wall because of the immediacy of the
problems, including environmental problems of the southern
border being open. So, the Illegal Immigration and Nationality
Act said yes, you can waive it, but it would apply if not
waived, of course.
Mr. Grijalva. Ms. Axelrod, I have 5 minutes, and I
apologize if I am being curt, but Ms. Axelrod, you are with the
Center for Immigration Studies. You are aware that they are
labeled by the Southern Poverty Law Center as a hate group?
Ms. Axelrod. A lot of places are labeled as a hate group by
the Southern Poverty Law Center because it seems to be that it
labels places that disagree with them politically as hate
groups. That is their opinion. I mean, they have been sued over
it, and they have lost, actually, in court, for some of the
people they have named hate groups.
Mr. Grijalva. Well, the label was because of repeated
circulation of White nationalists and anti-Semitic writers in
its weekly newsletter and the commission of a policy analyst
who had previously been pushed out of the Conservative Heritage
Foundation for the embrace of racist pseudoscience. The
development, its historical association, and the record of
publishing reports that hype the criminality of migrants were
one of the reasons they were labeled. I am sure you are aware
of that.
Ms. Axelrod. I am aware that a lot of people who can't deal
with the fact that it is very clear that there are
environmental impacts of immigration----
Mr. Grijalva. Mr. Chairman?
Ms. Axelrod [continuing]. Instead of dealing with that and
dealing with the fact that the Biden administration----
Mr. Grijalva. Mr. Chairman?
Ms. Axelrod [continuing]. Has been breaking the law,
instead of dealing with that want to call names. I am aware of
that.
Dr. Gosar. The gentleman is trying to reclaim his time.
Mr. Grijalva. I am not a lawyer, but I think consistency
would be important for your presentations before Congress.
Ms. Axelrod. I think consistency would be important----
Mr. Grijalva. Mr. Chairman----
Ms. Axelrod [continuing]. For people who say that they care
about the environment, but don't want to do NEPA.
Dr. Gosar. It is the gentleman's time.
Mr. Grijalva. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for being
here again.
The O'odham Nation and its relationship to the two sites
that you mentioned and the cultural resources and the
protection of those sites going forward as a sovereign nation,
how would you best recommend to Congress about that relation of
consultation, about that relation of the trust responsibility,
and where the Nation fits in in any discussion, given a wall,
so that we don't have the same situation, unfortunately, that
cannot be remedied that happened on tribal land and adjacent to
tribal land on Federal land?
Mr. Jose. Committee Chair and honorable Committee members,
Ranking Member Grijalva, thank you for the question.
Where I see going forward in this whole issue here, the
border wall and the immigration, there needs to be true
consultation so that we can avoid and we can address some of
the issues that not only I and other members that have come
before you have talked about, because I believe that that is
what is absent: true consultation to address some of these
issues. You have been hearing about NEPA, so it applies here
but it doesn't apply there. It applies here but it doesn't
apply there. We need to look at that collectively. And the
Tohono O'odham Nation requests a seat at the table.
So, to your question, how do I see it going forward, that
the Nation be included at the table, as stated in the
testimony, that we have a vested interest in this, as well, and
to protect the lands, to protect the people, to protect the
environment, to protect the homeland. If we do that, I believe,
the Nation believes that we can address the issues that become
confrontations.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. Just to add kind of
advice, we need to treat our panelists with respect. I know
that we got a little terse there. So, I would like to make sure
that that is----
Mr. Grijalva. If I in any way insulted, I just tried to get
my time back so that I could ask the Chairman a question, but I
don't think I was rude.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Well, Ms. Axelrod, I want to give you the
permission to talk to me about the Southern Poverty Law Center.
I am like you, I disagree with them. And they hold it against
us for our policy, our beliefs, instead of what we actually
truly are.
Now, I have been labeled every name in the book. I am not
one of those anti-Semites. I am not one of any of those. So,
from that standpoint it is very prejudicial. And I think they
are a very prejudicial group.
Ms. Axelrod. I mean, I am Jewish, so I am really not an
anti-Semite.
Dr. Gosar. Well, thank you very, very much. Would you like
to say anything in short fashion in regards to the Southern
Poverty Law Center?
Ms. Axelrod. I mean, again, I think when people don't want
to deal with the fact that you have a valid point about
immigration, they call you names instead. And I think it is
really unfortunate that instead of actually talking about the
environmental effects of immigration on our country, and the
effects of the border, and instead of doing NEPA, we call
people names who want to bring up important issues.
Dr. Gosar. I agree with you. I absolutely agree with you.
Lieutenant Nores, in talking with you and seeing some of
your pictures and stuff like that, can you elaborate on the
environmental consequences of illegal immigration from the
marijuana operations on the public lands?
Mr. Nores. Yes. I am happy to, Chairman.
The environmental impacts are exponential. Obviously, when
we have these illegal growers in the forest to set up, say, a
public land grow, trees are going to be removed, grasses,
habitat. Creeks are going to be impacted by putting water
diversions in and blocking water that feeds not only wildlife,
but leads to city water supplies at the bottom of canyons.
Also, when we talked about the EPA-banned poisons that I
mentioned in my intro, these are so toxic that a couple
tablespoons of carbofuran poured into a small creek could
destroy that creek for miles, no exaggeration, and kill every
living aquatic within it for that span of distance.
So, what is the aftermath of that? Animals are going to
die. There are potential water pollution sources for small
towns and even large cities. On the private land front, even
though we are not in the remote wilderness anymore in those
pristine areas, we are still in a rural tract where we have
creeks. We also have the underground water supply, the water
table being impacted underground.
A lot of these illegal growers now throughout Northern
California are bringing in illegal well-drilling operators,
equipment, and they are going underground and taking millions
and millions of gallons of water for, say, 10,000 grows as an
approximation in Siskiyou County, and depleting the water
supply so severely that ranchers that have lived in Siskiyou
County for 100 years, farmers and community members in a small,
rural ``American town'' that was safe are losing their water
and having to leave town and move out of the area because of
this infiltration.
So, it is an exponential compilation of environmental
crimes that just continue, besides just dead animals inside a
grow site.
Dr. Gosar. And over the last 3 years have you seen an
increase in that degradation and the wantonness? I mean, we
have cashless bail, we have all sorts of different things. And
particularly with the cartels, they are becoming very
emboldened. Do you see a difference in the application toward
public lands and to the environment?
Mr. Nores. We see a decrease in public lands, from what I
am told by the agencies I worked for previously, over the last
couple of years. But they still are on public lands. Obviously,
national forests, national parks, as our Forest Service and
national park representatives testified to earlier.
But the influx on private land, with as much if not more
environmental damage, is definitely increasing exponentially,
and not only in California. The Asian TCO cartel groups that I
mentioned are in Maine, they are in Oklahoma, they are in
Oregon, as well as California and possibly some other states.
The type of chemicals we are seeing right now that are
coming in that are not from the Mexican cartels coming across
our border, the carbofuran, but these new Chinese chemicals
with labels on them going back to that country in these grow
sites throughout all of California, not just Northern
California, and other states where they are run by Chinese
organized crime groups, primarily, and not necessarily the
Sinaloa Cartel, like historically in Mexico.
So, now we have two different cartels working environmental
crimes throughout the nation because they can get here and they
can operate with impunity the way our current structures are
from cannabis regulation, and also what is happening on the
border and the ease of entry.
Dr. Gosar. It is almost like they are in sync, right?
Mr. Nores. I am sorry.
Dr. Gosar. Like they are in sync, they are coordinating.
Mr. Nores. They very much are. And you brought up a good
point with that coordination. My DEA colleagues have just
exposed the fact that the Sinaloa Cartel and the Asian
transnational criminal organizations are now working together
in certain crimes. China is providing all the precursor
chemicals for fentanyl production and methamphetamine that the
cartels out of Mexico primarily run, and now we are seeing the
private land, especially illegal grow sites going on in private
land, with these new chemicals being run predominantly by the
Chinese and Asian cartels.
Dr. Gosar. Got you.
Mr. Nores. In a switch.
Dr. Gosar. I just have a few seconds. Chairman Jose, tell
me, you have infrastructure aspects of a road close to the
border. How does that infrastructure differ from a fence? And
what kind of degradation do we get from car traffic on those?
Can you give me an idea of what the difference is?
Mr. Nores. I am sorry, are you talking to----
Dr. Gosar. No, I am talking to Chairman Jose.
Mr. Jose. Chairman, thank you for the question.
The Tohono O'odham Nation has an agreement with the
Department of Homeland Security to maintain that road on the
border. And it is fairly maintained.
The other roads on the Tohono O'Odham Nation that are
traveled by the Border Patrol and others are not maintained.
So, the areas that are being patrolled are not on the border.
They are off the border. I drive the border. I was just on the
border Sunday. There is not a human wall on the Tohono O'odham
Nation. There is a vehicle barrier. There are migrants coming
up, there is illegal activity coming up. But the majority of
that stuff is coming through the ports of entry or the places
where there is a wall, not on the Tohono O'odham Nation.
Is there some coming across? Yes. The road is somewhat
maintained along the border, but the Border Patrol is not
patrolling the border.
Dr. Gosar. Well, so you say that the fentanyl and these
chemicals are coming through the ports of entry, but we don't
know what we don't know. I mean, we have 155 this year alone,
terrorists on the terrorist watch list. We have 155. And those
are the ports of entry. We know all these gotaways, do you
think most of these people on the terrorist watch list want to
be caught? They do not.
That is why we extrapolate. And even what we found, even in
the ports of entry, this fentanyl can kill the population of
Arizona time and time again, all of us, so I just want to make
sure that everything is in proper perspective.
My time is up. I now acknowledge the Chairman for the Full
Committee, Mr. Westerman, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Gosar. And, again, thank
you to the witnesses.
Lieutenant Nores, I am fascinated by the work that you have
done. I have been to tribal land. I have heard talk about these
grow sites. I have read about it in other places. I am quite
surprised that it is not more publicly known, that the press
hasn't done more to get the word out on this, and it would make
an interesting documentary, I think, to see how these cartels
are operating on U.S. soil.
I have flown in helicopters over the border and miles off
the border. I have seen the sites where cartels are operating
and the smuggling operations. And it is really eye opening to
me, even knowing what is happening, that these cartels are
operating like this on our side of the border.
How do you respond to Americans who are not living near
unregulated private or public land grow operations and do not
see the direct cartel threats?
Why should this be a priority issue?
Mr. Nores. Thank you, Congressman, especially for your
interest in it. And I agree, we aptly named the new book
``Hidden War'' because so many people don't know the depth
throughout America of what these cartels are doing.
And what we have seen at this point is not everybody is a
cannabis user in America. Not everybody lives next to an
illegal grow site, even a rural private land grow site or maybe
deep into the national forest. What we need to remember is this
cannabis that is coming from these transnational criminal
organizations, these cartels, has these EPA-banned poisons on
it, and they are not washing that stuff off. They are not
worried about health and human safety.
So, these criminal groups, that marijuana is going out to
the masses on a black market in almost every state in the
Union, even though those people may not live next to that grow
site. They could possibly be affected by consuming an
inorganic, unregulated cannabis product.
The other thing we need to remember is, with the human
trafficking, the fentanyl crisis, and methamphetamine, like we
have talked about throughout the day with various witnesses,
that affects everybody. That is in all 50 states. And while
illegal cannabis may not be grown in all 50 states by the
cartels, that other stuff is happening.
So, this is a domestic problem that I think we need to
handle as a complete priority, and look at the cartels as poly-
criminals, as they are defined, and not just cannabis, or human
trafficking, or fentanyl, or gun-running, but really the
biggest domestic threat I believe we have in America that needs
to be handled like anything we would consider a national
security issue harming our people.
Mr. Westerman. I appreciate your work on that. I want to
ask one other just quick question about it before I move on.
From what I understand, some of these chemicals, pesticides
or insecticides, herbicides, the things that they are using, if
the farmers back in my district wanted to get them to grow a
legal crop, they would have no access to it, nor should they
have access to it. That is the kind of chemicals that we are
talking about.
Mr. Nores. We indeed are, Congressman. These are chemicals
that were made in the 1940s and 1950s. There are nerve agents
in them, there are anticoagulants. They are very effective at
keeping rodents, insects, pretty much anything off of a
marijuana plant that a cartel crime group would not want to
have their plant infringed for the profit loss.
What we need to remember, though, is when EPA got their
technology up to study these chemicals that were legal in
America at one time, they realized that, when properly used,
they were still too toxic for human use and consumption on our
fruit crops, on our agricultural products.
And keep in mind one bottle or one 12-ounce crystalline
powder container of carbofuran was made to be diluted into
5,000 to 6,000 gallons of water before it was put on our
American agricultural crops, and EPA determined that that was
too toxic. The growers we see using this stuff literally have
5-gallon backpack sprayers, and they pour bottles of this stuff
into that backpack sprayer and put it on the cannabis, they put
it in the groundwater below, they put some of it in tuna cans
and other little traps to have animals suck in and poison them
so they don't infringe upon their cash crop.
And these new Chinese chemicals are mind blowing. We are
just finding out in the last couple of months that they are not
just spraying them and diluting them with a liquid. They are
actually pouring them into paint cans, mixing them up and
burning them in smudge pots. And these smudge pots give off a
smoke aroma inside an enclosed grow house, like a hoop house,
which is obviously much more contained than being in the
outdoor, pristine woods of, say, a grow in a national forest.
And this stuff is just nasty.
We are seeing Tyvek suits that the growers are using with
the fitted masks and full rebreather, ventilated filters
similar to or actually a hazmat suit----
Mr. Westerman. I can see you are passionate about that. I
hope you will keep telling your story, and I hope we can help
tell that story from this Committee and here in Congress.
I am almost out of time. I had more questions. But Chairman
Jose, I just have to ask you. If I have problems with Ranking
Member Grijalva, can you help me out with that?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Westerman. That was a yes.
I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the Chairman.
You came a long way. One of my questions that I have, one
last question, what was the question you wanted to have been
asked, and what is the answer?
I will start with you, Ms. Axelrod.
Ms. Axelrod. Well, I guess I wanted to have people ask me
what could be done to force the Administration to start
following NEPA instead of ignoring it so much.
And I think one thing that could be done is it could be
clarified that Americans really are harmed by immigration in
terms of standing, and that they are harmed by the illegal
immigration, and that the DHS, their procedures really are
inadequate because they have NEPA procedures that just don't
describe immigration whatsoever at all. And they just say,
``Well, those aren't really our procedures, they are not
binding.'' They just escape by saying, ``Well, you can't prove
that any one thing we did caused this problem because we did so
many things. So, you can't prove it was this or that, and you
can't sue on all of them together.''
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Ms. Axelrod.
Chairman Jose, what was the question you wanted to be asked
and what is the answer?
Mr. Jose. Honorable Chairman, distinguished members of the
Committee, the question I was hoping to get was, ``Chairman
Jose, what would you do to address the border issues?''
And my response would be if I could have a magic wand, and
I could wave it across the United States and have the United
States kick its drug habit, that would be partially to satisfy
some of the border issues.
The second thing I would do with that magic wand, I would
wave that magic wand across and create true immigration reform.
I think if we addressed those two things, which are
attainable, which are doable, we can address the majority of
the border issues. Thank you for the question.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Chairman.
Lieutenant, what was the question you wanted asked that
wasn't asked, and what was the answer?
Mr. Nores. I guess the question really is, for me, it is
first a statement of appreciation for taking the time to
address this issue, for bringing it to the light, taking the
hidden war and exposing it into the light that we are facing
throughout America.
And I would just ask each and every one of you to take what
we have discussed today, and I know everybody is, and make it a
national priority. Let's educate and make this not a hidden
war. Let's make this common knowledge to the American public.
Let's look at it as a national security issue. Let's look at
drug abuse, and basically the demand for some of these drugs
and some of the commodities that the cartels are making not
millions, but billions of dollars off of us Americans, while
using our country basically as a stomping ground to run their
criminal enterprises at the demise of the American public.
And I just thank everybody listening today that we can do
something with that moving forward, and hope we can.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. I thank the witnesses for their
testimony, and the Members for their questions.
The members of the Committee may still have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we ask that you respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. on October 23. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for their responses.
If there is no further----
Mr. Grijalva. I have a question for my two colleagues.
Dr. Gosar. Go ahead.
Mr. Grijalva. Are we going to vote again on the Floor or
should we make other plans, Westerman?
Mr. Westerman. We will vote on the Floor some time. I don't
have any----
Mr. Grijalva. Maybe today? Maybe tomorrow?
Dr. Gosar. Definitely probably tomorrow, but maybe tonight.
Mr. Westerman. Say tomorrow.
Mr. Grijalva. Yes, we should all take a deep breath for a
little while.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Gosar. With that in mind, this meeting is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 4:49 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
Government Accountability Office

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement
regarding our work on cultural and natural resource impacts from border
barrier construction along the U.S. southwest border. To help address
illegal cross-border activity, the federal government has constructed
hundreds of miles of physical barriers along the southwest border in
recent decades, including on federal lands managed by the Department of
the Interior where important cultural and natural resources are
located. These resources include sacred sites for tribal communities,
as well as the habitats of dozens of threatened and endangered species
of animals and plants. Federal and tribal lands make up a total of 760
miles, or approximately 40 percent, of the nearly 2,000-mile border.
In January 2017, an executive order directed the Secretary of
Homeland Security to immediately plan, design, and construct a
contiguous wall or other impassable physical barrier at the southwest
border.\1\ In response, the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS)
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) initiated the Border Wall
System Program to replace and construct new barriers along the
southwest border. In 2019, the President declared a national emergency
that directed the Department of Defense (DOD) to provide additional
support to CBP efforts.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Border Security and Immigration Enforcement Improvements, Exec.
Order No. 13767, Sec. 4, 82 Fed. Reg. 8793, 8794 (Jan. 30, 2017)
(issued Jan. 25).
\2\ Declaring a National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border
of the United States, Pres. Proclamation No. 9844, 84 Fed. Reg. 4949
(Feb. 20, 2019) (issued Feb. 15).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS and DOD used legal authorities to waive various cultural and
natural resource-related laws in constructing border barriers from
January 2017 through January 2021.\3\ Within DOD, the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers (USACE) was tasked to help expedite the construction of
border barriers using billions of dollars in DOD funding made available
following the National Emergency Declaration. A presidential
proclamation paused construction in January 2021.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The laws DHS waived included, but were not limited to, the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), Endangered Species
Act, Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act), Clean Air
Act, National Historic Preservation Act, Migratory Bird Treaty Act,
Archeological Resources Protection Act, Paleontological Resources
Preservation Act, Safe Drinking Water Act, Solid Waste Disposal Act,
and the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. See
e.g., 84 Fed. Reg. 52118 (Oct. 1, 2019). The laws DOD waived included:
NEPA, National Historic Preservation Act, Endangered Species Act,
Migratory Bird Treaty Act, Migratory Bird Conservation Act, Eagle
Protection Act, Clean Water Act, Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act,
and the Clean Air Act.
\4\ Termination of Emergency With Respect to the Southern Border of
the United States and Redirection of Funds Diverted to Border Wall
Construction, Pres. Proclamation No. 10142, 86 Fed. Reg. 7225 (Jan. 27,
2021) (issued Jan. 20). This proclamation also revoked Executive Order
13767, which called for construction of a border wall.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My statement is based on our September 2023 report entitled
Southwest Border: Additional Actions Needed to Address Cultural and
Natural Resource Impacts from Barrier Construction.\5\ It discusses
border barrier installed from January 2017 through January 2021 and its
impacts to natural and cultural resources, and CBP and DOD assessments
of potential impacts of border barrier construction during that
time.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, Southwest Border: Additional Actions Needed to Address
Cultural and Natural Resource Impacts from Barrier Construction, GAO-
23-105443 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 5, 2023).
\6\ In our report, we also assessed actions taken to address
impacts to cultural and natural resources since January 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For that report, we reviewed laws, regulations, and guidance
applicable to the construction of border barriers. We described border
barrier installed by analyzing CBP's geospatial data and overlaying
data from the U.S. Geological Survey. To identify impacts from the
construction and to evaluate CBP's and DOD's pre-construction
assessments, we reviewed agency documents, including assessments, and
interviewed officials from CBP, USACE, Interior and its component
agencies, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest Service. We
also interviewed a nongeneralizable sample of two tribal governments
and five nongovernmental stakeholders regarding their perspectives and
visited project sites along the border in Arizona and Texas. The report
contains a more detailed description of the scope and methodology of
our review. Our work was performed in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards.
Barrier Construction from January 2017 through January 2021 Had Various
Impacts on Cultural and Natural Resources

In our September 2023 report, we found that CBP and DOD, via USACE,
installed approximately 458 miles of border barrier panels across the
southwest border between January 2017 and January 2021.\7\ About 284 of
these miles (62 percent) were on federal lands, including those managed
by the National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and the
Forest Service, according to CBP data. For example, the agencies
constructed 187 miles of barrier panels across federal lands in
Arizona, more than in any other state, including through Organ Pipe
Cactus National Monument, San Bernardino National Wildlife Refuge,
Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge, and Coronado National Forest.
Most of the barrier miles that the agencies planned to construct with
DOD funding were on federal lands because selecting those locations
expedited the contracting and construction process (see fig 1).\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Border barrier panels refer to the vertical pedestrian barrier
component of CBP's border barrier system. CBP's full barrier system
included pedestrian barrier panels--consisting of 18- to 30-foot-tall
concrete-filled steel bollards--and other attributes such as lights and
sensors. In some cases, the barrier system also included features such
as roads or levees. In the report, we referred to border barrier panels
because most of these miles represented the installation of barrier
panels rather than the completion of the entire CBP barrier system.
\8\ See GAO, Southwest Border: Schedule Considerations Drove Army
Corps of Engineers' Approaches to Awarding Construction Contracts
through 2020, GAO-21-372 (Washington, D.C.: June 17, 2021). We have
previously reported that barrier construction on federal lands allowed
CBP and DOD to proceed without the government first having to acquire
real estate from private landowners--a process that could take years,
according to CBP officials. GAO, Southwest Border: Information on
Federal Agencies' Process for Acquiring Private Land for Barriers, GAO-
21-114 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 17, 2020).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsNotes: This figure shows locations of miles of border barrier
panels installed from 2017 through January 2021. It does not include
locations of miles of barriers installed prior to 2017. Tribal lands
are American Indian Reservations-Federal and American Indian Trust
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Land, as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau.

The agencies installed pedestrian barrier panels (rather than
vehicle barriers) for any project initiated as part of the border
barrier system after 2017.\9\ According to CBP data, more than 80
percent of the miles of pedestrian barrier panels installed replaced
previously existing pedestrian or vehicle barriers. Our 2023 report
includes additional details about the barrier panels installed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Vehicle barriers are typically about 3 feet tall with wide
enough openings to allow for wildlife passage.

We also found in our September 2023 report that a variety of
impacts to cultural and natural resources occurred from border barrier
construction, according to federal officials and representatives from
Tribes and stakeholders we interviewed and our observations.
Construction activities, the installed barrier system components, and
incomplete project activities due to the cancellation of construction
contracts after the January 2021 pause contributed to these impacts.
For example, pausing construction and canceling contracts exacerbated
some of the negative impacts because contractors left project sites in
an incomplete or unrestored state as of the January 2021 pause,
according to agency officials. We identified impacts in five broad
categories: cultural resources; water sources and flooding; wildlife
migration and habitats; vegetation and invasive species; and erosion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Examples of these impacts include:

Cultural resources. Some projects caused significant
damage and destruction to cultural resources, including
historic sites and sites sacred to Tribes, according to
tribal and agency officials and four of the five
stakeholders we interviewed. For example, according to
Tohono O'odham Nation officials, a culturally important
site in Arizona was irreparably damaged when contractors
used explosives to clear the way for expanding an existing
patrol road. The blasting damaged portions of Monument
Hill, a site that the Hia-C'ed O'odham, ancestors of the
Tohono O'odham, and other Tribes historically used for
religious ceremonies and that remains important to several
Indigenous communities. According to Tohono O'odham Nation
officials, Monument Hill was the site of intertribal
battles and contains the remains of Apache and O'odham
ancestors who fought in those battles.

Water sources and flooding. The barrier system itself can
disrupt the natural flow of water in heavy rain events.
These rain events can occur regularly along rivers and
drainages near the border, and barrier-related obstructions
can exacerbate flooding, according to National Park Service
and Bureau of Land Management officials. For example,
during construction, the contractor built the patrol road
several feet above the desert floor in Organ Pipe Cactus
National Monument, in some places by as much as 8 feet. As
a result, the raised road acts as a natural dam by impeding
water flow during rain events. During heavy rains, water
typically flows south across the desert into Mexico but now
hits the side of the raised road, according to a National
Park Service official. We observed that, as of May 2022,
more than a year after the pause in construction, the
contractor had not yet regraded the road to allow for
proper drainage.

Wildlife migration and habitats. Installation of
pedestrian barrier has affected wildlife by impeding their
movement across the landscape, including in habitat for
threatened and endangered species, according to tribal and
agency officials and all five stakeholders. For example,
installing the full border barrier system in parts of the
Rio Grande Valley in Texas has fragmented the endangered
ocelot's habitat, according to a joint FWS and CBP
documented agreement. The barrier system has also severed
the animal's travel corridors across the border. These
cumulative impacts have substantially elevated the risks of
the ocelot's extinction in the U.S., according to the
agreement.

Vegetation and invasive species. Clearing lands for border
barrier construction damaged native vegetation. FWS
officials told us that invasive plant species took root at
project sites in Texas, where contractors cleared native
vegetation to create staging areas to store construction
equipment and materials. Although construction contracts
usually included reseeding native vegetation, in many cases
the reseeding did not occur because of the January 2021
pause in construction, according to FWS officials.

Erosion. Barrier construction on steep hillsides--and
erosion control measures that were unfinished when
construction was paused--have led to significant erosion in
many locations, especially because the agencies were unable
to address the erosion for more than a year in many cases,
according to CBP officials. For some projects, contractors
disturbed large tracts of mountainside to install barrier,
build access roads, and clear construction staging areas,
leaving steep slopes unstable. In addition, according to
CBP officials, incomplete erosion control measures along
the barrier and patrol roads threatened the integrity of
the barrier system itself. For example, according to agency
officials, contractors built a large construction staging
area near the top of a mountain in the Pajarito Mountains
on the Coronado National Forest in Arizona, clearing the
mountainside of vegetation that kept the soil in place.
According to a Forest Service official, the entire
mountainside is in danger of collapse (see fig. 2).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsSome officials also reported positive impacts of barrier
construction on natural resources. For example, one Coronado National
Forest official noted that there was less trash and trampling of native
vegetation after the barrier was built. CBP officials also noted that
the addition of barrier in some areas reduced the amount of drug
trafficking across some federal lands, making it safer for patrol
agents to travel along the border.

CBP and DOD Considered Potential Impacts, but Agencies, Tribes, and
Stakeholders Identified Concerns

In our September 2023 report, we found that CBP and USACE, within
DOD, each took steps to assess potential cultural and natural resource
impacts of border barrier construction and actions to help minimize
these impacts for the projects they managed. Because the agencies
waived legal requirements, including cultural and natural resource-
related laws, before constructing border barriers between 2017 and
January 2021, they did not have to conduct any activities required by
those laws, such as environmental assessments required by the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), as amended.
Despite the waived legal requirements, CBP and USACE officials told
us they reviewed studies, conducted some assessments and surveys, and
solicited input from federal agencies and others. Officials from both
agencies said that their approaches differed from what they would have
done if they had been required to comply with NEPA. However, CBP
officials said they tried to meet, as closely as possible, NEPA's
substantive requirements, when time permitted. USACE officials also
said that they took the steps they could, while operating in the best
and fastest way possible.

Land management agency officials, tribal officials, and
stakeholders told us they have concerns regarding how CBP and USACE
assessed potential cultural and natural resource impacts. In some
cases, they noted that they shared these concerns with CBP and USACE.
CBP and USACE officials also noted some concerns regarding the
assessments. These concerns included:

Soliciting and incorporating input. Land management agency
officials, a tribal official, and all five of the
stakeholders we interviewed suggested that CBP and USACE
could improve their approach to soliciting and
incorporating input regarding their assessments, such as by
consulting with Tribes and providing more detailed
information when soliciting input. For example, officials
from FWS and the National Park Service both described
instances when CBP solicited input on maps or project
descriptions but did not include important details that
would allow them to offer anything but general feedback.
According to USACE officials, the short time frames limited
their ability to solicit and incorporate additional input.
CBP officials said that they did not always respond to the
input they received and noted that they could do a better
job of that in the future.

Sufficiency of analysis. One stakeholder and a tribal
official emphasized the importance of studying related
issues before taking action to construct barriers, such as
studying the impact on wildlife from installing lights on
border infrastructure. In addition, some of the CBP and
USACE assessment reports we reviewed identified limitations
of the agencies' own analyses. For example, CBP's
assessment of potential impacts for a project in Arizona
stated that the agency did not survey the project location
at the right time of year to identify many of the
potentially affected species or their potential habitats.
CBP officials explained that they did not undertake some
studies because they would not have completed them in time
to meet construction deadlines.

Flexibility in barrier decision-making. Land management
agency officials and three of the five stakeholders we
interviewed also noted concerns about the agencies' limited
flexibility in decision-making about barrier system
installation, including barrier type (pedestrian or
vehicle) and location. One Interior official said that
having such flexibility could provide more opportunities to
satisfy both CBP's border security mission and the land
management agencies' missions, especially on federal lands
that have been specifically protected for their natural
resource value. CBP officials told us that the 2017
executive order and appropriations acts limited their
flexibility in varying the barrier system components, such
as their ability to install vehicle barrier.\10\ According
to USACE officials, they also did not have flexibility in
choosing barrier system components to install, and the
military construction projects were to comply with CBP's
standard for the border barrier system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ The 2017 executive order directed the planning, design, and
construction of a contiguous and impassable physical barrier, and CBP's
fiscal years 2018 through 2021 appropriations acts directed the agency
to use operationally effective barrier designs that were already
deployed as of May 2017. CBP's fiscal years 2020 and 2021
appropriations also permitted certain operationally effective
adaptations of those earlier designs.

We found that CBP, which has committed to implementing mitigation
actions and maintains its authority to construct border barriers, has
not fully evaluated these concerns to inform future actions or
efforts.\11\ According to key practices that we and others have
identified for both program and project management, it is important to
identify and apply lessons learned from programs, projects, and
missions to limit the chance of recurrence of previous failures or
difficulties.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ As of June 2021, DOD had canceled all military construction-
and counterdrug-funded border barrier projects.
\12\ GAO, Project Management: DOE and NNSA Should Improve Their
Lessons-Learned Process for Capital Asset Projects, GAO-19-25
(Washington, D.C.: Dec. 21, 2018). Project Management Institute, Inc.,
A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK
'

Guide), Sixth Edition (2017); and Implementing Organizational Project
Management: A Practice Guide, First Edition (2014). PMBOK is a
trademark of Project Management Institute, Inc.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CBP officials said they have not evaluated lessons learned
regarding their assessments because they have not completed the barrier
construction projects. They said that they would typically wait to
consider such lessons once that occurs. However, CBP conducted its
efforts to assess the potential impacts of those projects prior to
January 2021, which would allow it to consider any lessons from those
efforts now, even if it is conducting additional work at the project
sites. Moreover, CBP's statutory authority to build border barrier, as
well as to waive laws when doing so, remains in effect, so it is
important to improve its process.\13\ By evaluating lessons learned,
CBP could gain insights for imminent, ongoing, or future barrier
construction efforts conducted using its waiver authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ In October 2023, DHS waived various cultural and natural
resource-related laws again to facilitate installing additional
physical barriers and roads along the border in Texas. Determination
Pursuant to Section 102 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant
Responsibility Act of 1996, as Amended, 88 Fed. Reg. 69,214 (Oct. 5,
2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our September 2023 report, we recommended that CBP, with input
from Interior, DOD, Tribes, and stakeholders, evaluate lessons learned
from its prior assessments of potential impacts. CBP agreed with this
recommendation and stated it would collect information and compile a
lessons learned report by June 2024.
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my statement for the record.

Anna Maria Ortiz,
Director, Natural Resources and Environment

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Gosar

Statement for the Record
Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas
Orlando Escareno, Director of Police

Introduction
Thank you for holding this hearing on important issues pertaining
to environmental damage to federal lands and National Parks caused by
the surge in immigrant and asylum-seeker (collectively, immigrant)
crossings along the U.S.-Mexico border in southern Texas (Southern
Border), particularly including how such crossings affect our tribe,
the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas (Tribe), just outside of Eagle
Pass, Texas.
The Tribe is one of three federally recognized tribes in the State
of Texas (State). Our Tribe is located parallel to the Southern Border,
with a membership of approximately 1,100 tribal citizens, most of whom
reside on our Reservation near Eagle Pass in Maverick County. Our Tribe
also has certain trust and adjoining fee lands that run directly
parallel to the Southern Border, and some of these lands are located
along the Rio Grande river system, and the Tribe also owns fee land for
traditional hunting purposes in Maverick and Kinney Counties. As I
discuss in greater detail below, our Tribal land has been the subject
of a significant number of illegal border crossings by immigrants, many
of whom are leaving behind waste on our lands and whose crossings are
exacerbating the challenges our Tribal law enforcement officers
experience with ensuring public safety.
I. The Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas Police Department

Background. The Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas Police
Department (Tribal Police Department) is certified by the Texas
Commission of Law Enforcement (TCOLE) and works in tandem with the law
enforcement departments of Maverick County, the State of Texas, and the
United States through various partnerships, including cross-
deputization agreements. Our Tribal Police Department also coordinates
with the United States Border Patrol (Border Patrol) to ensure the
safety of our Tribal members and non-Indian communities along the
Southern Border.
The mission of the Tribal Police Department is to protect the lives
and property of the people we serve, to reduce criminal activity, to
preserve the peace and to maintain a safe environment in partnership
with the Indian and non-Indian communities both within and surrounding
the Tribe's reservation. Our Tribal Police Department personnel
includes 30 full time patrol officers, who proudly serve this mission.
However, with only 30 patrol officers and limited resources at our
disposal, our ability to carry out this mission is already severely
strained. In addition to protecting and serving our Tribal members, our
officers are also responsible for serving and protecting the patrons of
our Tribe's Lucky Eagle Casino Hotel, located on our Reservation. This
operation generates necessary tribal government revenue, which our
Tribe puts towards the general welfare of Tribal members per the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act. Through this operation and other ventures of the
Tribe, the Tribe is the second largest employer in Maverick County, one
of the poorest counties in the State. Unfortunately, the surge of
illegal entries at the Southern Border only further hampers our ability
to protect our Tribal members, visitors, and surrounding non-Indian
communities.
II. Illegal Entries on Our Tribe's Lands

Strain on our Tribal Police Department. Over the past six months
alone, our Tribal Police Department officers have responded to 72
reported cases of suspected illegal border crossings and turned over
approximately 356 subjects to Border Patrol. While this may seem like a
small number of crossings relative to the number of crossings in other
border towns and cities, I reiterate that we have only 30 patrol
officers at our disposal to respond to these incidents 24 hours each
day, not to mention all other calls for assistance from our Tribe's
community and the patrons of our Tribal gaming facility. Furthermore,
this is just a six-month snapshot of the situation.
To make matters worse, our Tribal Police Department officers have
access to only squad vehicles with the capacity to carry two
individuals in addition to our officers. Under these circumstances
(i.e. without larger transportation vehicles), to transfer large groups
of illegally-crossing and/or undocumented immigrants to federal holding
facilities, our officers have had to make as many as three trips to
such facilities, with each roundtrip taking approximately 45 minutes of
our officer's valuable time. Time for such trips expand if the
immigrants need medical attention. This all leaves us with fewer
officers on the Reservation to carry out standard police duties.
Moreover, our Tribal Police Department lacks a temporary holding
facility to detain immigrants our officers find crossing through our
Tribal lands. Normally, our Tribal Police Department's procedure when
coming across individuals who illegally enter through the border is to
detain such immigrants until Border Patrol agents can travel to our
Reservation to pick up said immigrants. Typically, Border Patrol agents
will not arrive to our Reservation until approximately three-to-four
hours after one of our officers is able to establish communications
with Border Patrol. In other words, under ordinary circumstances where
one of our 30 Tribal patrol officers detain immigrants, our officers
lose approximately three-to-four hours staying with detained
immigrants, which they could be spending on protecting and serving our
Tribal members and surrounding non-Indian community members. The Tribe
does not have a tribal jail, so we have nowhere to hold individuals
while we await Border Patrol (we are hoping to secure grant funds to
assist the Tribe in building one).
Illegal crossings also put our Tribal members and other community
members at risk when immigrants attempt to or actually flee detention
by our Tribal Police Department officers. While many turn themselves in
(especially families), this is not always the case. There are times
when individual immigrants flee when being approached by our Tribal
officers, resulting in on-foot pursuits of these individuals. This can
expend even more of our officers' invaluable time. In addition, we have
serious concerns about illicit activities some of these individuals,
who have criminal intent, may be committing on our Tribal lands aside
from illegally crossing the border (e.g., human trafficking; drug-
trafficking). We, for example, have concerns that there may be some bad
actors among those crossing, who are using our hotel as a stash house.
Our principal and overarching concern is the protection of our
Reservation, including the safety of our Tribal members and visitors,
and our ability to assist our non-Indian neighbor communities in their
efforts for safety. We are concerned that our Tribal Police Department
will lack the manpower to adequately respond to security risks on our
Reservation when engaging in pursuits of illegally-crossing immigrants,
transporting immigrants to Border Patrol, and having to expend
additional police resources to address increased criminal activity by
certain bad actors among those crossing.

Environmental Damage and Associated Costs. The strain on the
capacity of our Tribal Police Department is but one of the many
negative consequences from the surge in illegal crossings by immigrants
has had on our Tribe. The spike in these illegal entries has also given
rise to environmental and property damage caused by waste left behind
by immigrants as they travel through our Tribe's lands.
It is not atypical for our Tribal members and law enforcement
officers to come across waste discarded by immigrants, including
clothing scraps, used diapers and scattered pieces of plastic, in
various parts of our Reservation. Examples of this can be seen in the
photographs below (titled ``Exhibit A'' and ``Exhibit B''), which one
of our Tribal employees informed me was taken at the Tribe's Pecan Farm
on October 13, 2023:

Exhibit A. Photograph of clothing and plastic waste on the Tribe's
Pecan Farm, taken October 13, 2023.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Exhibit B. Photograph of discarded clothing scraps on the Tribe's
Pecan Farm, taken October 13, 2023.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe Tribe's Pecan Farm Director notified me that in the Tribal
Pecan Farm area, it is not uncommon for employees to come across
clothing waste in grassy areas of the farm, like the trash shown in the
photographs above, which frequently damages farming equipment (e.g.,
clothing scraps lodged in lawn mowers). Similarly, Ricardo Barcena,
Jr., Director, Road & Bridge Department of the Kickapoo Traditional
Tribe of Texas (Road & Bridge Department), has described the increase
in immigrant crossings as leading to what he referred to as a
``crisis,'' in part, because his employees expend significant time
taking measures to avoid machinery damage caused by clothing waste left
by immigrants in grassy areas, which, in turn, delays Road & Bridge
Department projects. He explained that his employees are constantly
picking up clothes in grassy areas to avoid damage to Tribal
equipment--particularly, lawn mowers.

Moreover, because the Tribe does not have an on-reservation
landfill, to properly dispose of the waste, the Tribe must not only
expend funds on Tribal employee labor to collect the waste strewn
across our Tribal lands but also on transporting the waste from Tribal
lands to landfills in off-Reservation locations and paying the fees
associated with discarding such waste.

While we are unaware of any incidents of immigrants directly
dumping their waste into on-Reservation bodies of water or nearby
bodies of water, members of our Tribe have reported finding waste left
by immigrants either on or near on-Reservation river banks of the Rio
Grande, including wet clothing scraps and used diapers. This could pose
health risks to our Tribal members were such waste to contaminate our
local water supply, which we draw from the Rio Grande.\1\ We note that
we have not gathered data on whether waste disposed by immigrants near
the Rio Grande is contaminating our water supply to the extent such
disposal would actually pose a public health risk, however.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Annual Consumer Confidence Report (CCR) for the period of
January 1 to December 31, 2022, Kickapoo Env'tl Protect. Agency (June
2023) (``Source of Drinking Water . . . The water for the Kickapoo
Traditional Tribe of Texas Reservation is supplied by the City of Eagle
Pass Water Works . . . drinking water plant. This water is surface
water that comes originally from the Rio Grande River.'') (CCR
accessible here); Drinking Water Fact Sheet, World Health Org. (Sept.
13, 2023) (``Microbial contamination of drinking-water as a result of
contamination with feces poses the greatest risk to drinking-water
safety'') (Drinking Water Fact Sheet accessible here).

We also have concerns about environmental damage due to waste
disposal and wear-and-tear from foot-traffic in areas on our
Reservation that have increased cultural significance for the Tribe,
such as our cemetery and our Traditional Home, near an area that
immigrants have been using as a safe haven.
III. Requests for Assistance

To help the Tribe address environmental damage and other related
harms caused by the surge in illegal crossings on our Reservation, we
are asking Congress for funds to assist the Tribe with: (1) procuring
and/or constructing a temporary holding facility to detain immigrants;
(2) procuring a large passenger transportation vehicle (e.g., a van)
and other transit equipment for transporting large groups of immigrants
to Border Patrol facilities, including car seats for transporting
minors; (3) expanding the number of law enforcement officer positions
available in our Tribal Police Department; (4) procuring and installing
surveillance devices along the Southern Border and other parts of our
Reservation that are frequented by illegally-crossing immigrants; and
(5) expenditures on services arising from properly disposing waste left
behind by immigrants.
Conclusion
We greatly appreciate your attention and commitment to addressing
environmental harms caused by illegal crossings through our Tribe's
land and other federal lands. Our view is that the individuals who are
fleeing their countries to come to the United States must be treated
humanely while at the same time the rule of law must be followed. We
are happy to assist Border Patrol in the proper processing of these
individuals and to ensure their humane treatment and we look to
Congress to facilitate our efforts. We also look to Congress to help us
acquire the resources we need to continue our stalwart efforts to keep
our Reservation, our Tribal members, and our visitors safe.
Thank you, again, for your consideration of the requests of the
Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. Congress has a duty to fulfill the
federal trust responsibility owed to Tribal Nations in the United
States, which, in this case, coincides with our efforts to keep our
Reservation safe, particularly in light of increased immigrant
crossings of the Southern Border through our Tribe's lands.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

The Extremist Campaign to Blame Immigrants for U.S. Environmental
Problems

Center for American Progress, February 1, 2021 by Jenny Rowland-Shea
and Sahir Doshi

*****

With growing frequency over the past four years, right-wing
pundits, policymakers, and political operatives have fiercely and
furiously blamed immigrants for the degradation and decline of nature
in the United States. William Perry Pendley, who temporarily ran the
U.S. Bureau of Land Management under former President Donald Trump, saw
``immigration as one of the biggest threats to public lands,''
according to an agency spokesperson.
1
A handful of right-
wing anti-immigration zealots, including Joe Guzzardi, have repeatedly
misused data published by the Center for American Progress on nature
loss to make xenophobic arguments for anti-immigration
policies.
2
This so-called ``greening of hate''--a term
explored by Guardian reporter Susie Cagle--is a common refrain in a
wide range of conservative and white supremacist arguments, including
those of Ann Coulter, Fox News host Tucker Carlson, neo-Nazi Richard
Spencer, and the manifestoes of more than one mass shooter.
3

The claim that immigration is to blame for America's environmental
problems is so absurd, racist, and out of the mainstream that it is
easily debunked and tempting to ignore. The scientific community, and
the little research that has been conducted in this area, resoundingly
refutes the premise. Consider, for example, the environmental damage
caused by weak and inadequate regulation of polluting industries; the
destruction of wildlife habitat to accommodate wealthy exurbs and
second homes; the design and propagation of policies that concentrate
toxic poisons and environmental destruction near communities of color
and low-income communities; the continued subsidization of fossil fuel
extraction and trampling of Indigenous rights to accommodate drilling
and mining projects; and the propagation of a throw-away culture by
industrial powerhouses. All of these factors and others cause
exponentially more severe environmental harm than a family that is
fleeing violence, poverty, or suffering to seek a new life in the
United States.
The extremist effort to blame immigrants for the nation's
environmental problems deserves scrutiny--and not merely for the
purpose of disproving its xenophobic and outlandish claims. The
contours, origins, funding sources, and goals of this right-wing effort
must be understood in order to effectively combat it and ensure that
the extremists pushing it have no place in the conservation movement.
The individuals and organizations that are most fervently propagating
this argument come largely from well-funded hate groups that are
abusing discredited ideologies that were prevalent in the 19th-century
American conservation movement in an attempt to make their racist
rhetoric more palatable to a public concerned about the health of their
environment.
While leaders of the contemporary, mainstream environmental
movement in the United States have disavowed this strain of thought and
are working to confront the legacies of colonialism and racism in
environmental organizations and policies, a small set of right-wing
political operatives are trying to magnify overtly xenophobic and false
environmental arguments to achieve specific political objectives. In
particular, these right-wing political operatives and their deep-
pocketed funders are seeking to broaden the appeal of their anti-
immigration zealotry by greenwashing their movement and supplying their
right-wing base with alternative explanations for environmental decline
that sidestep the culpability of the conservative anti-regulatory
agenda. In their refusal to confront the true reasons for environmental
decline, they are hurting the people--immigrants, Indigenous peoples,
and people of color--who bear a disproportionate burden of
environmental consequences and are increasingly the base of the climate
justice and conservation movements.
Contextualizing anti-immigrant thought in environmentalism

Today's right-wing activists who are blaming immigrants for the
destruction of nature are, unfortunately, drawing from and building on
a long and troubling history of racism, colonialism, and xenophobia in
the U.S. environmental movement that harks back to the violent
dispossession of lands from Indigenous tribal nations. To understand
the power and dangers of this extremist movement--and where it diverges
from the current mainstream environmental movement--it is important to
trace the origin of population control, eugenics, and anti-immigration
ideologies within the U.S. environmental movement.
The discredited roots of environmental racism
Some of the earliest and most active proponents of land
conservation in the United States also espoused anti-immigration, white
supremacist, and racist views. For example, Madison Grant--a close
friend of President Theodore Roosevelt and influential voice in species
conservation, including playing a role in protecting the American bison
and California redwood--served as director of the American Eugenics
Society and vice president of the Immigration Restriction
League.
4

Grant played a key role in the passage of a 1924 law restricting
immigration by Asians and Arabs.
5
John Muir, known as the
father of national parks, expressed racism toward Black and Native
Americans and promoted ideas of restricting immigration by
nonwhites.
6

The notion that immigration was to blame for environmental
destruction resurged in the 1970s, just as Europe's population was
plateauing and that of the Global South began to grow. During this
period, many deemed overpopulation-driven resource depletion one of the
largest challenges facing the planet. Paul Ehrlich's 1968 book, The
Population Bomb, which argued that overpopulation would fuel famine and
global upheaval, proved very influential in the environmental movement
at the time.
7
This idea--which ignored the enormous
difference in consumption patterns between countries--reinforced the
idea already floating among U.S. nativists, which falsely associated
global population growth and immigration growth.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, these xenophobic ideas existed
within some environmental nonprofits, including Earth First! and the
Rewilding Institute, both of which were started by extremist activist
Dave Foreman.
8
The environmental argument for anti-immigrant
policies also tracks closely with the Sierra Club's history, and its
association with one person--John Tanton--has had perhaps the most
lasting impact.
9
Tanton, whom the Southern Poverty Law
Center (SPLC) calls ``the racist architect of the modern anti-immigrant
movement'' and who died in 2019, was a Sierra Club official in the
1980s and went on to form many prominent anti-immigration groups,
including many that dabble in environmental messaging.
10

Up until the 1990s, population control was part of the Sierra
Club's core platform. For decades, a faction within the organization--
including Tanton--worked to use the Sierra Club's influence to promote
policies to block immigration and undermine immigrant rights. In 1998,
Tanton and others pushed a vote about whether or not the Sierra Club
would take a strong public stance against immigration. The proposal was
narrowly defeated by the Sierra Club's members, leading to a full
separation from this ideology in the early 2000s.
11
But
Tanton's groups continue to try to influence environmental
progressives.
12

Unfortunately these views still exist within some environmental
groups as well. For example, the Rewilding Institute advocates for
restrictions on immigration into the United States as part of its
stance on global population growth.
3
The group also
maintains a relationship with their founder, Dave Foreman, whose views
on immigration, published in op-eds and books, are far outside the
main-stream, and who is an advisory board member of the SPLC-designated
hate group, Californians for Population Stabilization.
14

Today, as major environmental groups grapple with their own systems
of exclusion and injustice and reevaluate heroes and founders such as
Muir and Roosevelt, the mainstream conservation movement no longer
considers anti-immigrant arguments legitimate or accurate.
15

The `greening of hate'

While the history of this anti-immigrant argument has roots in
environmentalism, today, this line of thinking is primarily propagated
by extremists who are cloaking themselves as conservationists to make
their arguments more palatable. Researchers refer to this phenomena as
the ``greening of hate.''
16
The individuals making these
arguments are backed by many of the most prominent anti-immigration
groups and funders, several of which the SPLC have flagged as white
supremacist hate groups.
Greenwashed anti-immigrant groups and their funders
Groups

Most formal arguments claiming immigrants as the source of
environmental degradation can be traced back to a handful of anti-
immigration groups that are far outside of the mainstream environmental
movement.
Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR). Founded by John
Tanton, FAIR was deemed a hate group by the SPLC because of its ties to
white supremacist groups and eugenicists.
17

Center for Immigration Studies (CIS). Also founded by Tanton, CIS
was deemed a hate group by the SPLC because it repeatedly publishes and
promotes white supremacist and anti-Semitic writers and makes false
claims about the criminality of immigrants.
18

Progressives for Immigration Reform (PFIR). PFIR, also tied to
Tanton, is perhaps the most central organization in the anti-immigrant
greenwashing universe.
19
The group has been flagged by the
SPLC for hosting a ``cynical greenwashing campaign to recruit
environmentalists to the anti-immigrant cause by blaming them for urban
sprawl, overconsumption and a host of other environmental problems.''

20

Californians for Population Stabilization (CAPS). CAPS was founded
by Garrett Hardin, a University of California, Santa Barbara professor
and FAIR board member, who famously wrote the essay, ``The Tragedy of
the Commons,'' which he used to support his ideology of preventing the
``wrong'' people--specifically nonwhite people--from
reproducing.
21
Like many others on this list, the group has
ties to Tanton and was found to have hired white
supremacists.
22

NumbersUSA. Also founded by Tanton, the group is considered a
nativist organization along the lines of FAIR and CIS.
23
Don
Weeden, of the Weeden Foundation, formerly served as the group's
treasurer and on the board of directors and until recently was one of
the group's independent directors.
24

Funders

Colcom Foundation. Based in Pittsburgh, Colcom was founded by
Mellon Bank heiress Cordelia Scaife May, who believed that her life's
purpose was curbing the threat of overpopulation by limiting
immigration to the United States.
25
According to public tax
filings, Colcom is the single-largest funder of anti-immigrant groups
in the United States, giving around $150 million since
2005.
26
The foundation provides the bulk of funding to
Tanton's anti-immigration groups, including PFIR, NumbersUSA, FAIR, and
CIS, along with nominal money for environmental causes. In February
2020, activists protested Colcom, describing it as ``not an
environmental organization that dabbles in white supremacy, [but] a
white supremacist group that dabbles in environmentalism.'' Several
environmental organizations have subsequently severed ties to the
foundation.
27
Colcom Vice President John Rohe, who decades
ago published a book about Tanton, denied activists' claims about the
organization, saying, ``To be concerned about the level of immigrants
due to overpopulation is not anti-immigrant.''
28

Weeden Foundation. Led by Don Weeden, the foundation has provided
funding to CAPS, NumbersUSA, PFIR, FAIR, and CIS, along with
biodiversity and wilderness conservation organizations and projects,
including the Rewilding Institute.
29
Several of its officers
have also been very active in leadership and boards within the anti-
immigration groups that they fund.
30

Foundation for the Carolinas. Despite generally being well liked
for their work to improve economic opportunity in Charlotte and around
North Carolina, the group manages a donor-advised fund that has
funneled money to FAIR, CIS, and NumbersUSA. Between 2006 and 2018, the
foundation gave nearly $21 million in donor-advised gifts to at least
nine anti-immigrant organizations, 85 percent of which went to Tanton-
linked organizations.
31

Anti-immigrant groups cloaking themselves in environmentalism to
push a xenophobic agenda is not new.
32
While their
scientifically meritless arguments are no longer welcome within the
mainstream environmental movement, they continue to fuel the vitriol--
and bad policy decisions, including draconian cuts to immigration
levels, the evisceration of the U.S. refugee asylum systems, and the
separation of families at the border--that hurt legitimate, effective
solutions to the conservation and climate crisis.
33

Racist rhetoric undermines the conservation movement

This small but organized and well-funded fringe of anti-immigration
activists has produced arguments that range from openly bigoted and
racist stereotypes to the more insidious and purportedly science-based
claims about population that resonate with Eurocentric environmentalism
of the 20th century. It bears repeating: These claims do not have the
support of the scientific community, and the little research that has
been conducted in this area resoundingly refutes them.
34
In
fact, the vast majority of behavioral studies demonstrate that
immigrants live more environmentally sustainable lifestyles than
native-born Americans, so much so that immigrant density is associated
with lower carbon emissions.
35

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Population-based arguments against immigration, meanwhile, are
built on a series of flawed assumptions. The first is that the
environmental health of the United States exists in isolation from the
rest of the world, which has never been more untrue than in 2020, as
the country grapples with climate change, the collapse of transnational
migratory species, and a coronavirus pandemic born out of nature
destruction and overexploitation of wildlife in another
continent.
36
The second is that it allows the interests
driving the real problem--overconsumption and unregulated development--
off the hook.
37
For example, corporate interests such as the
oil and gas industry have undue influence on U.S. policy.
38

Per capita, the United States has a greater rate of climate emissions,
air pollution, and nature destruction than most other countries and is
an outlier even among countries with similar standards of
living.
39
Policies aimed at limiting corporate capture and
protecting public health--not curtailing immigration--are the solutions
to these problems.
Polls show that communities of color--to which most immigrants and
second-generation Americans belong--are the most concerned about this
destruction and the likeliest to support policies that would protect
the environment.
40
For example, polls show high Latino
support for conserving water, reducing air pollution, and protecting
wildlife.
41
This comes as no surprise given that communities
of color--especially those that are also low-income--are more likely to
suffer the consequences of unplanned urban sprawl, oil and gas
drilling, deforestation, and pollution.
42
Studies show that
white people contribute disproportionately to the problem of air
pollution, while Black and Latino people are the likeliest to bear the
burden of air pollution where they live.
43
Immigrants, who
contribute less to pollution on average than native-born Americans, are
still disproportionately likely to suffer the consequences of toxic
pollution from industrial polluters.
44
In this context,
genuine environmentalism cannot exclude or antagonize immigrants and
second-generation Americans, who form a core constituency of the
conservation movement.
Instead, this vitriol could actively harm the conservation movement
by alienating and erasing both potential and existing allies, members,
and leaders who are from immigrant backgrounds.
45
For
example, immigrant leaders were central to the labor-driven movement to
ban the use of toxic DDT pesticides in the 20th century.
46

More recently, Asian immigrants in the fishing industry faced the worst
consequences of the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill and participated
heavily in cleanup efforts.
47
At the local level, immigrants
are at the forefront of a range of environmental justice and
conservation efforts, even as they remain under-represented at the
tables of national organizations and government agencies.
48

Moreover, the racist rhetoric that runs throughout the anti-immigration
fringe could undermine the United States' ability to cooperate across
borders with countries that will be key allies in fighting climate
change, conserving biodiversity, and, ultimately, fighting the
ecological degradation and disasters that often force people to flee
their home countries to begin with.
49

One of the most dramatic examples of how greenwashed nativism can
harm the planet is the Trump administration's U.S.-Mexico border wall.
Its construction was not only regarded as ineffective and wasteful but
has also caused immense damage to the environment, including by
blasting mountains, destroying ancient cactus, desecrating sacred sites
of the Tohono O'odham Nation, and disrupting the migration routes and
survival of nearly 100 already imperiled species ranging from jaguars
to monarch butterflies.
50
Notably, the Trump
administration's extensive use of waivers to circumvent environmental
standards and regulations allowed the federal government to destroy
these lands with impunity in the name of immigration
control.
51

Focusing, instead, on the root causes of human displacement and
migration--including those rooted in nature destruction and climate
change--and increasing well-designed legal channels for people to seek
entry to the United States would help U.S. immigration policy become
more humane, more effective, and more environmentally
sustainable.
52
Moreover, the Biden administration has an
opportunity to focus on repairing the cruel and counterproductive
mistakes of the Trump era to establish a working legal immigration
system, asylum process, and pathway to citizenship--all of which will
benefit the U.S. environmental movement.
53

Conclusion

Anti-immigrant sentiments were a staple of mainstream Eurocentric
conservation in the 19th and 20th centuries--but so were eugenics,
unscientific species exterminations, and the purposeful usurpation of
land from Indigenous tribes who often stewarded natural resources more
effectively than the managers who followed. As an examination of
funding sources and policy positions have found, the extremist groups
now hawking misleading and easily debunked green-hate arguments are not
acting in good faith.
Twenty-first century environmentalism is, by necessity, a
multiracial, multi-generational, international, and anti-elitist
movement whose diversity only makes it stronger. It is built of, by,
and for all people--and immigrant-dense communities are its
base.
54
If the evidence of bad actors funding green hate,
the mounting scientific data, and 650 miles of border wall devastation
are not evidence enough, this fact alone should make clear that these
arguments do not belong in the modern environmental movement.
Endnotes

1. Democracy Forward, @DemocracyFwd, October 16, 2020, 10:41 a.m. ET,
Twitter, available at https://twitter.com/DemocracyFwd/status/
1317113444668243968.

2. Joe Guzzardi, ``More Americans = less wilderness,'' Havasu News,
September 22, 2020, available at https://www.havasunews.com/opinion/
joe-guzzardi-more-americans-less-wilderness/article_b4f885d0-fd67-11ea-
8a69-27f96d6e0982.html; Joe Guzzardi, ``Joe Guzzardi: The West is
losing natural area at an alarming pace,'' The Associated Press, March
8, 2018, available at https://apnews.com/article/
c62553be8cd14d9eb665be6a6bd1c4d6; Glen Colton, ``Prevent urban sprawl
with immigration reform,'' November 16, 2020, The Pueblo Chieftain,
available at https://www.chieftain.com/story/opinion/2020/11/16/
columnist-talks-how-immigration-reform-prevent-urban-sprawl/
6314669002/.

3. Susie Cagle, `` `Bees, not refugees': the environmentalist roots of
anti-immigrant bigotry,'' The Guardian, August 16, 2019, available at
https://www.theguardian.com/environ-ment/2019/aug/15/anti.

4. Jedediah Purdy, ``Environmentalism's Racist History,'' The New
Yorker, August 13, 2015, available at https://www.newyorker.com/news/
news-desk/environmentalisms-racist-history.

5. Richard Conniff, ``How a Notorious Racist Inspired America's
National Parks,'' Mother Jones, July/August 2016, available at https://
www.motherjones.com/environment/2016/07/anniversary-national-parks-
racist-history-madison-grant/.

6. Cagle, `` `Bees, not refugees.' ''

7. Charles C. Mann, ``The Book That Incited a Worldwide Fear of
Overpopulation,'' Smithsonian Magazine, January/February 2018,
available at https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/book-incited-
worldwide-fear-overpopulation-180967499/.

8. Cagle, `` `Bees, not refugees.' ''
9 Hop Hopkins, ``How the Sierra Club's History With Immigrant Rights Is
Shaping Our Future,'' Sierra Club, November 2, 2018, available at
https://www.sierraclub.org/articles/2018/11/how-sierra-club-s-history-
immigrant-rights-shaping-our-future.

10. Southern Poverty Law Center, ``John Tanton,'' available at https://
www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/john-tanton
(last accessed January 2021).

11. Michelle Nijhuis, ``Immigration controversy engulfs Sierra Club
board election,'' Grist, March 2, 2004, available at https://grist.org/
article/nijhuis-sierra/.

12. Cagle, `` `Bees, not refugees' ''; Colton, ``Prevent urban sprawl
with immigration reform''.

13. Rewilding Earth, ``Human Population Growth,'' available at https://
rewilding.org/our-programs/population-growth/ (last accessed April
2021).

14. Dave Foreman, ``More Immigration = More Americans = Less
Wilderness,'' Earth Island Journal, Autumn 2013, available at https://
www.earthisland.org/journal/index.php/magazine/entry/foreman/;
Rewilding Earth, ``Dave Foreman,'' available at https://rewilding.org/
dave-foreman/ (last accessed January 2021); Rewilding Earth, ``CAPS
Talks About the New Edition of Man Swarm,'' February 26, 2015,
available at https://rewilding.org/caps-talks-about-the-new-edition-of-
man-swarm/; Californians for Population Stabilization, ``Staff and
Board of Directors,'' available at https://capsweb.org/staff/ (last
accessed April, 2021).

15. Michael Brune, ``Pulling Down Our Monuments,'' Sierra Club, July
22, 2020, available at https://www.sierraclub.org/michael-brune/2020/
07/john-muir-early-history-sierra-club.

16. Betsy Hartmann, ``Conserving Racism: The Greening of Hate at Home
and Abroad,'' January 2003, available at https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/
265045644_Conserving_Racism_The_Greening_of_Hate_at_Home_and_Abroad.

17. Southern Poverty Law Center, ``Extremist Files: Groups,'' available
at https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/groups (last
accessed January 2021).

18. Southern Poverty Law Center, ``Extremist Files: Groups.''

19. Amy Mehta, ``How Anti-Immigration Groups Are Hijacking the
Environmental Movement,'' AlterNet, January 13, 2010, available at
https://www.alternet.org/2010/01/how_anti-
immigration_groups_are_hijacking_the_environmental_movement/.

20. Alexander Zaitchik, ``Anti-Immigrant Groups Continue Greenwashing
Campaign,'' Southern Poverty Law Center, October 8, 2010, available at
https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2010/10/08/anti-immigrant-groups-
continue-greenwashing-campaign.

21. Southern Poverty Law Center, ``Garrett Hardin,'' available at
https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/
garrett-hardin (last accessed January 2021).

22. Mehta, ``How Anti-Immigration Groups Are Hijacking the
Environmental Movement.''

23. Heidi Beirich, ``The Nativist Lobby: Three Faces of Intolerance,''
Southern Poverty Law Center, February 1, 2009, available at https://
www.splcenter.org/20090131/nativist-lobby-three-faces-intolerance.

24. NumbersUSA, ``Independent Directors (as of January, 2020),''
available at https://www.numbersusa.org/about/directors (last accessed
December 2020); The Center for Popular Democracy, ``Report Spotlights
the New York Elites Who Fund Nativist Groups,'' available at https://
www.populardemocracy.org/news-and-publications/report-spotlights-new-
york-elites-who-fund-nativist-groups (last accessed January 2021).

25. Nicholas Kulish and Mike McIntire, ``Why an Heiress Spent Her
Fortune Trying to Keep Immigrants Out,'' The New York Times, August 14,
2019, available at https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/14/us/anti-
immigration-cordelia-scaife-may.html.

26. Anti-Defamation League, ``Funders of the Anti-immigrant Movement,''
January 27, 2014, available at https://www.adl.org/news/article/
funders-of-the-anti-immigrant-movement.

27. Ryan Deto, ``How Pittsburgh's Colcom Foundation is `greenwashing'
its anti-immigrant message,'' Pittsburgh City Paper, March 11, 2020,
available at https://www.pghcitypaper.com/pittsburgh/how-pittsburghs-
colcom-foundation-is-greenwashing-its-anti-immigrant-message/
Content?oid=16919993.
28. Lacretia Wimbley, ``Activists launch campaign against Colcom
Foundation,'' Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, March 5, 2020, available at
https://www.post-gazette.com/local/city/2020/03/05/immigrant-rights-
activists-protest-Colcom-Foundation/stories/202003050139; John F. Rohe,
Mary Lou and John Tanton: A Journey into American Conservation
(Washington: FAIR Horizon Press, 2002).

29. Anti-Defamation League, ``Funders of the Anti-immigrant Movement'';
Earth First! Newswire, ``Dave Foreman still aligning with bigots,''
September 30, 2011, available at https://earthfirstjournal.org/
newswire/2011/09/30/dave-foreman-still-aligning-with-bigots/.

30. The Plot Against Immigrants, ``The Weeden Foundation,'' available
at https://plotagainstimmigrants.com/network/the-weeden-foundation/
(last accessed January 2021).

31. Teo Armus and Ames Alexander, ``Foundation for the Carolinas under
scrutiny over grants to anti-immigration groups,'' The Charlotte
Observer, November 20, 2019, available at https://
www.charlotteobserver.com/news/politics-government/
article237574649.html.

32. Laurie Mazur and Priscilla Huang, ``Leadership, Not Scapegoats,''
Center for American Progress, July 15, 2008, available at https://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/news/2008/07/15/4616/
leadership-not-scapegoats/.

33. Kevin Lynn, ``Jobs, Wages and Immigration,'' April 2, 2013,
Progressives for Immigration Reform, available at https://
progressivesforimmigrationreform.org/labor-economics/.

34. Jorge Madrid, ``From a `Green Farce' to a Green Future: Refuting
False Claims About Immigrants and the Environment'' (Washington: Center
for American Progress, 2010), available at https://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/reports/2010/10/13/8552/
from-a-green-farce-to-a-green-future/.

35. Ibid.

36. Alejandra Borunda, ``The science connecting wildfires to climate
change,'' National Geographic, September 17, 2020, available at https:/
/www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2020/09/climate-change-increases-
risk-fires-western-us; Jim Daley, ``Silent Skies: Billions of North
American Birds Have Vanished,'' Scientific American, September 19,
2019, available at https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/silent-
skies-billions-of-north-american-birds-have-vanished; Sahir Doshi and
Nicole Gentile, ``When Confronting a Pandemic, We Must Save Nature to
Save Ourselves'' (Washington: Center for American Progress, 2020),
available at https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/green/reports/
2020/04/20/483455/confronting-pandemic-must-save-nature-save/.

37. Fred Pearce, ``It's not overpopulation that causes climate change,
it's overconsumption,'' The Guardian, September 19, 2014, available at
https://www.theguardian.com/com-mentisfree/2014/sep/19/not-
overpopulation-that-causes-climate-change-but-overconsumption.

38. Eimly Dao, ``Oil And Gas Lobbying: How Our Political System Has
Empowered The Fossil Fuel Industry,'' The Rising, February 28, 2020,
available at https://therising.co/2020/02/28/oil-and-gas-lobbying-
impacts/.

39. U.N. Environment Programme, ``Emissions Gap Report 2019'' (Nairobi,
Kenya: 2019), available at https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/
20.500.11822/30797/EGR2019.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y; Dalia
Streimikiene and Neringa Barakauskaite-Jakubauskiene, ``Sustainable
Development and Quality of Life in Lithuania Compared to Other
Countries,'' Technological and Economic Development of Economy 18
(4)(2012): 588-607, available at https://journals.vgtu.lt/index.php/
TEDE/article/view/4723.

40. Matthew Ballew and others, ``Which racial/ethnic groups care most
about climate change?'', Yale Program on Climate Change Communication,
April 16, 2020, available at https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/
publications/race-and-climate-change/.

41. Earthjustice, ``Latinos And The Environment,'' available at https:/
/earthjustice.org/features/poll-latino-opinion (last accessed January
2021); Hispanic Enjoying Camping, Hunding and the Outdoors, ``3-year
Polling Analysis: Latinos Clearly Value Conservation,'' August 20,
2014, available at https://www.hechoonline.org/blog/3-year-polling-
analysis-latinos-clearly-value-conservation.

42. Jenny Rowland-Shea and others, ``The Nature Gap: Confronting Racial
and Economic Disparities in the Destruction and Protection of Nature in
America'' (Washington: Center for American Progress, 2020), available
at https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/green/reports/2020/07/21/
487787/the-nature-gap/.

43. Jonathan Lambert, ``Study Finds Racial Gap Between Who Causes Air
Pollution And Who Breathes It,'' NPR, March 11, 2019, available at
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2019/03/11/702348935/study-
finds-racial-gap-between-who-causes-air-pollution-and-who-breathes-it.

44. Guizhen Ma, ``The Environmental Impact of Immigration in the United
States'' (Logan, UT: Utah State University, 2020), available at https:/
/digitalcommons.usu.edu/etd/7782/
?utm_source=digitalcommons.usu.edu%2Fetd%2F7
782&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages; Michael Gochfeld and
Joanna Burger, ``Disproportionate Exposures in Environmental Justice
and Other Populations: The Importance of Outliers,'' American Journal
of Public Health 101 (1)(2011): S53-S63, available at https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3222496/.

45. Sudha Nandagopal, ``Why environmentalists should get involved in
immigration reform,'' Grist, March 19, 2010, available at https://
grist.org/article/2010-03-19-why-environmentalists-should-get-involved-
in-immigration-reform/.

46. La Madre Tierra, ``Historia,'' available at https://www.lama-
dretierra.org/historia/ (last accessed January 2021).

47. Erik Ortiz, ``Five Years After BP Gulf Oil Spill, Vietnamese
Fishermen Still Struggling,'' NBC News, April 20, 2015, available at
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/five-years-after-bp-oil-
spill-vietnamese-fisherman-make-slow-n343411.

48. Lea Ceasrine and Rose Aguilar, ``Indigenous, Immigrant, and Local
Activists At The Forefront of Environmental Justice,'' KALW Radio,
September 18, 2019, available at https://www.kalw.org/post/Indigenous-
immigrant-and-local-activists-forefront-environmental-justice#stream/0.

49. Lauren Markham, ``How climate change is pushing Central American
migrants to the US,'' The Guardian, April 6, 2019, available at https:/
/www.theguardian.com/commentis-free/2019/apr/06/us-mexico-immigration-
climate-change-migration.

50. Center for Biological Diversity, ``No Border Wall,'' available at
https://www.biologicaldiversity.org/campaigns/border_wall/ (last
accessed January 2021).

51. Center for Biological Diversity, ``Trump administration Waives
Environmental Laws to Build Border Walls in New Mexico, Arizona,''
Press release, April 23, 2019, available at https://
www.biologicaldiversity.org/news/press_releases/2019/border-wall-
environmental-laws-04-23-2019.php.

52. Jayla Lundstrom, ``Climate Change Is Altering Migration Patterns
Regionally and Globally,'' Center for American Progress, December 3,
2019, available at https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/
news/2019/12/03/478014/climate-change-altering-migration-patterns-
regionally-globally/; Tom Jawetz, ``Restoring the Rule of Law Through a
Fair, Humane, and Workable Immigration System'' (Washington: Center for
American Progress, 2019), available at https://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/reports/2019/07/22/472378/
restoring-rule-law-fair-humane-workable-immigration-system/; Dan
Restrepo, Trevor Sutton, and Joel Martinez, ``Getting Migration in the
Americas Right: A National Interest-Driven Agenda'' (Washington: Center
for American Progress, 2019), available at https://www.american-
progress.org/issues/security/reports/2019/06/24/471322/getting-
migration-americas-right/.

53. Tom Jawetz, ``How Executive Action Can Build a More Fair, Humane,
and Workable Immigration System: The First 100 Days and Beyond,''
Center for American Progress, January 11, 2021, available at https://
www.americanprogress.org/issues/immigration/news/2021/01/11/494390/
executive-action-can-build-fair-humane-workable-immigration-system/.

54. Intersectional Environmentalist, ``The Future is Intersectional,''
available at https://www.intersectionalenvironmentalist.com/about-ie
(last accessed January 2021); NAACP, ``Environmental and Climate
Justice,'' available at https://naacp.org/issues/environmental-justice/
(last accessed January 2021).

______

CENTER FOR IMMIGRATION STUDIES

Southern Poverty Law Center

https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/group/center-
immigration-studies

*****

Founded in 1985 by John Tanton, the Center for Immigration Studies
(CIS) has gone on to become the go-to think tank for the anti-immigrant
movement with its reports and staffers often cited by media and anti-
immigrant politicians. CIS's much-touted tagline is ``low immigration,
pro-immigrant,'' but the organization has a decades-long history of
circulating racist writers, while also associating with white
nationalists.

While CIS and its position within the Tanton network have been on
the Southern Poverty Law Center's (SPLC) radar for years, what
precipitated listing CIS as an anti-immigrant hate group for 2016 was
its repeated circulation of white nationalist and antisemitic writers
in its weekly newsletter and the commissioning of a policy analyst who
had previously been pushed out of the conservative Heritage Foundation
for his embrace of racist pseudoscience. These developments, its
historical associations and its record of publishing reports that hype
the criminality of immigrants are why CIS is labeled an anti-immigrant
hate group.
CIS reports have been widely criticized and debunked by groups such
as the Immigration Policy Center and the CATO Institute. Alex
Nowrasteh, an immigration policy analyst at CATO, said in early 2017:
``Oh, I'm convinced that [CIS executive director Mark Krikorian is]
wrong about all the facts and issues. They're wrong about the impact of
immigrants on the U.S. economy and on U.S. society.'' Speaking about
CIS to Univision in August 2017, Illinois Rep. Luis Gutierrez stated:
``Their research is always questionable because they torture the data
to make it arrive at the conclusion they desire, which is that
immigrants are criminals and a burden on the U.S. and our economy. It
is the worst kind of deception, but politicians, the conservative media
and some Americans eat it up because it always looks somewhat
legitimate at first glance.'' CIS has also defended the usage of
``anchor babies'' and released a report on ``terror babies,''popular
concepts among the nativist movement.
While capable of appearing as a sober-minded policy analyst in some
settings, longtime CIS executive director Mark Krikorian's
contributions to the immigration policy debate rarely rise above
petulant commentary dashed with extremist statements. Often, these
statements are highly revealing.
At his perch at National Review and on Twitter, Krikorian has
asked, ``How many rapists & drug-dealers are the anti-deportation
radicals protecting?'' and argued that Mexico's ``weakness and
backwardness has been deeply harmful to the United States.'' Krikorian
has called Mexican American journalist Jorge Ramos a ``white-Hispanic
ethnic hustler'' and riffed that if the U.S. were a police state, as
Chelsea Manning claimed, then ``this mentally ill traitor would have
been dumped in a shallow grave years ago.'' In one exchange on Twitter,
Krikorian tried to whitewash the role eugenicists played in the 1924
Immigration Act, only to stop responding when Harry H. Laughlin's role
in advancing the legislation was mentioned. Laughlin was the most
prominent eugenics advocate prior to WWII and went on to co-found the
racist pseudoscience-promoting Pioneer Fund, which Tanton had close
ties to through the 1990s.
More recently, CIS has been in the headlines for its connections to
former Trump Administration adviser Stephen Miller, a man who in
college collaborated with white nationalist Richard Spencer to bring
another white nationalist, Peter Brimelow, onto campus for a debate on
immigration. Miller was instrumental in pushing for anti-immigrant
policies in the Trump White House, regularly drawing from CIS. In early
2017, Miller made the rounds on national media defending the Trump
administration's Muslim ban by citing the CIS. ``First of all, 72
individuals, according to the Center for Immigration Studies, have been
implicated in terroristic activity in the United States who hail from
those seven nations, point one,'' Miller said on NBC's ``Meet the
Press.'' Fact-checkers at The Washington Post debunked the talking
point, which collapsed several categories of crimes related to
terrorism to reach a higher number, and awarded it ``Three
Pinocchios.''
In Their Own Words

``We send out a weekly roundup of immigration commentary from all
sides, including people we don't agree with. I include The New York
Times, and their editorials on immigration are usually things we
completely disagree with, and we include a pretty broad range,
including some sites that publish other material that frankly I find
kind of objectionable. But if they are important sites of immigration
news, we include them because the whole point is, see the broad
spectrums of views and judge for yourself.''--CIS executive director
Mark Krikorian on C-SPAN defending the inclusion of white nationalist
group VDARE in CIS's weekly newsletter, 2019.
``Am I a bad person for thinking it was already a holiday?''--CIS
executive director Mark Krikorian commenting on a story about the major
Islamic holiday Eid al-Adha falling on Sept. 11, 2016.
``Obama's Justice Dept has been doing everything in its power for
7.5 yrs to foment race war. Happy now?''--CIS executive director Mark
Krikorian on Twitter, 2016.
``It's ironic--it's illegal for them to work, but they're working
for the immigration service in a sense. . . . I don't have any problem
with it in principle. The question is: Is it run well?''--CIS executive
director Mark Krikorian on private detention centers with ``volunteer''
work programs that pay undocumented immigrants $1 to $3 a day for
cleaning, cooking and other jobs, 2015.
``The diminution of sovereignty engineered by the EU is bad enough
for some share of the population, but many more will object to
extinguishing their national existence a la Camp of the Saints.''--CIS
executive director Mark Krikorian referencing the racist novel
published by John Tanton's white nationalist publishing house The
Social Contract Press, 2015.
``We can expect a disaster. In sum, we'll witness the unmaking of
America.''--CIS senior policy analyst Stephen Steinlight commenting on
the prospect of 2014 immigration reform passing, 2014.
``Send him back to Liberia so it's on their dime.''--CIS executive
director Mark Krikorian on a Liberian immigrant who was diagnosed with
Ebola in Texas, 2014.
``We have to have security against both the dishwasher and the
terrorist because you can't distinguish between the two with regards to
immigration control.''--CIS executive director Mark Krikorian on anti-
Muslim conspiracist Frank Gaffney's radio show, 2014.
``There's no court that will stop Obama from doing anything. And we
all know, if there ever was a president that deserved to be impeached,
it's this guy. Alright? And I wouldn't stop. I would think being hung,
drawn, and quartered is probably too good for him.''--CIS senior policy
analyst Stephen Steinlight at a Tea Party meeting, 2014.
``You don't know how long it will be here before the political
activists get engaged in [the Mexican] community and foment something
that will look like the civil rights movement for African Americans,
but I can promise you it will be a lot bloodier.''--CIS senior policy
analyst Stephen Steinlight on the prospect of Mexican immigrants
attaining U.S. citizenship, 2013.
``Tomorrow is Ash Wednesday. . . . It's a season of repentance,
prayer, and self-denial, to prepare the believer for the commemoration
of Christ's suffering and death and for the celebration of his
resurrection. And a group of Evangelical grandees has decided to mark
the holy season by prostituting scripture for political ends.''--CIS
executive director Mark Krikorian in response to a group of evangelical
leaders calling for immigration reform, 2013.
``My guess is that Haiti's so screwed up because it wasn't
colonized long enough.''--CIS executive director Mark Krikorian after
the 2010 Haitian earthquake that killed 160,000 people, 2010.
``That means the children and grandchildren of immigrants are
committing a lot of crime, making this a long-term problem. That's much
worse news.''--CIS research director Steven Camarota arguing that the
children of immigrants are prone to criminality in response to research
showing that immigrants commit less crime than the native U.S.
population, 2008.
``Perhaps the simplest way to approach [skills-based immigration]
would be to admit anyone who scores above 140 on an IQ test.''--CIS
executive director Mark Krikorian advocating for an IQ test component
in a draconian immigration policy regime, The New Case Against
Immigration: Both Legal and Illegal, 2008.
``There are real differences between groups, not just trivial ones
that we happen to notice more than we should. Race is different in all
sorts of ways, and probably the most important way is in IQ. Decades of
psychometric testing has indicated that at least in America you have
Jews with the highest average IQ, usually followed by East Asians, and
then you have non-Jewish whites, Hispanics and then Blacks. These are
real differences. They're not going to go away tomorrow, and for that
reason we have to address them in our immigration discussions.''--CIS
contributing writer Jason Richwine, during a panel about Krikorian's
book, 2008.
History

The Center for Immigration Studies, like the rest of the organized
anti-immigrant movement we see in America today, was founded by the
late John Tanton, a Michigan ophthalmologist turned population-control
alarmist whose racist beliefs stirred him to create a network of
organizations with a simple agenda: heavily restricting the immigration
levels to the United States in order to maintain a white majority. As
Tanton wrote in 1993, ``I've come to the point of view that for
European-American society and culture to persist requires a European-
American majority, and a clear one at that.''
Tanton founded his flagship organization the Federation for
American Immigration Reform (FAIR) in 1979, an organization that was
for years supported by the eugenics promoting Pioneer Fund. Soon after
founding FAIR, he was eager to enhance the legitimacy of the anti-
immigrant policies FAIR was proposing. To do that, Tanton needed an
independent think tank, which came to fruition in 1985, called the
Center for Immigration Studies (CIS).
Tanton donated his correspondences to the University of Michigan
and among the conversations with Klan lawyers and white nationalists,
his role in establishing CIS is made clear. In a letter dated Sept. 16,
1985, Tanton spelled out the need for creating CIS and explicitly
confirmed that it would start as a project of FAIR. ``After a careful
and prolonged study, the FAIR board has concluded that a `Think Tank'
on the scale of the Worldwatch Institute is needed. For credibility,
this will need to be independent of FAIR, though the Center for
Immigration Studies, as we're calling it, is starting off as a project
of FAIR.'' The next day, Tanton wrote to Gregory D. Curtis in
Pennsylvania where he again described CIS as a ``project,'' writing,
``We're in the process of setting up independent projects both the
Center for Immigration Studies, and the Litigation Program.''
Scholar Steven Gardiner describes in his 2005 paper, ``White
Nationalism Revisited,'' ``There are also organizations, the Federation
for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) for example, that in their push
for mainstream acceptance vehemently denying racist motivations, even
while playing to radicalized fears and allying themselves with doctrine
white nationalists.'' The same can be said of CIS despite the best
efforts of Tanton and others to play up its independence from FAIR and
Tanton himself.
CIS became independent in 1986, but the relationship with Tanton
and FAIR was far from over. In another memo also written in 1986,
Tanton talked about the need to get CIS fully funded and properly
functioning, ``To expand our fund-raising market, we created the Center
for Immigration Studies last year. We need to get CIS fully funded and
entrenched as a major Washington think-tank, one that can venture into
issues, which FAIR is not yet ready to raise.''
In another 1986 memo to a file kept for the purpose of eventually
writing an autobiography, Tanton described CIS as an organization over
which he had direct control, as opposed to others that he said were
``one level removed from our control.'' Eight years later, in 1994,
Tanton wrote that he was still setting what he called ``the proper
roles for FAIR and CIS.''
In 1989, Tanton recorded his oral biography, where he discussed how
FAIR donated board members to CIS and also discussed hiring the man who
served as the think tank's first executive director. Tanton stated:
``We actually donated several of our board members and donors to the
Center for Immigration Studies as it was called--Gene Katz became one
of their important donors. Liz Paddok left the main FAIR board and went
over to the Center for Immigration Studies board. We subsequently hired
a retired foreign service officer, David Simcox, to run CIS.'' Tanton
also remarked, ``Forming [Immigration Reform Law Institute] and CIS
were part of an effort to develop a balanced program--a neatly rolled
rug!''
Otis Graham--Tanton's friend and confidant at CIS

A look at the FAIR and CIS boards today shows that not much has
changed. CIS and FAIR share one board member, Frank Morris, and two
people who have served on FAIR's advisory board currently sit on the
CIS board: Peter Nunez and William Chip.
The man Tanton recorded his oral biography with was a close friend,
Otis Graham, who helped grow CIS during its early years before the
arrival of its current executive director, Mark Krikorian, in 1995.
When Tanton started CIS as a FAIR project in 1985, Graham was a member
of the FAIR board. But Tanton's correspondence makes clear that he was
able to get Graham to leave the FAIR board in order to run CIS, a job
he did until Krikorian took over. Graham did hold the role of executive
director and others that were not specified.
Tanton frequently wrote Graham revealing letters. In 1991, he told
him about former Klan leader David Duke's campaign for governor of
Louisiana that year, which he described as based on ``the excesses of
affirmative action and illegitimate pregnancy.'' Tanton told Graham
that ``there is a lot going on out there on the cultural and ethnic
(racial) difference'' front and added, in a hopeful tone, that it was
``all tied to immigration policy. At some point, this is going to break
the dam.''
A 1994 Tanton letter also shows that he was critical to raising
funds for CIS. Although Tanton said he played a ``behind-the-scenes
role'' at CIS, he revealed that key backers of his other organizations
had ponied up millions for CIS. Those large donations were key because
CIS does not do direct-mail fundraising.
Krikorian hired and Tanton revisionism

In 1995, another CIS transfer from FAIR occurred, this time in the
person of Krikorian. Krikorian worked at FAIR as a newsletter writer
and then working at a few newspapers before joining CIS. His stint at
FAIR is not mentioned on his bio page at the CIS website. Within a few
weeks of his appointment, Tanton sent Krikorian a letter of
congratulations, telling him, ``If there is anything I can do to help
out at any point, please let me know.''
It was around this time, too, that the historical revisionism
around the founding of CIS began. Though there is no explicit evidence
of collusion between Tanton, Krikorian and Dan Stein, FAIR's president,
all three have attempted to change the narrative, attempting to put
some distance between FAIR, Tanton, and the think tank. The crux of the
tale is that Tanton simply raised money for CIS and nothing more. In
his letter congratulating Krikorian in February 1995, Tanton wrote, ``I
have tried in particular to help with fundraising through the years,
and have been able to steer some small amounts of money toward CIS.''
Less than a year before Krikorian joined CIS, Dan Stein was recording
his own oral biography with Tanton. When CIS came up, Stein admitted
that both organizations shared office space but also stated, ``Yes, CIS
was never a project of FAIR, but it was a bit of a spin-off.'' This is
a bit of a whitewash of the facts contained in Tanton's memo almost 10
years earlier where he specifically states that CIS was starting off
``as a project of FAIR.''
In a correspondence sent to the SPLC as well as testimony before
Congress, Krikorian has also pushed this narrative. ``We've never had
any institutional relationship,'' Krikorian told the SPLC in an email
in 2009. ``He's never been on our board or served as an employee, he's
never even been in our offices.'' He said Tanton ``had some role back
in the mid-80s in helping rustle up money for CIS,'' but added that he
and Tanton had no ``personal relationship.'' Krikorian sounded a
similar note in 2004, when he testified before an immigration
subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee. ``He wrote us a check, I
think it was a year ago,'' he said of Tanton. ``It was the first check
I have seen from him in nine or 10 years. . . . We have no
institutional relationship.''
The narrative about CIS's independence, especially from a white
nationalist like Tanton, is key to the organization being seen as
credible in the Beltway. As Stein put it in his oral bio: ``Well, yes,
there has always been an important role for CIS with its research-
oriented profile and greater appearance of objectivity. Its reports
have been accepted by the media and some members of Congress as
authentic research; it's certainly as authentic as anything that the
Urban Institute or any of the Ford Foundation groups have put out. So
it plays a very valuable role, and has continued to develop as an
independent organization and perform much of the mission it was
originally designed to carry out.''
Despite Krikorian's having no ``institutional relationship'' with
Tanton, it is clear through Tanton's correspondences that the two men
stayed in touch over the years. Tanton would send Krikorian suggestions
and also included him in letters penned to white nationalists. In 1997,
Tanton invited Krikorian and others to participate in the annual
``Writers Workshop'' event put on by his racist publishing house, the
Social Contract Press (TSCP). TSCP has published a number of racist
texts, including an English language translation of the French novel
Camp of the Saints, a book penned by Frenchman Jean Raspail. The novel
depicts an invasion of France by immigrants from India who are painted
as sexually voracious savages who destroy the country and rape white
women. The book gained more notoriety during the 2016 election campaign
after reports that Trump's senior adviser and then-Breitbart executive
Stephen Bannon was a major fan of the novel.
TSCP also publishes a quarterly journal, The Social Contract
(TSC),which has routinely published nativist screeds authored by
influential white nationalists including the late Sam Francis, Patrick
Buchanan and Peter Brimelow. TSC's longtime editor is white nationalist
Wayne Lutton, a man described by Gardiner in his 2005 paper as one of
the ``intellectual theorists of white nationalism.'' While Tanton
hobnobbed with white nationalists and shared their beliefs, Lutton has
a long track record of directly working for white nationalist groups.
For a number of years, Lutton was on the editorial advisory board of
the Citizens Informer, the publication of the white nationalist group
Council of Conservative Citizens (CCC), which Charleston shooter Dylann
Roof credited with being his gateway into white nationalism. Before
working for Tanton, Lutton wrote for and sat on the advisory board of
the Institute for Historical Review (IHR), one of America's longest-
running Holocaust denial organizations. In 2002, Lutton joined the
editorial advisory board of the antisemitic Occidental Quarterly
publication.
Both Krikorian and his staff are regular attendees at the TSC
Writers Workshop, which also attracts white nationalists, and their
writings regularly appear in TSC. In 2016, CIS fellow John Miano spoke
at the gathering, while Krikorian did the year before, and Jessica
Vaughan, CIS's director of policy studies, spoke in 2012. Krikorian has
four pieces published in TSC, and Steve Camarota, the CIS director of
research, is published there three times. CIS fellow Don Barnett and
CIS board members Frank Morris, and William Chip as well as former
member Vernon Briggs are also published in TSC.
Racism in CIS Reports and Speeches

In an interview with NPR in early 2017, in response to the SPLC
listing CIS as a hate group Krikorian stated: ``Our work is out there.
We have published and spoken, myself and my staff, millions of words
and there is nothing in there that you're gonna be able to say that is
based on a sort of using a religious or racial or ethnic criteria in
running our immigration policy. It's just not there.'' Despite its
efforts to ``vehemently deny racist motivations'' as Gardiner points
out in the case of FAIR, the group is capable of ``playing to
racialized fears.'' Among the millions of words both written and
uttered by CIS staffers, including Krikorian, are a litany of examples
of attacks on Latinos, Muslims and immigrants in general.
Hired in 2005 by Krikorian, CIS's senior policy analyst Stephen
Steinlight perhaps best epitomizes the organization's general distaste
of modern, that is to say largely nonwhite, immigrants. In ``The Jewish
Stake in America's Changing Demography,'' a report Steinlight wrote for
CIS four years before he joined the organization, he painted American
Muslims as Jew haters, writing: ``For reasons that appear
simultaneously self-evident and self-serving, spokespersons from the
organized Muslim community regularly cite the figure of six million
Muslims. The number is chosen because it constitutes both a form of
demographic riposte to the hated figure of the six million Jewish
victims of Nazism that Muslims believe confers vast moral and political
advantages on Jews and, secondly, it allows Muslims to claim they have
already achieved numerical parity with American Jews.'' Krikorian, for
his part, called Muslims a ``vicious people,'' writing in National
Review in 2011, ``Well, I'm afraid that in the Islamic world democracy
faces the problem of a vicious people, one where the desire for freedom
is indeed written in every human heart, but the freedom to do evil.''
In July 2017, as tensions mounted in Jerusalem, Krikorian tweeted that
Palestinians want to ``exterminate the Jews.''
At a Tea Party event in 2014, Steinlight was filmed calling for the
hanging of then-President Obama. Speaking at the Highlands Tea Party in
Florida, Steinlight stated, ``We all know, if there ever was a
president that deserved to be impeached, it's this guy. Alright? And I
wouldn't stop. I would think being hung, drawn and quartered is
probably too good for him.'' Krikorian's response to the incident,
which was widely covered in mainstream press was to tell HuffPost,
``Steve sometimes has used impolitic language and I admonished him to
choose his words more carefully in the future,'' and put a reprimand in
Steinlight's personnel file.
No such reprimand occurred when Steinlight, speaking at a Tea Party
gathering in Texas in 2013, said the following about Mexican
immigrants: ``Within a few years, I promise you, and I love it when
they say, `Oh, those people don't care about political rights, they
just care about jobs.' Do you know how long they will be here before
the political activists get engaged in that community, and foment
something that will look like the civil rights movement for African
Americans, but I can promise you it will be a lot bloodier.'' At
another Tea Party event in 2014 in Texas, Steinlight anticipated
President Trump's Muslim ban by calling for the return of something
similar to the McCarran Internal Security Act, which excluded
communists and fascists from immigrating to the United States, but
applied to Muslims. He stated, ``If I had my druthers, we would bring
back something like the McCarran Act, in the `50s which barred
communists and fascists on the grounds that they believe in things that
are subversive to the Constitution. Muslims believe in things that are
subversive to the Constitution.'' Steinlight conducted an interview in
2013 with the conservative Washington Times, stating, ``Hispanics don't
exemplify `strong family values.' '' He also warned in 2004 that
immigration threatens ``the American people as a whole and the future
of Western civilization.''
Krikorian also has a long track record of racist remarks. Perhaps
his most vile came in the aftermath of the devastating earthquake in
Haiti in 2010, that killed an estimated 160,000 people. Writing in his
regular column on the conservative National Review website nine days
after the natural disaster, Krikorian remarked, ``My guess is that
Haiti's so screwed up because it wasn't colonized long enough.'' (His
emphasis).
He has also routinely attacked influential Americans of color. In
2017, he described civil rights leader John Lewis as ``Like a grown man
who won the big game in high school and never stops talking about it.''
After Justice Susan Sotomayor was appointed in 2009, Krikorian took to
National Review to say that Americans should not be ``giving in to''
the ``unnatural'' pronunciation of her last name.
The new case against immigration: Both legal and illegal

In 2008, Krikorian wrote a book on immigration restriction, The New
Case Against Immigration: Both Legal and Illegal. Krikorian says
today's immigrants ``look'' a lot different than immigrants from 100
years ago. Explaining that Europeans previously accounted for the
majority of immigration, he laments most immigrants today come from the
``third world.'' He believes this is the main issue with immigration
today. These immigrants, he claims, have intense difficulties with
assimilation such as learning English, transnationalism, and
``affirmative action for immigrants.''
A hallmark of Krikorian's argument is to exploit the plight of
black Americans. ``Today's `systematically different' immigrants are
simply continuing the traditional pattern (common among the Irish and
Italians and others in the past) of trying to climb over the backs of
black Americans to achieve assimilation'' he says. He adds, ``Hispanics
and Asians are simply the latest immigrant groups trying to use their
location on the nonblack side of the divide as an assimilation tool.''
And despite otherwise never advocating on behalf of black Americans, he
takes advantage of their position in society to serve his argument.
``Bridging this basic divide in American society between black and
nonblack--bringing our black countrymen into full membership in the
American nation in every respect--is our most urgent long-term domestic
concern,'' he claims.
Krikorian believes many of these immigrant communities make America
vulnerable and the threat ``isn't confined to radical Islam.'' In fact,
he says America is also susceptible to threats from North Korea,
``Communist China,'' and Colombia. He adds that Colombian communities
in the United States would ``serve as a base of operations for FARC
attacks in the United States in the event of war.''
On Mexicans he says, ``It could well be that there are cultural or
other reasons that Mexican immigrants are especially deficient in
institution building, but they nonetheless reflect a broader trend in
modern society.'' Krikorian adds, ``But Mexico, already the eight-
hundred pound gorilla of immigration policy, is the eight-thousand-
pound gorilla with regard to sovereignty, due to its domination of the
immigration flow, its proximity, and the historical resentments that
many of its people harbor toward our country.''
Krikorian's book cites his own organization, CIS, and Krikorian
himself over 50 times, while also citing white nationalists Peter
Brimelow, Steve Sailer and Patrick Buchanan.
Failing studies and bad stats

CIS reports and blog pieces have also been widely discredited and
debunked by such groups as the Immigration Policy Center and CATO
Institute, which criticized CIS in 2015 for exaggerating immigrant
welfare use. But a number of publications also contain bigoted language
demonizing immigrants from all walks of life and making a mockery of
CIS's ``pro-immigrant'' tagline.
In a 2008 blog, Jessica Vaughan decried the Temporary Protected
Status (TPS) program, which provides relief for thousands of
individuals who have fled war-torn nations and countries dealing with
natural disasters. Vaughan wrote, ``One legacy of TPS has been its
contribution to the burgeoning street gang problem in the United
States.'' A 2008 report authored by CIS fellow David Seminara referred
to immigrants as ``Third-World gold-diggers.'' In the same report, he
wrote, ``The use of fraudulent marriage petitions is prevalent among
international terrorists.''
In 2010, another CIS fellow David North attempted to blame teenage
obesity on immigrants in a piece titled, ``Farfetched? Does Illegal
Immigration Facilitate Teenage Obesity?'' Also in 2010, following the
BP oil spill, then CIS writer Phil Cafaro attempted to blame immigrants
for the spill, writing, ``Population makes a difference--and
immigration levels make a difference to our overall population,''
before concluding, ``In the long-term, regarding efforts to create a
sustainable society, these demographic trends loom a lot larger than
whether or not BP or Halliburton made some greedy, foolish decisions to
cut corners in the Gulf.''
CIS reports are a big hit with white nationalists, for which
immigration is their ``most important'' issue, as Gardiner accurately
points out. One white nationalist who has routinely cited CIS figures
is Jared Taylor, one of the most prominent white nationalists of the
past quarter century. After Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Taylor wrote,
``Blacks and whites are different. When blacks are left entirely to
their own devices, Western civilization--any kind of civilization--
disappears''--a comment indistinguishable from Krikorian's following
the Haitian earthquake in 2010. Taylor's columns in his now-defunct
American Renaissance journal and AMREN website cites CIS at length.
Krikorian, in a recent Reddit AMA, attempted to distance himself from
Taylor, writing, ``Sorry, I never `promoted' him. He came to a public
event once and asked a question. You could've done the same--would I be
promoting you?'' But again, Krikorian's swift dismissal doesn't tell
the whole truth. Taylor has actually asked questions at multiple CIS
events, and both men have attended Tanton's Writers Workshop events in
the past. Tanton was a big fan of Taylor's and helped fund the American
Renaissance journal when Taylor launched it in 1990.
CIS staffers cozying up with racists

The Taylor-Krikorian connections don't stop there. CIS circulates a
weekly email to its supporters that contains articles on immigration
written by people from across the political spectrum. A study conducted
by the SPLC and the Center for New Community (CNC) found that CIS
circulated over 2,000 pieces of material from racist websites or penned
by white nationalists, including three pieces published on the AMREN
website.
Over 1,700 articles circulated by CIS in its weekly email came from
VDARE, a racist website that serves as a hub for white nationalists,
antisemites and nativists. VDARE stands for Virginia Dare, the supposed
first white child born in the Americas. VDARE was founded by English
white nationalist Peter Brimelow, a former National Review contributor
who now is seen as a key player in the racist ``alt-right'' movement.
Brimelow's relationship with CIS dates back decades, when Tanton would
write to him and Krikorian. Krikorian wrote a review of Brimelow's
infamous anti-immigrant book Alien Nation, calling it a ``flawed
jewel.'' CIS also published Brimelow in a 1998 colloquy titled ``What,
Then, Is the American, This New Man?''
Brimelow wrote 51 pieces circulated by CIS. Other VDARE authors CIS
circulated include antisemite Kevin MacDonald, a former psychology
professor at California State University, Long Beach, who published a
trilogy that supposedly ``proves'' that Jews are genetically driven to
destroy Western societies. CIS staffers have also written articles for
VDARE throughout the years. CIS fellow John Miano has written dozens of
pieces for VDARE, dating back to 2001, and in 2016 attended VDARE's
Christmas party.
Kevin MacDonald was far from the only antisemite circulated by CIS
to its supporters. One article CIS circulated was authored by Holocaust
denier John Friend, who has described the Holocaust as a ``manufactured
narrative, chock full of a wide variety of ridiculous claims and
impossible events, all to advance the Jewish agenda of world domination
and subjugation.''
Another piece CIS circulated is from Rense.com, a site full of
Holocaust-denial material which published a birthday ode to Adolf
Hitler in 2015 including lines like, ``You NEVER built Jewish gas
chambers,'' and ``You removed Jews and their Zionist agenda from
positions of power in banking, media and politics, but only after World
Zionism declared World War on Germany in 1933 and proved their hatred
for the German people.'' The piece refers to Jews as ``predators'' and
includes lines including: ``How come that the Jews are so rich? Only
Jews are offended by the question because they are too arrogant and
insecure to recognize [sic] that every stranger, not necessarily a Jew,
is being asked from time to time who is he and what makes him tick.''
Six articles written by the notorious Norwegian anti-Muslim blogger
Peder Are Nostvold Jensen who writes under the name ``Fjordman,'' were
also circulated by CIS in its weekly emails. Fjordman was cited over
100 times in the manifesto of racist mass murderer Anders Behring
Breivik, who killed 77 people in Norway in 2011.
In 2008, CIS circulated a Taki's Magazine article by white
nationalist Richard Spencer--the face of the alt-right movement--and
two pieces from Spencer's old white nationalist website
AlternativeRight.com. CIS also distributed one piece by William
Regnery, the founder of the National Policy Institute (NPI) the white
nationalist think tank Spencer now runs. Regnery also founded the
Charles Martel Society, the publisher of the racist and antisemitic
journal Occidental Quarterly.
In 2007, Krikorian accepted an invitation to speak at Michigan
State University from its chapter of Young Americans for Freedom (YAF),
a conservative college organization. This chapter of YAF, however, was
not like many of its sister chapters across the country. The chapter
was led by one of Richard Spencer's friends, white nationalist Kyle
Bristow. The MSU-YAF had been widely covered in the media for a series
of nasty stunts--staging a ``Catch an Illegal Immigrant Day,'' holding
a ``Koran Desecration'' competition, and posting ``Gays Spread AIDS''
flyers across campus. Krikorian was part of the same speaker series
that included Nick Griffin, a Holocaust denier who heads the extremist
British National Party, and Jared Taylor (whose speech was later
cancelled). Bristow is now the white nationalist movement's go-to
lawyer.
A number of CIS reports have also appeared reprinted in the Journal
of Social, Political and Economic Studies, published by Roger Pearson,
a white nationalist who has been active on the far right since the
1950s. In 1958, Pearson founded the Northern League, a ``Pan-Nordic
cultural organization'' dedicated to convincing Northern Europeans to
recognize ``their common problems and their common destiny,'' and to
come to ``an appreciation . . . of the threat of biological extinction
with which we [i.e. Nordics] are threatened.'' The members of this new
group included Nazis. In 1957, Pearson wrote, ``If a nation with a more
advanced, more specialized, or in any way superior set of genes mingles
with, instead of exterminating, an inferior tribe, then it commits
racial suicide, and destroys the work of thousands of years of
biological isolation and natural selection.'' In total, three reports
published by CIS were reprinted in Pearson's journal, two back in 2002,
and one in 2009. The civil rights group Center for New Community
contacted Pearson about the 2009 reprint, and his response was, ``If I
remember correctly, it was reprinted with the permission of Center for
Immigration Studies.''
On multiple occasions CIS staffers have granted interviews with
another antisemitic outlet, American Free Press (AFP). AFP was founded
by now-deceased antisemite Willis Carto, who like Pearson was active on
the radical right for over half a century. AFP carries stories on
Zionism, secret ``New World Order'' conspiracies, and thinly veiled
vilification of American Jews and Israel, something that could be
learned by conducting a simple Google search.
Mainstream credibility

Tanton described in his oral biography that CIS ``has gone on to be
quite successful'' and that most certainly is the case in part due to
the group working hard to distance itself from its founder, while at
the same time fostering relationships with elected officials and
government agencies. This was a key goal of Tanton's, first described
in a memo he wrote back in 1986. Under the subheading ``Infiltrate the
Judiciary Committees,'' Tanton wrote: ``This is a long-range project.
We should make every effort to get legislators sympathetic to our point
of view appointed to the House and Senate Judiciary Committees, and
their Immigration Sub-Committees. Think how much different our
prospects would be if someone espousing our ideas had the chairmanship!
If we secure the appointment of our people as freshmen members of the
committee, we will eventually secure the chairmanship. Remember: we're
in this for the long haul.''
Later in the memo, Tanton wrote about the need to ``develop strong
relationships with the [U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service],
and with the Bureau of Consular Affairs in the State Department (which
supervises the issuance of visas). Here I'm speaking of not just the
people in Washington, but the workers in the field. We should recruit
field people to membership, and get their ideas on how to change
things, drawn from their perspective of daily work with the problem.
The Departments of Labor and Education also have a piece of this pie,
and we should get to know them as well.''
Steinlight and other CIS staffers have not been shy about promoting
their strong ties with agencies now under the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), a department formed long after Tanton wrote his
strategic memos.
The CNC detailed the relationships between CIS and these agencies
at length in a 2015 report titled ``Blurring Borders: Collusion Between
Anti-Immigrant Groups and Immigration Enforcement Agencies.'' Speaking
specifically about CIS, it reads, ``In a July 2014 appearance on the
internet radio show Cotto & Company, CIS Senior Policy Analyst Stephen
Steinlight admitted that a recent CIS publication that inspired
multiple Congressional inquiries could not have been done ``without our
ongoing good connections with whistleblowers in agencies like
Immigration and Customs Enforcement.'' As recently as March 31, 2015,
CIS's Jessica Vaughan published analysis based on, as she opaquely
phrased it, ``DHS statistics, which have not been released to the
public, but were obtained by the Center.''
CIS has also worked with Border Patrol in the past, most notably
during border tours that the group organizes on both the U.S./Mexico
and U.S./Canada borders.
While members of Congress are comfortable working with FAIR, CIS
currently has the monopoly when it comes to testifying before Congress.
In total, CIS staffers have testified over 100 times, and 11 times
since the beginning of 2016. FAIR has not testified before Congress
since 2012, according to its website.
While CIS routinely hosts panel discussions featuring nativist
members of Congress, including Rep. Mo Brooks of Alabama and Rep. Lou
Barletta of Pennsylvania, a more blatant example of CIS's deep
relationships with elected officials occurred during the last major
push for comprehensive immigration reform in 2013. CIS director of
national security policy Janice Kephart left the organization to take
up of special counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee. During the
heated debates over the bill in the Senate, then-Sen. Jeff Sessions of
Alabama, a longtime ally of the anti-immigrant movement, was the key
spokesperson on the Senate floor in opposite to the bill. During
Sessions' rebuttals Kephart could be seen sitting behind the senator.
In early 2014, as the prospect of comprehensive immigration
measures diminished, CIS again relied on leaks from its friends in DHS
to publish two reports. The first claimed that ICE ``released 68,000
aliens with criminal convictions'' in 2013 and the second cited
internal DHS metrics claiming that 36,000 immigrants awaiting the
outcome of their deportation proceedings were released by DHS under
President Obama's watch that same year. The 36,000 number promoted Rep.
Lou Barletta, a close ally of the anti-immigrant groups, to write an
op-ed citing the first CIS report where he claimed its release was
``the day immigration reform died.''
Following the tragic shooting death of Kate Steinle in San
Francisco in July 2015 by an undocumented immigrant, CIS and other
anti-immigrants used it as an opportunity to attack so-called
``sanctuary cities.'' CIS published a map of sanctuary jurisdictions on
its website that prompted a backlash. In July 2017, Mark Krikorian
published a piece on the two-year anniversary of Steinle's death, using
it to push for anti-sanctuary policies. A week earlier, Steinle's
father, who was with her on the night she died, provided quotes in a
piece in the San Francisco Chronicle titled, ``Leave Kate Steinle Out
of the Immigration Debate.'' ``I don't know who coined `Kate's Law,' ''
Jim Steinle stated, ``It certainly wasn't us.'' In 2015, Steinle said
in an interview that his family is not opposed to sanctuary policies.
History of attrition through enforcement

Since its inception, CIS has been advocating for some form of
``attrition through enforcement.'' Various CIS writers have advocated
for this policy, from David North to Jessica Vaughn.
What began as a reflection of IRCA in 1987 has evolved into CIS's
core policy. David North explains in his 1987 article that immigrants
need to be treated as poorly as possible so that they themselves choose
to leave, alleviating the work of immigration enforcement. ``Being
arrested as one heads illegally over-the border, and then being sent
back to the nearest port of entry, is a nuisance, and little more.
Being arrested in illegal status in New York, and being sent home to
Lima or Sydney is a major disincentive, and the individual either will
not try again, or will not try again quickly,'' he says.
Attrition through enforcement was formalized in the anti-immigrant
movement in 2005. The United States needs to ``shrink the illegal
population through consistent, across-the-board enforcement of
immigration law,'' Krikorian proclaimed. Krikorian says in denying
immigrants access to jobs, identification, housing and ``in general
making it as difficult as possible for an illegal immigrant to live a
normal life here,'' undocumented individuals would ``self-deport.''
Kris Kobach, former Kansas secretary of state and counsel for the
Immigration Reform Law Institute (IRLI), a legal department of FAIR, an
SPLC-designated hate group, is responsible for some of the most anti-
immigrant legislation, particularly attrition through enforcement.
Kobach has also attended a TSC Writers Workshop.
Kobach first began experimenting with this policy on a smaller
scale, helping to draft and then defend legislation like Ordinance 5165
in Fremont, Nebraska, which barred undocumented individuals from
renting property. These ordinances were then rolled into bigger omnibus
packages which were introduced in Arizona as SB 1070 and then in
Alabama as HB 56. Both bills allow law enforcement to racially profile
individuals when there is ``reasonable suspicion'' they are
undocumented.
In 2008, Kobach authored Attrition Through Enforcement: A Rational
Approach to Illegal Immigration, in which he touts the Legal Arizona
Workers Act (LAWA), which requires all employers in Arizona to use E-
Verify, as a successful example of attrition through enforcement.
E-Verify

E-Verify is an integral component of attrition through enforcement
according to Krikorian. In 2015, Pew published a report, ``More
Mexicans are Leaving Than Coming to the U.S.,'' which found a net
decline in immigration from Mexico from 2009 to 2014. Working off the
results of this report, Krikorian accounted this decline to attrition
through enforcement. He says the Pew report suggests that if the U.S.
implements nationwide E-Verify, tracks and punishes individuals who
overstay their visas, prosecutes ``border infiltrators'' and deports
every ``illegal arrested by local police,'' then the ``illegal
population will shrink considerably.'' However, no analysis or evidence
is provided to substantiate this claim. The Pew report Krikorian cites
actually says family reunification is the top reason for leaving.
Advertised as a free system for employers to verify if employees
are documented, E-Verify is estimated to cost almost $1 billion to
implement nationwide. An audit published by U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS) in 2009 estimates it would cost the
federal government $635 million, an additional $10 million in
compliance costs, and at least $200 million to the private sector
alone.
In addition to the cost of implementation and maintenance of this
program, E-Verify often wrongly presumes workers guilty and forces
individuals to defend their documented status. This affects all
people--not just the undocumented. E-Verify has an almost 1% inaccuracy
rate for wrongly identifying legal workers as unauthorized.
The ACLU estimates there are 154 million workers in the United
States, and if the E-Verify system fails just 1% of the time, it will
keep 154,000 people from working. These 154,000 people can be denied by
the system for a number of reasons, but the cause is rarely obvious.
The E-Verify system compiles data from 20 different databases, and the
effort to clear the system error can be not only rigorous, but costly
as well.
Across two administrations: Trump to early Biden years

Donald Trump's rise to power brought CIS and the rest of the
nativist movement closer to the White House and closer to shaping
immigration policy than ever before.
Krikorian bragged to Reuters in October 2016 that the Trump team
had received requests for research and studies during the campaign. In
August, Trump released a campaign ad that specifically cited CIS. Also
in August, Krikorian met with Trump officials in New York, where he was
asked to be a campaign surrogate, a position that he turned down.
Trump's major national security speech, also delivered in August
2016, contained a call for an ``ideological screening test,'' similar
to the one used in the Cold War and touted by Krikorian in December
2015. In his National Review column he wrote, ``The narrowest solution
would be to restore the principle of `ideological exclusion' to U.S.
immigration law. With the end of the Cold War--which too many imagined
to be the End of History--we eliminated the legal bar to enemies of
America who were not actual members of terrorist organizations or card-
carrying members of totalitarian political parties.''
Trump's victory resulted in nativists obtaining top jobs in the
administration and DHS and Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions was appointed
Attorney General. Aside from working hand in hand with Kephart in 2013,
Sessions has endorsed the work of CIS and participated in a panel
discussion event the group organized in 2006 and spoke on a CIS
teleconference in 2013. During the 2016 campaign, Sessions spoke at a
reception for guests invited to a CIS conference. Stephen Miller, a
Sessions staffer-turned Trump adviser and speechwriter, served as the
keynote speaker at a CIS awards ceremony in 2015. In 2017, CIS staffer
Jon Feere left the organization and took up a position at the DHS.
Former FAIR executive director Julie Kirchner also was hired for a
position at USCIS.
In 2016 CIS began commissioning Jason Richwine, a disgraced former
Heritage Foundation analyst, to write reports and blogs for the
organization. Richwine's racist views were exposed in 2013 after he co-
authored a major Heritage Foundation report on the ``costs'' of the
most recent comprehensive immigration reform bill. Journalists, as well
as civil rights groups such as the SPLC and the Anti-Defamation League,
reported on a the racist nature of Richwine's Harvard dissertation in
which he claimed, ``No one knows whether Hispanics will ever reach IQ
parity with whites, but the prediction that new Hispanic immigrants
will have low-IQ children and grandchildren is difficult to argue
against.'' Richwine's beliefs in IQ differences between the races are
prevalent not only in anti-immigrant circles, but also white
nationalist ones. He authored pieces for the white nationalist website
Alternative Right, founded by Richard Spencer.
But five years prior to this, Krikorian was exposed to Richwine's
views on race and IQ in a panel discussion organized by the American
Enterprise Institute to discuss Krikorian's book, The New Case Against
Immigration. With Krikorian sitting on the same panel, Richwine stated:
``There are real differences between groups, not just trivial ones that
we have to notice more than we should. Race is different in all sorts
of ways, and probably the most important way is in IQ. Decades of
psychometric testing has indicated that at least in America you have
Jews with the highest average IQ, usually followed by East Asians, and
then you have non-Jewish whites, Hispanics and then blacks. These are
real differences. They're not going to go away tomorrow, and for that
reason we have to address them in our immigration discussions.''
Present

With the election of Joe Biden, the anti-immigrant movement,
including CIS, found itself at an inflection point. The previous four
years represented a recent high-water mark of the nativist movement's
ability to influence federal immigration policy. However, with the
Biden administration's promise to reverse former President Trump's
draconian immigration agenda, CIS and other anti-immigrant hate groups
shifted from a proactive strategy to one centered on preserving the
anti-immigrant status quo they helped usher in.
As part of the effort to defend its policy victories over the last
four years, CIS has welcomed several former Trump administration
officials to its staff, some of whom had worked at CIS in years past.
One former Trump administration official who joined CIS is Robert
Law. From 2017 to 2021, Law worked at U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS), first as senior policy adviser and subsequently as
chief of the Office of Policy and Strategy. Law, who prior to joining
the Trump administration had held multiple positions at FAIR,
reportedly helped draft President Trump's executive order that
temporarily blocked the issuance of new green cards in April 2020.
Currently, Law serves as CIS's Director of Regulatory Affairs and
Policy.
Jon Feere is another former Trump administration official presently
working at CIS. Since 2002, Feere has worked at CIS on and off, in a
variety of positions. During his time in the Trump administration,
Feere served in ICE as the senior adviser to the director and as ICE's
chief of staff from January 2017 to January 2021. Feere was a political
appointee of the Trump administration, meaning his nomination did not
require Congressional approval. At CIS, Feere is the director of
investigations.
CIS is currently focused on using a state-centric strategy to
protect the anti-immigrant policy remnants of the Trump administration.
In a Dec. 6, 2021, report, CIS Director of Policy Studies Jessica
Vaughan noted the importance of a state and local government-led
blueprint that reiterates CIS's commitment to an extreme slate of
``self-deportation'' policies, which are long proven failures for the
states and communities that have adopted them over recent decades.

______

Statement for the Record
Sky Island Alliance

Pedestrian Traffic Highest Near Roads at the U.S.-Mexico Border in
Southeastern Arizona

October 12, 2023

Sky Island Alliance operates a network of 110 motion and heat-activated
wildlife cameras along the U.S.-Mexico border on federal lands of
southeast Arizona. Camera detections of pedestrians within 1.5 miles of
the border from March 2020 to present were analyzed from Coronado
National Forest, San Rafael State Natural Area, Coronado National
Memorial, San Pedro Riparian National Conservation Area, and San
Bernardino National Refuge Area. During this period, the cameras
detected a total of 13,978 vehicles and 634 people on foot including
recreationists, biologists, ranchers, and refugees. Refugees
constitutes no more than 17% of total observed pedestrians. Vehicles
outnumber pedestrians 22:1.

Daily rates of pedestrian detections are plotted against distance from
the camera to the closest road for cameras north of border with bollard
barriers (Coronado National Memorial, San Pedro Riparian National
Conservation Area, and San Bernardino National Wildlife Refuge) and
vehicle barriers (Coronado National Forest and San Rafael State Natural
Area):

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Key takeaways:

There are significantly higher daily detection rates of
pedestrians on federal lands near roads.

The highest daily rates of pedestrians occur on federal
lands with bollard barrier at the border.

______

Statement for the Record
Sky Island Alliance

No Trash Detected on Four Federal Land Units along U.S.-Mexico Border
in Arizona

October 12, 2023

Sky Island Alliance operates a transect of motion and heat-activated
wildlife cameras along the U.S.-Mexico border on federal lands of
southeast Arizona. Cameras facing the international boundary on
Coronado National Forest, Coronado National Memorial, San Pedro
Riparian National Conservation Area, and San Bernardino National Refuge
Area detected no instances of trash between June 6 and September 19,
2023:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Example photos

International border road at San Pedro Riparian National Conservation
Area:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

International border road at San Bernardino National Wildlife
Refuge:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT] [GRAPHIC]

[all]
