- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING ON-GOING CYBERSECURITY THREATS WITHIN. THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND THE NEXUS TO STATE-SPONSORED CYBER ACTORS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING ONGOING CYBERSECURITY
THREATS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF.
THE INTERIOR AND THE NEXUS TO STATE-
SPONSORED CYBER ACTORS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, June 7, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-515 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

PAUL GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
MIKE COLLINS, GA, Vice Chair
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, NM, Ranking Member

Matt Rosendale, MT                   Ed Case, HI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Mike Collins, GA                     Susie Lee, NV
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

--------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, June 7, 2023..........................     1

Statement of Members:

Gosar, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.................................................     1
Stansbury, Hon. Melanie A., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Mexico....................................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:

Greenblatt, Hon. Mark, Inspector General, U.S. Department of
the Interior, Washington, DC...............................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Cruz Cain, Marison, Director, Information Technology and
Cybersecurity, Government Accountability Office,
Washington, DC.............................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record.......................    22
Cavanaugh, Brian, Fellow for Cybersecurity, Intelligence, and
Homeland Security, Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC.....    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Questions submitted for the record.......................    40
Cheng, Dean, Senior Advisor, China Program, United States
Institute of Peace, Washington, DC.........................    41
Prepared statement of....................................    43
Questions submitted for the record.......................    48

Siers, Rhea, Senior Advisor (Cyber Risk), Teneo, Washington,
DC.........................................................    49
Prepared statement of....................................    51
Questions submitted for the record.......................    54
Clancy, T. Charles, Sr., Senior Vice President and General
Manager, Mitre Labs, and Chief Futurist, The Mitre
Corporation, McLean, Virginia..............................    56
Prepared statement of....................................    58
Questions submitted for the record.......................    61

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING ON-GOING CYBERSECURITY THREATS WITHIN.
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
AND THE NEXUS TO STATE-SPONSORED CYBER ACTORS

----------

Wednesday, June 7, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:01 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Gosar
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gosar, Collins, Westerman;
Stansbury, Case, and Lee.

Dr. Gosar. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
examining ongoing cybersecurity threats within the Department
of the Interior and the nexus to state-sponsored cyber actors.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statement at
the hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking
Minority Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all
other Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing
record if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule
3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
The Chairman now recognizes myself for my introductory
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Good afternoon, everyone. I would like to thank
all of our witnesses, both those from the public and the
private sector, for being here today, as well as many of the
colleagues that will surely be showing up for their
participation.
When you think of the House Committee on Natural Resources,
a hearing on cybersecurity probably isn't the first thing that
comes to mind. However, in today's world of hyperconnectivity,
technology touches almost every aspect of our lives. From
toothbrushes with apps to children playing games on tablets in
restaurants, it seems we cannot escape the growing role of
technology in our daily lives.
With more connectivity, more information, and more data,
there is an ever-increasing need for vigilance, protection, and
cybersecurity to guard against these threats. These threats are
foreign and domestic, and come from private actors and nation
states like China.
As our experts may mention later, cybersecurity refers to
the security of our devices: infrastructure, data, and users of
computers, computer networks, information, and communication
technology, virtual systems, or computer-enabled control of
physical components. As individuals, we are increasingly aware
of the potential for cyber criminal activities. In both our
personal and professional lives, there is more awareness of the
need for best practices like changing our password, not
clicking on links from Nigerian princes offering us a small
fortune if we help them out.
But jokes aside, small actions by individuals protect our
work from both lone cyber criminals and large-scale hacking
groups who hope to make money by exploiting hard-working,
earnest Americans. Unfortunately, individual vigilance often
gets lost in the large governmental bureaucracies.
Federal agencies are responsible for collecting,
processing, storing, and disposing of massive amounts of
digital information related to individuals, businesses, and
sensitive government matters. As a result, even the slightest
cyber vulnerability as government agencies can manifest itself
as a large-scale breach and, therefore, our nation's economic
prosperity, national security, and our personal privacy.
Sadly, many government agencies, including the Department
of the Interior, are increasingly vulnerable to today's world
of omnipresent technology and information. At the same time,
foreign nation states like China are aware of even the
slightest cyber security weaknesses, and are increasingly
seizing vulnerabilities in America's cybersecurity
infrastructure as opportunities to advance their strategic,
economic, geopolitical, and military interests.
For example, on May 24, Microsoft, in partnership with the
U.S. Intelligence Agency, announced the discovery of stealth
and malicious activity aimed at critical infrastructure in the
United States. The attack, carried out by a state-sponsored
actor based in China called Volt Typhoon, targeted critical
infrastructure in Guam and elsewhere in the United States.
In the most recent campaign, communications and government
infrastructure sectors were included in the attack. The
infrastructure is a key component to maintaining America's
interests in the Indo-Pacific region. Unfortunately, this is
just one attack of many, and we know of and can speak of those
that are unclassified, but we can't even talk about the ones
that are classified in an open forum.
China's threat looms large over the national security
interests of the United States and the world. Ongoing
aggressions in the Indo-Pacific highlight the need to support
our territories, including holding the Department of the
Interior accountable to ensure their assets are cyber-secure.
There are no quick fixes to cybersecurity and the agencies are
never done with the project.
Rather, cybersecurity is an ongoing process that requires
agency planning, implementing processes, and conducting
programing. I am grateful for the men and women in both the
private sector and the government services who devote their
professional lives to protecting America's information
technology assets.
In my own state, we set up the Arizona Cyber Command
Center, which is run by the Department of Public Safety's
Arizona Counter Terrorism Information Center in Phoenix. I have
actually been there. This center works together with the state
and Federal officials to protect our assets from cyber
criminals.
The critical nature of the mission does not excuse any
government agency at the Federal, state, or local level from
fulfilling their duties and implementing necessary changes,
especially when they are told time and time again that they are
falling short.
Today, we will hear from both the Office of the Inspector
General and the Government Accountability Office about
cybersecurity vulnerabilities at the Department of the
Interior. They found absurd levels of password insecurity at
the Department and ``long-recognized but unaddressed cyber
risks to BSEE's offshore energy infrastructure that would be
catastrophic to our national and economic security if
attacked.'' I appreciate both the IG and the GAO's work on this
important issue, as accountability is a key component to
resolving the cybersecurity problem across the government.
In addition to our government witnesses, we have a very
accomplished panel from the private sector, all of whom can
speak to the very real threat that nation states like China
continue to pose not only to the Department of the Interior,
but across the Federal Government.
Moreover, these witnesses can speak to the best practices
providing recommendations and policies that are available today
to make our taxpayer-owned assets more secure and less
vulnerable to the Chinese Communist Party. I think that is
great news, and something that doesn't even necessarily take a
change in the law. Often a change in individual behavior like
updating passwords, using two-factor authentication, and
increasing interagency collaboration to ensure that those with
access to our critical infrastructure keep it safe and secure.
Again, I appreciate the witnesses' time today, and I turn
to the Ranking Member, Ms. Stansbury, for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MELANIE A. STANSBURY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Chairman. It is actually really
wonderful to be here today, and to have had such a productive
bipartisan effort to examine these critical issues affecting
our nation's national security and our Federal agencies.
While cybersecurity may be a subject that many do not
immediately think of when they think about this Committee's
jurisdiction, we are well aware of the rising frequency of
cyber attacks and the implications for the agencies that this
Committee has jurisdiction over. Agency assets are targeted by,
as was said, state-sponsored actors, cybercrime groups, and
even hobbyist hackers.
Our Federal agencies are particularly attractive targets
because of their high profiles, their access to sensitive and
privileged information, and, of course, the national security
implications. But our Federal agencies are prioritizing
cybersecurity, and are prepared to strike back at cyber
criminals who threaten us.
And I, too, would also like to thank our cyber
professionals who work in the area, especially those who work
in my district at our national labs and at our base.
Cyber attacks can affect everyone in our country. In New
Mexico, our local institutions have been under cyber attack
this past year, including our public school system, our county,
and one of our universities. A cyber attack on these systems or
operations related to these missions could have devastating and
long-lasting effects on any institution.
I look forward to hearing testimony from our government and
expert witnesses today to understand the vulnerabilities, what
is at stake, and what we can do to address these issues.
A recent GAO and OIG report revealed that there is, of
course, significant room for improvement when it comes to
modernizing our systems and procedures, identifying and
resolving weaknesses, improving coordination between agencies
and the private sector, and addressing the risks to our
critical infrastructure. These recommendations are particularly
important for the Department of the Interior, which manages
billions of dollars in assets, including the financial assets
of tribal communities and insular areas, as well as operations
related to oil and gas leasing, our national parks, and our
water supplies across the western United States, as well as our
exploration for critical minerals.
One of the OIG reports from February found that offshore
oil and gas infrastructure regulated by DOI faces significant
risks, and a successful cyber attack could have significant
implications to environmental, physical, and economic harm in
terms of a potential oil spill or other impacts to our energy
systems, not to mention disruptions that could occur to energy
supplies and markets, as we saw with the Colonial Pipeline and
SolarWinds.
By improving our understanding of our cyber security
vulnerabilities as we are going to do in this hearing, as well
as bad actors' motivations for launching these attacks, we can
prevent them and minimize the damage when they do happen.
Strengthening our cybersecurity infrastructure is more than
just patching and having the most state-of-the-art technology.
We must also ensure that our agencies have the necessary
resources and personnel to properly monitor and address their
needs.
I do want to take a moment before we begin to hear
testimony to say this to anyone who is involved in cyber
attacks or cyber crime: the United States is prepared to
respond to, dismantle, and disrupt any cyber criminal
enterprise attempting to attack its networks, data, and
systems. Earlier this year, the Justice Department completed a
disruption campaign against a ransomware group, and the FBI
successfully penetrated the network. The stakes with
cybersecurity are huge, but so are the consequences. So, if you
are coming for the Federal Government, we will be coming for
you.
With that, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. That was a nice end to that statement.
I now recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee, the
gentleman from Arkansas.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you to
Subcommittee Chairman Gosar and Ranking Member Stansbury for
holding this very important bipartisan hearing today, as well
as to the witnesses and my colleagues for their time and
participation.
I think it is safe to say that we all recognize the power
of technology in our day-to-day lives. With the devices in our
hands we can control the temperature of our homes, monitor
weather around the globe, and harness the power of this
metadata for all kinds of new uses, even things like monitoring
soil moisture to track the growth of trees and crops.
Just like regular folks, government agencies depend on
information technology systems for pretty much everything,
including national defense, maintaining our critical energy
infrastructure, and protecting personally identifiable
information for Federal Government employees.
Most of us in this room have probably been targets of a
cyber attack. In March of this year, the FBI announced that the
personal data of Members and staff were breached in an attack
on the D.C. Health Link site. Unfortunately, this is a common
occurrence, too common of occurrence, as foreign nation states
recognize the growing role that technology plays in America's
government operations.
Nation states like China are launching increasingly
sophisticated cyber attacks to further their strategic and
geopolitical priorities. Because of this growing threat,
industry leaders described cyber weapon deployment as ``the
dawn of a new age of conflict.''
Despite the critical and growing importance of
cybersecurity, U.S. Government agencies often fall short of
best practices and align with the recommended standards. The
results can be catastrophic.
For instance, in 2015, affiliates of the Chinese Communist
Party hacked systems at OPM and stole personally identifiable
information for 4.2 million government employees and security
clearance background information on 21.5 million individuals.
The Director of the FBI at the time called it a treasure trove
of information about everybody who has worked for, or tried to
work for, the U.S. Government. His successor said that data
theft allows China to identify targets for espionage campaigns,
and aids in the nation's development of artificial intelligence
systems.
Sadly, this breach was not a surprise to those monitoring
cybersecurity vulnerabilities at OPM. The IG issued warnings to
the agency for years over alarming cybersecurity security
vulnerabilities. Those warnings were ignored, the Chinese
Communist Party exploited the vulnerabilities, and our national
security suffered. You would think that the lesson was learned,
and other government agencies would prioritize cybersecurity,
especially when notified time and again that their agencies are
vulnerable. However, many agencies still fall short.
The Department of the Interior is no exception. On behalf
of the Committee of Natural Resources, I thank both the
Inspector General and the GAO for their work highlighting
cybersecurity weaknesses at the Department of the Interior.
But let me make it clear that the Department of the
Interior is not alone. All government agencies must make a
renewed commitment to cybersecurity in order to protect
America's information, data, and technology. Indeed, with the
ever-increasing role of technology and the rapid rise of
artificial intelligence, effective and ongoing cybersecurity is
of utmost importance and, quite frankly, it is a matter of life
and death.
We have an impressive slate of witnesses today from both
the private and public sectors. I look forward to listening to
them and learning more about cybersecurity as we work to
protect America's information technology infrastructure.
With that, I yield back, and thank you again to the
witnesses.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the Chairman. Now I will introduce our
witnesses from the first panel.
First we have the Honorable Mark Greenblatt, Inspector
General of the U.S. Department of the Interior; and then we
have Ms. Marisol Cruz Cain, Director, Information Technology
and Cybersecurity, Government Accountability Office. I work a
lot with you, so thank you so much for being here today.
Let us remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
your microphone so we can all hear you.
We use timing lights here. When you begin, you will see a
green light. At the end of 5 minutes, that light will turn to
red. When you see that red, I will ask you to please complete
your statement.
I will also allow all the witnesses in the panel to testify
before Member questioning.
I now recognize Mr. Greenblatt for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARK GREENBLATT, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Greenblatt. Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury,
and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you today.
My office has identified IT security as a top management
challenge for the Department of the Interior for more than 20
years. With that in mind, we have prioritized cybersecurity
oversight as an important part of our portfolio, and have built
a track record, a long track record of effective oversight into
these vulnerabilities.
Our latest inspection focused on password security at the
Department. It goes without saying that passwords are a prime
target of attack for malicious actors who are attempting to
gain unauthorized access to sensitive data. Our team tested
whether DOI's password complexity and enforcement controls were
effective to prevent a malicious attack. To do this, our
testers spent less than $15,000 to design a system to crack or
hack passwords. Our tools compared the Department's 85,000
passwords, on the one hand, with 46 quadrillion potential
passwords on the other.
It is important to note two things: first, all of the
equipment, tools, and information that our team used is
available to malicious actors across the globe; second, the
methodology that we used is similar to that used by hackers in
the past.
The results of our testing were troubling. In total, we
cracked more than 20 percent of the Department's active
passwords, which amounts to more than 18,000 passwords. Get
this: Our team was able to crack more than 14,000 in the first
90 minutes alone.
Even worse, the cracked passwords included hundreds of
accounts belonging to senior government officials, and hundreds
more of accounts with elevated privileges such as what a
systems administrator would have.
Moreover, our testers found that the most commonly used
password at the Department was ``password1234.'' In fact, 5 of
the top 10 passwords in the Department included the word
``password'' and some combination of 1234. Even so, 99.99
percent of the accounts that we hacked met DOI's password
complexity requirements. As I said, the results of our tests
were disturbing.
But the good news is that there are solutions. The first
one is requiring what is called multi-factor authentication, or
MFA. MFA refers to the requirement to use at least two factors
to access computer systems, and the factors can be broken down
into three categories: something you have, such as an ID card;
something you know, such as a password; and something you are,
such as a fingerprint or a retinal scan. Multi-factor
authentication would require at least two of those, such as a
password with a fingerprint. MFA is the gold standard for
cybersecurity because it is much easier for an attacker to
obtain a password than it is to obtain a retinal scan.
MFA is already required on all Federal information systems
and has been for decades. But our inspection showed that the
Department of the Interior still allowed passwords alone on an
unknown number of systems. In fact, our inspection found that
nearly 90 percent of Interior's high-value IT assets permitted
authentication through passwords alone, or allowed MFA to be
bypassed.
Let me say that again, because that might be the most
significant aspect of our findings: We found that nearly 90
percent of the Department's high-value assets did not enforce
multi-factor authentication requirements. We therefore
recommended that the Department prioritize implementing and
requiring MFA that cannot be bypassed on all of its systems,
starting with the high-value assets.
While MFA is the cornerstone for cybersecurity, we
recognize that there may be cases in which MFA cannot be fully
implemented. So, we recommended that the DOI improve its
password policies. In particular, we recommend shifting away
from clumsy passwords that have special characters and numbers
and are simply impossible to remember.
Specifically, we recommend that the Department shift away
from requiring a password, which is hard for a person to
remember and easy for a computer to crack, to a passphrase,
which is a string of unrelated words which is easy for a person
to remember and hard for a computer to crack. Using passphrases
is part of the mandatory technical requirements for Federal
agencies, and we recommended that the Department adopt policies
and controls that are consistent with that guidance.
To its credit, the Department concurred with our
recommendations, and has generally provided target dates for
their implementation.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to answering
your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Greenblatt follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Mark Lee Greenblatt, Inspector
General, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for giving me the opportunity to discuss
cybersecurity at the Department of the Interior (DOI) and in
particular, our office's January 2023 report, P@s$w0rds at the U.S.
Department of the Interior: Easily Cracked Passwords, Lack of
Multifactor Authentication, and Other Failures Put Critical DOI Systems
at Risk. As you know, inspectors general have a direct reporting
relationship to Congress. My office and I take this obligation
seriously, and we appreciate the Subcommittee's continued support for
our independent and objective oversight.
In our recent inspection of the DOI's password security, we found
that the DOI's management practices and password complexity
requirements were not sufficient to prevent potential unauthorized
access to its systems and data. In fact, during our inspection, we
cracked 18,174 of 85,944--or 21 percent of active user passwords,
including 288 accounts with elevated privileges and 362 accounts of
senior U.S. Government employees. As the result of our findings, we
made eight recommendations to help the Department strengthen its IT
security by improving user account management practices. The DOI
concurred with our recommendations.
I. Background

The DOI Office of Inspector General (OIG) has recognized IT
security as one of the DOI's top management challenges for many years.
The DOI relies on complex, interconnected information systems to carry
out its daily operations and spends approximately $1.7 billion annually
on its portfolio of IT assets. Our work has found that the DOI
continues to face challenges in implementing an enterprise IT security
program that balances compliance, cost, and risk while enabling bureaus
to meet their diverse missions.
The OIG prioritizes cybersecurity oversight as an important part of
our portfolio. For example, our 2023-2024 oversight plan includes
planned reviews of the DOI's vulnerability remediation practices and
cyber threat hunting efforts. We also currently have an ongoing review
of the DOI's public cloud computing security practices.
In April 2023, we issued the fiscal year 2022 annual independent
Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) audit for the
DOI.\1\ That audit identified needed improvements and made 24
recommendations intended to strengthen the DOI's information security
program as well as those of the bureaus and offices. Using FISMA
metrics, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) scored the
cybersecurity performance of 23 Federal agencies, including the DOI.
The DOI scored a 68 percent and ranked 23rd on the list.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Summary: Independent Auditors' Performance Audit Report on the
U.S. Department of the Interior Federal Information Security
Modernization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Report No. 2022-ITA-028).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other recent work published by our office includes the results of
our testing of the DOI's cyber threat detection and defense controls.
Specifically, in August 2022, we issued a memorandum concluding that
this evaluation could be closed without a full-scale report because we
were satisfied with the Department's response to our technical tests,
conducted between May and November 2021.\2\ Our review of the
Department's cyber incident tracking system demonstrated that the DOI's
IT staff identified our simulated attacks. Moreover, the Department
mitigated confirmed technical vulnerabilities identified by our
technical tests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The U.S. Department of the Interior's Cyber Threat Detection
and Defense Controls (Report No. 2020-ITA-067).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, in September 2020, we issued a report of our
evaluation of the security of the DOI's wireless networks.\3\ Our
evaluation revealed that the Department did not deploy and operate a
secure wireless network infrastructure. We conducted reconnaissance and
penetration testing of wireless networks representing each bureau and
office. To do this, we assembled portable test units for less than $200
that were easily concealed in a backpack or purse and operated these
units with smartphones from publicly accessible areas and locations
open to visitors. Our attacks simulated the techniques of malicious
actors attempting to break into departmental wireless networks, such as
eavesdropping, so-called ``evil twin'' attacks,\4\ and password
cracking. We made 14 recommendations that will help prevent malicious
actors from eavesdropping on internal communications and gaining
unauthorized access to the DOI's wireless networks. The Department
concurred with and has implemented all recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Evil Twins, Eavesdropping, and Password Cracking: How the
Office of Inspector General Successfully Attacked the U.S. Department
of the Interior's Wireless Networks (Report No. 2018-ITA-020).
\4\ In such attacks, bad actors seek to capture usernames and
passwords and then crack the passwords.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the team's success rate cracking passwords during our
September 2020 evaluation, we decided to conduct a formal test of
passwords throughout the Department. That prompted this passwords
project, in which we inspected the DOI's password complexity
requirements after defining rules of engagement \5\ with the Department
to ensure that it was able to protect its IT systems and that any
vulnerabilities could be addressed promptly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ As explained in our report, according to the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, ``rules of engagement'' define detailed
guidelines and constraints regarding the execution of information
security testing. The rules are established before the start of a
security test and give the test team authority to conduct defined
activities without the need for additional permissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II. The DOI OIG's Inspection of the DOI's Password Complexity
Requirements

Identifying and authenticating users is a fundamental security
control for granting access to computer systems and information
resources. As such, authentication methods such as passwords are a
prime target of attack for malicious actors attempting to gain
unauthorized access to sensitive data. In this inspection, our
objective was to determine whether the Department's password management
and enforcement controls were effective enough to prevent a malicious
actor from gaining unauthorized access to Department computer systems
by capturing and ``cracking'' user passwords.
A. Methodology
A ``clear text password'' is what a user types when prompted to log
in to a system. To avoid exposing a sensitive password, user passwords
are stored in a secure, unintelligible format called ``hashes.'' The
hashed version of a password is not usually accepted through typical
authentication operations, such as computer login prompts. This
restriction prevents a malicious actor from using captured password
hashes to gain unauthorized access to a computer system. So, for
example, the clear text password ``Password-1234'' is stored in its
hashed form as ``A71FB31235347EA75956B6155ED36899.''
Hashes are generally considered secure because they cannot be
directly reverted to clear text--their original state. However, there
are indirect methods attackers can use to attempt to recover hashed
passwords. Once attackers have captured hashes, they must attempt to
recover their original clear text form through a process referred to as
``hash cracking.'' \6\ If successful, this enables the attacker to use
the password to gain unauthorized access to an organization's computer
systems and data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ``Hash cracking'' is the automated process of generating clear
text password ``candidates'' and then computing hashes of those
candidates and comparing the results against captured hashes. If the
candidate's hash matches the captured hash, it means the password
candidate and the clear text version of the captured hash are the same.
If the two hashes do not match, the process continues until either a
match is found or the attacker gives up and attempts to crack other
captured password hashes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To test the Department's passwords, our inspectors spent less than
$15,000 on a system designed to crack--or hack--passwords using open-
source software and a custom wordlist, consisting of publicly available
password lists harvested from past data breaches, dictionaries from
multiple languages, U.S. Government terminology, and pop culture
references. We created a set of rules and processes for manipulating
and combining those words into password candidates; we then attempted
to crack the hashes for every DOI user account.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ As part of our rules of engagement with the Department, we
waited 90 days to begin testing hashes from the Department. At that
time, all accounts should have had their passwords changed or been
disabled due to inactivity pursuant to departmental policy. As of June
8, 2021, we provided the Department with a list of all user accounts
with passwords we cracked to ensure that the Department forced those
accounts to change passwords.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Findings
We found that the Department's management practices and password
complexity requirements were not sufficient to prevent potential
unauthorized access to its systems and data. Over the course of our
inspection, we cracked 18,174 of 85,944--or 21 percent of active user
passwords, including 288 accounts with elevated privileges and 362
accounts of senior U.S. Government employees.

Specifically, we found that:

1.  The Department did not consistently implement multifactor
authentication (MFA), including for 89 percent of its High
Value Assets, which are assets that could have serious
impacts to the Department's ability to conduct business if
compromised. This lack of MFA left these systems vulnerable
to password compromising attacks.

2.  The Department's password complexity requirements were outdated
and ineffective, allowing users to select easy-to-crack
passwords (e.g., Changeme$12345, Polar_bear65,
Nationalparks2014!). We found, for example, that 4.75
percent of all active user account passwords were based on
the word ``password.'' In the first 90 minutes of testing,
we cracked the passwords for 16 percent of the Department's
user accounts.

3.  The Department's password complexity requirements implicitly
allowed unrelated staff to use the same inherently weak
passwords--meaning there was not a rule in place to prevent
this practice. For example, the most reused password
(Password-1234) was used on 478 unique active accounts. In
fact, 5 of the 10 most reused passwords at the Department
included a variation of ``password'' combined with
``1234''; at the time of our report, this combination met
the Department's requirements, even though it is not
difficult to crack.

4.  The Department did not timely disable inactive (unused) accounts
or enforce password age limits, which left more than 6,000
additional active accounts vulnerable to attack.

The Department Did Not Consistently Implement MFA on Its Systems

MFA refers to the requirement to use at least two factors to access
computer systems, such as a password plus a PIN from a smartphone app
or a PIV card plus a password. When MFA is implemented correctly, it
adds a layer of security that protects organizations, even when
passwords are compromised.
MFA is already required on all Federal information systems and has
been for decades. As our inspection showed, however, the Department
still allowed single-factor authentication (username and password) on
an indeterminate number of its systems, including high-value IT assets.
Because the Department relied on authentication methods that were
not in line with National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST)
recommendations, Governmentwide mandates, and industry best practices,
the burden of the Department's security controls rested on obsolete
password complexity requirements. Further, the Department did not have
a full picture of which systems complied with which standards. Without
requiring and enforcing MFA across its systems--including those that
contain sensitive information--the Department's data remains at risk of
unauthorized exposure.
The Department's Ineffective Password Complexity Requirements Allowed
Easy-To-Crack Passwords

Department policy at the time of our inspection required that all
passwords have a minimum length of 12 characters and contain at least 3
of 4 character types consisting of uppercase, lowercase, digits, and
special characters. We found that these requirements were not
sufficient to prevent us from successfully recovering the clear text
passwords for 18,174 active user accounts (21 percent) using our hash-
cracking system. We recovered passwords for 13,924 of those accounts in
the first 90 minutes of testing and recovered the passwords for the
remaining 4,250 accounts over an additional 8 weeks of testing.
We note that 99.99 percent of the accounts we cracked met the
Department's password complexity requirements. These passwords,
however, were consistently made up of single dictionary words,
patterns, or slightly modified existing passwords--all of which people
tend to use to construct memorable passwords. Although the Department's
password policy at the time of the inspection appeared to encourage
complex passwords, in practice, its policies were not sufficient to
prevent users from creating passwords that are easy to crack.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Most of the passwords we cracked were based on a single
dictionary word with the inclusion of enough characters or character
substitutions to meet the complexity requirement. For example,
``Password-1234'' was the most used password at the Department. Even
though a password of this type meets requirements because it includes
uppercase letters, lowercase letters, digits, and a special character,
it is, in fact, easy to crack.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, frequent password change requirements, while crucial when
weak passwords are permitted, tend to encourage users to continue to
use passwords that are easy to crack. NIST states that, when frequent
password changes are required, users are most likely to change a single
character, or append a character to the end of an existing password
(e.g., Password-1234 might become Password-1234!). This ensures that
the password remains memorable to the user, but it also remains weak
and easy to crack. This creates a feedback loop that frustrates users,
perpetuates the weak password cycle, and does not improve security.
The Department's Password Complexity Requirements Implicitly Allowed
Hundreds of Unrelated Accounts To Use the Same Passwords

Password reuse is a security risk because it reduces both the time
and effort necessary for a successful attack. The risk is greatly
increased when the same easy-to-crack passwords are allowed to be used
on multiple accounts. We found that the same easy-to-crack passwords
(which all met the Department's complexity requirements) were used
across multiple active accounts. Even though many of these accounts
were unrelated to each other, the passwords were so common that
multiple employees from different bureaus and offices independently
chose the same passwords. Because the Department did not have an
explicit rule in place denying this practice, it implicitly allowed
users to create the same passwords across multiple accounts.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ In other cases, we found common passwords reused across
multiple related accounts, such as new accounts with temporary
passwords, shared mailboxes, or service accounts. (Service accounts are
often granted elevated privileges over systems or data, and shared
mailboxes often contain sensitive data or attachments.) Understanding
the purpose and extent of access granted to these accounts was out of
the scope of our inspection; therefore, we were unable to identify the
extent of the risk posed by these and other nonadministrative accounts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We found that 20 percent of all active accounts had passwords that
were used across multiple distinct accounts (16,812 out of 85,944).
This includes both cracked and uncracked passwords. We were able to
identify when the same passwords were used based on the hashes, so even
if we did not crack a password, we could identify and determine which
accounts shared the same password.
NIST standards require agencies to check potential passwords and
disallow them if they are on a list of commonly used, expected, or
compromised passwords. We found that none of the Department's bureaus
had implemented the ability to check for and prevent weak passwords.
The Department Did Not Timely Disable Inactive Accounts or Enforce
Password Age Limits

We found that the Department failed to enforce its own account
management policies regarding account disabling and password changes on
a significant number of accounts. The Department's policy requires
accounts to be disabled after 45 days of inactivity. Enforcing this
provision is important because unused accounts pose a higher risk to
Department systems and networks, as they offer more opportunities for a
malicious actor to gain unauthorized access. Disabling accounts after a
period of inactivity reduces this risk. We found that 6,243 of all
active accounts had not been used for more than 45 days; the Department
failed to disable these accounts as required by its own policy and
instead left implementation and enforcement of this policy to the
bureaus and offices. We cracked 23 percent (1,405) of these accounts.
We also found that 28 percent of the accounts we cracked did not
comply with the Department policy requiring password changes at 60-day
intervals, suggesting that these accounts were still using the
passwords after we cracked them. Without that password age limit, an
attacker is not limited by time. According to Department policy in
place at the time of our inspection, an attacker would have only 60
days to intercept or otherwise acquire a hash, crack it, and then use
it.
C. Recommendations

Given our findings, we made eight recommendations to the Department
to help it strengthen its IT security by improving account management
practices. In summary, our recommendations can be grouped into four
broad categories:

First, we recommended that the Department prioritize
implementing MFA across all systems and develop a system to
track the status of the implementation of MFA.

Second, we recommended that the Department revise password
complexity requirements to bring them in line with current
NIST guidance, such as using longer passphrases and less
frequent change intervals.

Third, we recommended that the Department revise policy to
prohibit accounts from reusing the same passphrases and
passwords.

Fourth, we recommended that the Department ensure
compliance with policies regarding timely disabling of
inactive accounts.

In response to the report, the Department concurred with our
recommendations and provided target implementation dates. We are
engaged in ongoing communication with the Department regarding the
status of these recommendations and will report on Oversight.gov when
actions sufficient to close the recommendations have occurred.
III. Conclusion

In the current cyberthreat environment, strong authentication
methods and robust account and password management practices are
necessary to help protect computer systems from unauthorized access.
Overreliance on passwords to restrict system access to authorized
personnel can have catastrophic consequences.
The Department's reliance on single-factor authentication only
increased the importance of aligning its account management
requirements with NIST's recommendations.
To best mitigate the risk of easy-to-crack passwords, the
Department should prioritize MFA on all systems and applications. In
those instances where MFA has not yet been implemented, password
complexity requirements should be updated to comply with NIST guidance.
Thank you for your time. I look forward to answering questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Mark Greenblatt,
Inspector General, U.S. Department of the Interior
Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar
Question 1. Is anything stopping the Department of the Interior
from allocating a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives?

Answer. The Department of the Interior (DOI) did not address budget
issues in its response to our office's report (the DOI's response is
included in the report as Appendix 2). The Office of Inspector General
(OIG) also has not independently evaluated the DOI's budget. Given that
we have not conducted oversight work in this area, we do not have a
basis to make findings or draw conclusions about the Department's
ability to allocate a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives.

Question 2. How can DOI better prioritize cybersecurity initiatives
with its existing budget?

Answer. Although we have not conducted specific work regarding the
DOI's prioritization of cybersecurity initiatives within its existing
budget, we have evaluated various aspects of DOI's IT environment, and
64 IT-related open recommendations have yet to be implemented. We have
identified seven of these recommendations as ``significant,'' including
four from the passwords inspection report that was discussed at the
hearing. Designation of a recommendation as ``significant'' considers a
range of factors but, overall, is an indication that we have concluded
that it is a particularly important issue to address. Beyond noting
this designation, we do not have a basis to make findings or draw
conclusions about how the DOI should make prioritization decisions
within its current budget.

______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Inspector General. I now recognize
Ms. Cruz Cain for her 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARISON CRUZ CAIN, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY AND CYBERSECURITY, GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Cruz Cain. Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury,
Chairman Westerman, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you
for inviting GAO to contribute to this important discussion
about cybersecurity risks at the Department of the Interior.

As you know, Federal agencies and our nation's critical
infrastructure, such as energy and transportation, depend on
technology systems to carry out operations and to process
essential information. The security of these systems and data
is vital to protecting individual privacy and our nation's
security and well-being. GAO has long emphasized the urgent
need for the Federal Government to improve its ability to
protect against cyber threats. In fact, we have designated
cybersecurity as a government-wide, high-risk area since 1997.

Today, I will focus on cyber threat actors and incidents
facing Federal systems and critical infrastructure. I will also
discuss recent findings related to Interior's cybersecurity
program and practices.

Risk to technology systems are increasing. Malicious actors
are becoming more willing and capable of carrying out cyber
attacks, which can result in serious harm to human safety, the
environment, and the economy. Because of this, agencies and
critical infrastructure owners and operators need to protect
the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of their
systems, and effectively respond to cyber attacks.

According to the 2023 annual threat assessment of the U.S.
intelligence community, China, Iran, North Korea, and Russia
continue to pose the greatest cyber threats. These countries
possess the ability to launch cyber attacks that could disrupt
the operations of critical infrastructure, including facilities
and assets supporting offshore oil and gas production. Recent
attacks demonstrate the impact these threat actors can have on
critical infrastructure and systems.

The ransomware attack on the Colonial Pipeline Company led
to a shutdown of the pipeline, which resulted in widespread
gasoline shortages throughout the southeastern United States.
Federal agencies have continued to report tens of thousands of
information security incidents each year, which further
highlights the importance of protecting their systems and those
that support our critical infrastructure.

Accordingly, the Department of the Interior has significant
responsibilities, both for protecting its own systems and data,
and overseeing the safety of the offshore oil and gas
infrastructure. However, both we and Interior's OIG have
identified needed improvements in the Department's
cybersecurity program and practices.

As my colleague mentioned, in January 2023, Interior's OIG
reported that the Department had numerous weaknesses in its
password management. Also, its computer authentication
mechanisms and account management practices had weaknesses
similar to those that were allegedly exploited in the Colonial
Pipeline attack.

Also, in September 2022, we reported on Interior's efforts
to establish a comprehensive privacy program. We found that the
Department had addressed several important privacy practices,
but had not yet incorporated privacy into its organization-wide
risk management strategy. This practice is key to ensuring that
the Department has established a strategic approach to
identify, assess, and manage privacy risks.

Further, in October 2022, we reported that Interior's
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement had not
developed a strategy to identify and assess cyber risks to
infrastructure supporting offshore oil and gas. Absent such a
strategy, offshore oil and gas infrastructure will continue to
remain at significant risk from cyber threat actors.

Much to its credit, Interior generally agreed with the
recommendations that we and the OIG have made to address these
issues, and has outlined plans to implement them. It will be
important for the Department to follow through on their
commitments to help ensure that the Department is capable of
both preventing and responding to the ongoing cyber threats it
faces.

In summary, to protect Federal systems and critical
infrastructure from cyber-related threats, Federal agencies
such as Interior need to ensure that they are effectively
implementing risk-based cybersecurity programs and practices.
Doing so provides the best protection from cyber attacks that
threaten our nation's economic well-being and national
security.

This concludes my remarks, and I look forward to answering
any questions you may have. Thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Cruz Cain follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marisol Cruz Cain, Director, Information
Technology and Cybersecurity, U.S. Government Accountability Office

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss cybersecurity
risks at the Department of the Interior, such as threats posed by
malicious actors, including nation-state actors. As you know, federal
agencies and our nation's critical infrastructures--such as energy,
transportation systems, communications, and financial services--depend
on technology systems to carry out operations and process, maintain,
and report essential information. The security of these systems and
data is vital to protecting individual privacy and national security,
prosperity, and well-being. Moreover, recent incidents highlight the
impact that cyberattacks can have on these systems.
We have designated information security as a government-wide high-
risk area since 1997. We expanded this high-risk area in 2003 to
include protection of critical cyber infrastructure. In 2015, we
expanded it again to include protecting the privacy of personally
identifiable information.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See GAO, High-Risk Series: Efforts Made to Achieve Progress
Need to Be Maintained and Expanded to Fully Address All Areas, GAO-23-
106203 (Washington, DC.: Apr. 20, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This statement discusses various types of threat actors and attacks
that could compromise federal systems and our nation's critical
infrastructure, such as that overseen by Interior. It also discusses
cybersecurity risks that we and the Office of the Inspector General
have identified at the department.
This statement is based on previously issued GAO reports on
cybersecurity at Interior and other federal agencies. We also reviewed
Interior Office of Inspector General reports and other public
information sources.
We conducted the work on which this testimony is based in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our
findings and conclusions based on audit objectives. We believe the
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives.
Background

The U.S. Department of the Interior's mission is to protect and
manage the nation's natural resources and cultural heritage, provide
scientific and other information about those resources, and honor its
trust responsibilities and special commitments to American Indians,
Alaska Natives, and affiliated Island Communities. The department plays
a central role in how the United States stewards its public lands,
increases environmental protections, pursues environmental justice, and
honors our nation-to-nation relationship with Tribes. The department
carries out its mission through 11 technical bureaus:

Bureau of Indian Affairs

Bureau of Indian Education

Bureau of Land Management

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management

Bureau of Reclamation

Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement

Bureau of Trust Funds Administration

National Park Service

Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

U.S. Geological Survey

In addition to the 11 bureaus, a number of offices fall under the
Office of the Secretary, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy,
Management and Budget, the Solicitor's Office, and the Office of
Inspector General.
Interior IT Security Responsibilities
Interior is responsible for protecting the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of its information and information systems.
Specifically, the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of
2014 (FISMA) was enacted to provide a comprehensive framework for
ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over
information resources that support federal operations and assets.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014
(FISMA 2014), Pub. L. No. 113-283, 128 Stat. 3073 (Dec. 18, 2014)
largely superseded the Federal Information Security Management Act of
2002 (FISMA 2002), enacted as Title III, E-Government Act of 2002, Pub.
L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, 2946 (Dec. 17, 2002). As used in this
statement, FISMA refers to the new requirements in FISMA 2014, and to
other relevant FISMA 2002 requirements that were unchanged by FISMA
2014 and continue in full force and effect.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FISMA requires agencies to develop, document, and implement an
agency-wide information security program to secure federal information
operations and assets of the agency. These information security
programs are to provide risk-based protections for the information and
information systems that support the agency's operations. FISMA
requires agencies to comply with the Office of Management and Budget's
(OMB) policies and procedures, the Department of Homeland Security's
(DHS) binding operational directives, and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology's (NIST) information security standards.
Interior's Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) leads
Interior's security management program. The office's mission and
primary objective is to establish, manage, and oversee a comprehensive
information resources management program. The Interior Chief
Information Security Officer (CISO) reports to the Chief Information
Officer and oversees the Information Assurance Division. This division
is responsible for Interior's IT security and privacy policy, planning,
compliance, and operations.
Each of Interior's bureaus and offices have an Associate Chief
Information Officer (ACIO) that reports to the department Chief
Information Officer and the Deputy Bureau Director. The ACIO serves as
the senior leader over all IT resources within the bureau or office.
Each also has an Associate Chief Information Security Officer that
represents the Bureau and reports to the Bureau ACIO and Interior's
CISO.
Interior Offshore Oil and Gas Responsibilities
Interior's Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) is
responsible for overseeing offshore oil and gas operations, including
cyber risks. The bureau's mission is to promote safety, protect the
environment, and conserve resources offshore through regulatory
oversight and enforcement. It is responsible for overseeing offshore
operations, which includes the authority to investigate incidents that
occur on the outer continental shelf, monitor operator compliance with
environmental stipulations, and take enforcement actions against
operators that violate safety or environmental standards.
BSEE's regulatory programs advise a wide range of offshore
activities and facilities, including drilling, well completion,
production, pipeline, and decommissioning operations. The bureau
implements advancements in technology and conducts onsite inspections
to assure compliance with regulations, lease terms, and approved plans.
To date, BSEE's regulations do not explicitly mention cybersecurity,
but the bureau has determined that addressing cybersecurity risks to
offshore oil and gas infrastructure aligns with its mission to promote
safety and protect the environment.
Cyber Threat Actors Pose Serious Risks to Federal Systems and Critical
Infrastructure

Risks to technology systems are increasing. In particular, systems
and networks supporting federal agencies and U.S. critical
infrastructure are becoming more vulnerable to cyberattacks. These
systems and networks are composed of, and connected to, enterprise IT
systems and operational technology systems.\3\ Because of their
complexity and interconnections with other systems, these systems are
vulnerable to cyberattacks. Such attacks could result in serious harm
to human safety, the environment, and the economy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Enterprise IT systems encompass traditional IT computing and
communications hardware and software components that may be connected
to the internet. Operational technology systems monitor and control
sensitive processes and physical functions, such as offshore oil and
gas operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overview of Cyber Threat Actors
Key cybersecurity risks to federal agencies and U.S. critical
infrastructure also include the growing attack capabilities of threat
actors. According to the 2023 Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S.
Intelligence Community, China, Iran, North Korea, and Russia pose the
greatest cyber threats.\4\ Of particular concern, these countries
possess the ability to launch cyberattacks that could have disruptive
effects on critical infrastructure, including facilities and assets
supporting offshore oil and gas production. Further, the assessment
stated that transnational organized ransomware actors continue to
improve and execute high-impact ransomware attacks, extorting funds,
disrupting critical services, and exposing sensitive data. Table 1
describes common types of cyber threat actors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community (Feb. 6, 2023).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 1: Common Cyber Threat Actors

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Threat actor             Description and potential motivation
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nations                  Nations--including nation-states, state-
sponsored, and state-sanctioned groups or
programs--use cyber tools as part of their
efforts to further economic, military, and
political goals. Chinese and Russian cyber
threat actors have previously targeted the
U.S. energy sector, including oil and gas
companies. In addition, Iran has previously
targeted foreign oil and gas companies using
cyberattack techniques.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Transnational criminal   Transnational criminal groups, including
groups                   organized crime organizations, seek to use
cyberattacks for monetary gain. Further, cyber
criminals are increasing the number, scale,
and sophistication of ransomware attacks that
threaten to cause greater disruptions of
critical services.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hackers and hacktivists  Hackers break into networks for reasons
including the challenge, revenge, stalking, or
monetary gain. In contrast, hacktivists are
ideologically motivated actors who use
cyberattack tools to further political goals.
For example, according to U.S. Coast Guard
officials, the agency considers environmental
groups opposed to petroleum development to be
a threat actor that could potentially target
offshore oil and gas infrastructure.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Insiders                 Insiders are individuals (such as employees,
contractors, or vendors) with authorized
access to an information system or enterprise
and who have the potential to cause harm,
wittingly or unwittingly. This can occur
through the destruction, disclosure, or
modification of data, or through denial of
service. Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement officials indicated that insiders,
such as a disgruntled employee, could cause
issues on an offshore oil and gas facility.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: GAO analysis / GAO-23-106869

Examples of Cyberattacks
Cyber adversaries use a variety of tactics and techniques to
exploit vulnerabilities and attack systems and networks. According to
MITRE's ATT&CK
'
Framework, attackers tend to follow common
methodologies to compromise targets and achieve their goals. For
example, threat actors can use multiple techniques, such as
compromising the supply chain of hardware and software, to gain initial
access to IT and operational technology systems.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The supply chain is a linked set of resources and processes
that begins with the design of products and services and extends
through development, sourcing, manufacturing, handling, and delivery of
products and services to the acquirer.

In fiscal year 2022, federal agencies reported 30,659 information
security incidents across nine categories,\6\ which represents a 5.7
percent decrease from the over 32,500 incidents reported in fiscal year
2021.\7\ Examples of successful cyberattacks demonstrate the impact
they can have on federal systems and the nation's critical
infrastructure:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The nine categories of incidents are (1) attrition, (2) email/
phishing, (3) external/removable media, (4) impersonation/spoofing, (5)
improper usage, (6) loss or theft of equipment, (7) web, (8) other/
unknown, and (9) multiple vectors.
\7\ Office of Management and Budget, Federal Information Security
Modernization Act of 2014, Annual Report Fiscal Year 2022. The number
of incidents are from OMB's fiscal year 2022 annual FISMA report to
Congress, which is based on incidents reported to the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency by federal agencies. OMB notes that
drawing conclusions based on this data point would be premature,
particularly as agencies have adjusted to several new sets of reporting
guidelines over the last few years.

In May 2023, Microsoft reported that it uncovered
cyberattacks by Volt Typhoon, a state-sponsored actor based
in China. According to Microsoft, Volt Typhoon has been
active since 2021 and has targeted critical infrastructure
in communications, manufacturing, utility, transportation,
government, and IT, among other sectors. Microsoft also
reported that Volt Typhoon is aiming to develop
capabilities that could disrupt communication
infrastructure between the United States and Asia during
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
future crises.

In May 2021, the Colonial Pipeline Company learned that it
was a victim of a cyberattack, and malicious actors
reportedly deployed ransomware against the pipeline
company's business systems. According to a joint advisory
released by DHS and the FBI, the company proactively
disconnected certain systems that monitor and control
physical pipeline functions to ensure the safety of the
pipeline. This resulted in a temporary halt to all pipeline
operations, which led to gasoline shortages throughout the
southeast U.S.

In December 2020, the cybersecurity firm FireEye
discovered that a SolarWinds product known as Orion was
compromised and being leveraged by a threat actor for
access to its customer systems. Hackers inserted malicious
code into Orion--a product widely used in both the federal
government and private sector to monitor network activity
and manage devices. The threat actor, the Foreign
Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation, used Orion
to breach several federal agency networks. The initial
breach opened a backdoor to agency systems that enabled the
threat actor to deliver additional malicious code. This
allowed the actor to move laterally, gathering information
and compromising data.

In 2015, Russian threat actors conducted a cyberattack on
the Ukrainian power grid that systematically disconnected
substations, resulting in a power outage for about 225,000
customers.

According to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, from
December 2011 to 2013, state-sponsored Chinese actors
conducted a spearphishing and intrusion campaign targeting
U.S. oil and gas pipeline companies. Of the 23 targeted
pipeline operators, 13 were confirmed compromises.

Progress Has Been Made, but Interior's Cybersecurity Practices Have
Weaknesses

While Interior has made progress in addressing previously reported
cybersecurity weaknesses, both the department's Office of Inspector
General (OIG) and GAO have continued to identify multiple weaknesses in
the department's cybersecurity program and practices. These include
issues affecting both Interior's own security environment and its
oversight of offshore oil and gas infrastructure.
Interior's Inspector General Identified Weaknesses in Cybersecurity
Practices
In January 2023, Interior's OIG issued a report examining the
department's password complexity requirements.\8\ The OIG found that
the department's management practices and password complexity
requirements were not sufficient to prevent potential unauthorized
access to its systems and data. Specifically, the OIG determined that
the department (1) had not consistently implemented multifactor
authentication, (2) used password complexity requirements that were
outdated and ineffective, (3) used password complexity requirements
that implicitly allowed unrelated staff to use the same inherently weak
passwords, and (4) did not promptly disable inactive (unused) accounts
or enforce password age limits. The OIG noted that if a malicious actor
were to compromise an account with elevated privileges, such as a
system administrator's account, the magnitude of harm would increase.
The OIG made eight recommendations to help the department strengthen
its IT security by improving user account management practices. The
department concurred with the OIG's recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Department of the Interior Office of Inspector General,
P@$$words at the U.S. Department of the Interior: Easily Cracked
Passwords, Lack of Multifactor Authentication, and Other Failures Put
Critical DOI Systems at Risk, 2021-ITA-005 (January 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In April 2023, the OIG released a summary of an independent audit,
carried out by a contractor on behalf of OIG, of the department's
information security program.\9\ The summary indicated that Interior's
program was not effective because it was not consistent with applicable
FISMA requirements, OMB policy and guidance, or NIST standards and
guidelines.\10\ The contractor identified needed improvements in the
areas of risk management, supply chain risk management, identity and
access management, configuration management, data protection and
privacy, information security continuous monitoring, incident response,
and contingency planning. To address these weaknesses, the contractor
made 24 recommendations intended to strengthen the Interior's
information security program as well as those of the bureaus and
offices. The department concurred with all recommendations and
established a target completion date for each corrective action.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Department of the Interior Office of Inspector General,
Summary: Independent Auditors' Performance Audit Report on the U.S.
Department of the Interior Federal Information Security Modernization
Act for Fiscal Year 2022, 2022-ITA-028 (April 2023).
\10\ According to OMB's fiscal year 2022 Core IG Metrics
Implementation Analysis and Guidelines, a security program is
considered effective if most of the fiscal year 2022 Core Inspector
General Metrics are at least Level 4, ``Managed and Measurable.'' Using
OMB's guidance and the CyberScope results, the contractor determined
that most of the cybersecurity functions were Level 3, ``Consistently
Implemented.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
GAO Has Reported on Gaps in Interior's Approach to Managing
Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks

Cybersecurity risk management: In July 2019, we reviewed the
cybersecurity risk management practices at the 23 civilian Chief
Financial Officers (CFO) Act agencies, which includes Interior.\11\ We
found that the department had not fully addressed three of five key
practices for establishing its cybersecurity risk management program.
Specifically, the department had not (1) developed a cybersecurity risk
management strategy that addressed key elements, (2) fully documented
risk-based policies and procedures, or (3) fully established a process
or mechanism for coordination between its cybersecurity risk executive
and its enterprise risk management governance structure. We recommended
that Interior take steps to address these gaps. Since then the
department has implemented all three recommendations. Implementing
these foundational practices is a critical step in ensuring Interior
can make consistent, informed risk-based decisions to protect agency
systems and information against cyber-based threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Agencies Need to Fully Establish Risk
Management Programs and Address Challenges, GAO-19-384 (Washington,
DC.: July 25, 2019).

IT workforce planning: In October 2019, we reported on the extent
to which the 24 CFO Act agencies had implemented key IT workforce
planning activities.\12\ We found that Interior had partially,
minimally, or not implemented the key practices. This included, for
example, assessing gaps in competencies and staffing. Accordingly, we
recommended that Interior fully address the workforce planning
activities. As of May 2023, Interior had taken some steps, but work
remained to fully implement these activities. A key to having a
successful cybersecurity program is having a well-trained, highly
qualified workforce that is versed in identifying cyber threats and
recognizes steps to take once confronted with them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO, Information Technology: Agencies Need to Fully Implement
Key Workforce Planning Activities, GAO-20-129 (Washington, DC.: Oct.
30, 2019).

Information and communications technology supply chain risk
management: In December 2020, we issued a public version of a sensitive
report reviewing the information and communications technology (ICT)
supply chain risk management programs and practices at the 23 civilian
CFO Act agencies (which includes Interior).\13\ None of the 23
agencies, including Interior, fully implemented all of the foundational
practices for supply chain risk management. Fourteen of the 23 agencies
had not implemented any of the practices. In the sensitive version of
the report, we made a total of 145 recommendations to the 23 agencies
to fully implement these practices. Implementing these practices will
help organizations protect against supply chain risks, such as the
insertion of counterfeits and malicious software, unauthorized
production, and tampering, as well as poor manufacturing and
development practices throughout the system development life cycle.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ GAO, Information Technology: Federal Agencies Need to Take
Urgent Action to Manage Supply Chain Risks, GAO-21-171 (Washington,
DC.: Dec. 15, 2020). This is a public version of a sensitive report
that GAO issued in October 2020. Information that agencies deemed
sensitive was omitted and, due to sensitivity concerns, GAO substituted
numeric identifiers that were randomly assigned for the names of the
agencies.

Privacy of personal information: In September 2022, we reported on
a review of privacy programs at the 24 CFO Act. Agencies.\14\ We found
that Interior had addressed most of the key practices for establishing
a privacy program. However, the department had not fully incorporated
privacy into its department-wide risk management strategy, to include a
determination of risk tolerance. We recommended that Interior establish
a time frame for incorporating privacy into an organization-wide risk
management strategy that includes a determination of risk tolerance,
and develop and document this strategy. Interior concurred with this
recommendation and plans to implement it by November 2023. Such a
strategy will help the agency ensure that it is managing risks to
sensitive personal information consistently and within acceptable
parameters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ GAO, Privacy: Dedicated Leadership Can Improve Programs and
Address Challenges, GAO-22-105065 (Washington, DC.: Sept. 22, 2022).

Cybersecurity of offshore oil and gas infrastructure: In October
2022, we reported that BSEE had long recognized the need to address
cybersecurity risks to offshore oil and gas infrastructure but had
taken few actions to do so.\15\ In 2015 and 2020 BSEE initiated efforts
to address cybersecurity risks, but neither resulted in substantial
action. In 2022, BSEE started another such initiative and hired a
cybersecurity specialist to lead it. However, bureau officials said the
initiative will be paused until the specialist is adequately versed in
the relevant issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ GAO, Offshore Oil and Gas: Strategy Urgently Needed to Address
Cybersecurity Risks to Infrastructure, GAO-23-105789 (Washington, DC.:
Oct. 26, 2022).

We recommended that BSEE immediately develop and implement a
strategy to address offshore infrastructure risks. Such a strategy
should include an assessment and mitigation of risks and identify
objectives, roles, responsibilities, resources, and performance
measures, among other things. Absent the immediate development and
implementation of an appropriate strategy, offshore oil and gas
infrastructure will remain at significant risk. In March 2023, the
department indicated that BSEE is developing a cybersecurity strategy
and anticipates that this strategy will be complete by the end of
calendar year 2023.
In summary, cyber threats continue to pose a significant threat to
systems supporting the federal government and critical infrastructure.
Successful cyberattacks, including those carried out by nation-state
actors, could have catastrophic consequences for the economy, national
security, and human safety and well-being. The Department of the
Interior needs to continue to take steps to ensure that its systems and
data are protected from cyber-based attacks carried out by malicious
actors. Moreover, Interior needs to ensure that it is addressing cyber-
security risks to critical infrastructure assets for which it has
responsibility.

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

*****
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Cruz Cain submitted her prepared statement as a GAO
report. The statement as a GAO report can be viewed on the
Committee Repository at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II15/20230607/115966/HHRG-
118-II15-Wstate-CruzCainM-20230607.pdf

------

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Marisol Cruz Cain, Director,
Information Technology and Cybersecurity, U.S. Government
Accountability Office
Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar
Question 1. Is anything stopping the Department of the Interior
from allocating a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives?

Answer. The need to conduct risk assessments and budget constraints
due to operating and maintaining legacy systems are stopping the
Department of the Interior from allocating a greater percentage of its
existing budget to cybersecurity initiatives. Key steps for agencies to
ensure adequate funding for cybersecurity initiatives are to identify
and assess cyber risks, prioritize initiatives for addressing those
risks, and allocate the necessary funds as appropriate. For example, as
we reported, the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) had committed minimal resources and
demonstrated a lack of urgency in addressing cybersecurity risks to
offshore oil and gas production infrastructures.\1\ Accordingly, it is
critical that BSEE move expeditiously to develop and implement a
strategy to guide its most recent cybersecurity initiative. This
strategy should include (1) a risk assessment; (2) objectives,
activities, and performance measures; (3) roles, responsibilities, and
coordination; and (4) identification of needed resources and
investments. In March 2023, Interior indicated that BSEE is developing
a cybersecurity strategy that includes identifying resource needs,
which may be complete by the end of calendar year 2023. By developing
such a strategy, Interior will be better positioned to identify and
prioritize the funds it needs to support critical cybersecurity
initiatives. These priorities can then be reflected in future budget
requests. Similarly, we recently recommended that Interior incorporate
privacy into its organization-wide risk management strategy.\2\ This is
a key step for the department to identify, assess, and prioritize risks
to the sensitive personal information with which it is entrusted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Offshore Oil and Gas: Strategy Urgently Needed to Address
Cybersecurity Risks to Infrastructure, GAO-23-105789 (Washington, D.C.:
Oct. 26, 2022).
\2\ GAO, Privacy: Dedicated Leadership Can Improve Programs and
Address Challenges, GAO-22-105065 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 22, 2022).

As we have noted, however, agencies such as Interior are sometimes
constrained in making new investments by the large portion of their IT
budgets that are allocated to the operations and maintenance of legacy
systems. For example, in fiscal year 2023, Interior's budget allocates
approximately $297 million to the development, modernization, and
enhancement of its IT systems while allocating nearly $1.5 billion to
the operation and maintenance of existing systems. As we have
previously reported, legacy systems can be costly and difficult to
maintain, may have unsupported hardware and software, and may operate
with known security vulnerabilities.\3\ Such security vulnerabilities
may be either technically difficult or prohibitively expensive to
address.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ GAO, Information Technology: Agencies Need to Continue
Addressing Critical Legacy Systems, GAO-23-106821 (Washington, D.C.:
May 10, 2023).

Question 2. How can DOI better prioritize cybersecurity initiatives
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
with its existing budget?

Answer. Interior can better prioritize its cybersecurity
initiatives within its existing budget by continuing to utilize its
cybersecurity risk management strategy and ensuring that it is fully
implementing risk-based policies. Federal guidance, such as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-
39, identifies practices for establishing effective agency-wide
cybersecurity risk management programs. Specifically, the practices
include aligning agency priorities with resource allocation and
prioritization at all levels of the organization, including the
enterprise, business, and system levels.

We reported in July 2019 that managing competing priorities between
operations and cybersecurity presents a challenge for many agencies.\4\
In particular, agencies highlighted the competition for limited
resources between cybersecurity risk management activities and
operational or mission needs. For example, Interior's Deputy Chief
Information Officer noted that the need to balance mission priorities
with those related to cybersecurity risk management leads to fiscal and
operational challenges when making investment, architectural, and
operational decisions. To its credit, as we recommended in our July
2019 report, Interior developed an organization-wide cybersecurity risk
management strategy to define how the department intends to identify,
assess, and respond to risks. It also updated its policies to require
an organization-wide cybersecurity risk assessment and established a
process for coordination between its cybersecurity and enterprise risk
management functions. By establishing and implementing these risk-based
policies and procedures, Interior should be better positioned to
prioritize cybersecurity initiatives within its existing budget as well
as to identify areas for future investment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Agencies Need to Fully Establish Risk
Management Programs and Address Challenges, GAO-19-384 (Washington,
D.C.: July 25, 2019).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. If threat actors were to obtain personally identifiable
information during a breach of the Department of the Interior's (DOI)
systems, how would federal employees and members of the public be
impacted? How would infrastructure under the DOI, such as oil and gas
infrastructure, drinking water sources, and power grid maintenance, be
impacted?

Answer. A successful attack on Interior's systems involving
personally identifiable information (PII) could significantly impact
both federal employees and members of the public, leaving them more
susceptible to identity theft, fraud, and other crimes. The advent of
new technologies and the proliferation of PII has increased the
government's reliance on IT to collect, store, and transmit this
sensitive information. Consequently, vulnerabilities arising from
agencies' increased dependence on IT can result in the compromise of
personal information, such as inappropriate use, modification, or
disclosure. Recently reported breaches involving PII show that PII such
as names, addresses, dates of birth, and Social Security numbers can be
compromised when attackers exploit vulnerabilities in IT systems.

With respect to critical infrastructure, we previously reported
that cyberattacks against critical infrastructure (e.g., electric grid,
water and wastewater systems, etc.) were increasing in frequency,
sophistication, and scale.\5\ Because of their complexity and
interconnections with other systems, these systems are vulnerable to
cyberattacks. Such attacks could result in serious harm to human
safety, the environment, and the economy.\6\ Successful cyberattacks on
systems supporting critical infrastructure can compromise sensitive
information, such as businesses' proprietary information or
individuals' financial or medical information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: CISA Should Improve
Priority Setting, Stakeholder Involvement, and Threat Information
Sharing, GAO-22-104279 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 1, 2022).
\6\ GAO, Cybersecurity: Interior Needs to Address Threats to
Federal Systems and Critical Infrastructure, GAO-23-106869 (Washington,
DC.: June 7, 2023).

Moreover, operational technology (OT) systems, which are used to
monitor and control physical equipment, were once largely isolated from
internet and business IT systems but are now frequently connected with
those systems both within a company and accessible by internet systems
globally. As a result, cyberattacks are now more likely to originate in
business IT systems and migrate to OT. According to Interior's Bureau
of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, results of a successful
cyberattack on offshore oil and gas infrastructure could include deaths
and injuries, damaged or destroyed equipment, and pollution to the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
marine environment.

______

Dr. Gosar. I thank Ms. Cruz for her testimony. We will now
go to Members for their 5 minutes. I first recognize the
gentleman from Arkansas, the Chairman of the Full Committee,
Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Gosar. And, again, thank
you to the witnesses.
Inspector General Greenblatt, a lot of interesting stuff in
your testimony. The Password Complexity Report discusses how
passphrases that you mentioned may be more effective than
passwords, and how a ``negative feedback loop'' has developed
for password requirements. Can you explain what passphrases are
in a little more detail, what you mean by a negative feedback
loop for passwords, how passphrases are a better solution, you
alluded to that, but also how AI can be used to crack
passwords, and even maybe passphrases?
Mr. Greenblatt. Passphrases, in short, are just a string of
unrelated words. The example that we used in our report is
``dinosaur letter trail chants.'' It takes a computer 550 years
to figure that out, as opposed to a password, which might
appear to be more complicated. It actually is easier for the
computer to crack that. For example, that can take a computer 3
days, as opposed as opposed to 550 years to crack a passphrase.
So, the key is, as hackers have been getting better about
hacking into passwords, we have increased the complexity
requirements on the passwords, which means as humans, we have
to adopt mechanisms to make them easier to remember. Making
them easier to remember makes them easier to crack. So, that is
this negative feedback loop that, as the complexity
requirements have increased, the quality of the passwords has
decreased.
That is why the movement throughout government, and this is
set by the NIST, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, which is the standard-setting body for the U.S.
Government with respect to these issues, has said we should go
to passphrases. Again, that is a string of unrelated words
which is almost impossible for a computer to crack in a
reasonable amount of time.
Mr. Westerman. So, will AI help aid in cracking even those
passphrases in a shorter amount of time, my understanding with
AI is it can profile you and learn, if you will. Will it
somehow be able to know that you picked dinosaur whatever it
was?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Greenblatt. Yes, right. I am sure it is going to get
better. The technology is going to get better and better, so we
will have to stay in front of it. The key is the length of the
passphrase. The longer it is, the more difficult it is for a
computer to figure it out.
Mr. Westerman. And then doing the multi-factor
authorization on top of a passphrase sounds like the direction
we need to head.
Mr. Greenblatt. That is exactly right. Here is the mnemonic
that I use to remember this, because I am a layman, I am not a
cybersecurity expert. But the way I remember it is password is
bad; passphrase is better; MFA best. That boils down my entire
testimony in seven words.
Mr. Westerman. That is pretty easy. Thank you.
Ms. Cain, your testimony declared that DOI had not fully
implemented key information technology workforce planning
recommendations that were originally made in 2019. What were
those recommendations? What are the recommendations DOI has
failed to implement, and why have they still failed to
implement them 5 years later?
And maybe a follow-up to that is, with this hearing, with
your reports, hopefully they have gone in and changed the
passwords, the ones that you cracked in 90 minutes, 16 percent
of them. Are you seeing any improvements at DOI, or do we know?
Ms. Cruz Cain. Much to its credit, we can say today that we
have received information from Interior, and we are going to
close each one of those workforce recommendations that we had.
Some of the workforce recommendations were looking at their
skilled workers and filling up gaps in different types of
technical workers that they needed, and they have, to this
date, given us documentation to prove that they have closed all
of their workforce recommendations.
So, we are very happy about that. Yes, it did take 5 years,
but much to Interior's credit, they have been continually
working on it, and have gotten to a good place with our
recommendations specific to the workforce.
We have not done any password work at Interior, or really
haven't looked into Interior's systems. We would be more than
happy, if there is a specific Interior system you would like
for us to look at, but we do not have any recent work that has
looked into a specific Interior system.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
And just real quickly, Inspector General, when did you do
the hacks? When did you crack these? How long ago was that?
Mr. Greenblatt. It was at least a year ago, because we gave
the Department a chance to fix much of this. So, it had to be
at least a year ago.
Mr. Westerman. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Hawaii, Mr. Case, is recognized.
Mr. Case. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Greenblatt, you testified that DOI, I think your words
were, generally concurred in your recommendations, or the OIG's
recommendations, and established target dates. Are you
satisfied with their target dates, are they reasonable?
What kind of time frames are we talking about?
And what are the obstacles to expeditious implementation?
Mr. Greenblatt. Yes. Generally speaking, they have been
very constructive. The relationship we have had has been very
productive with them. I have had a number of engagements with
the Chief Information Officer there. They, and the Deputy
Secretary, frankly, appear to be oriented in the right
direction.
In terms of the target dates, they do seem reasonable to
us. We would have said so in the report if we did not find them
reasonable. We have done that in other contexts. In this
context, we found them to be reasonable. In fact, one of the
recommendations, they have already submitted the packet of
materials to close one of our recommendations, and we are just
going through the process of looking at that right now.
I also understand that they have taken some steps already
to implement measures with respect to the passwords and
shifting over to passphrases. So, that was a very constructive
result.
In terms of the problems with respect to timing, this would
appear likely on the multi-factor authentication piece, where
there are some systems that are so old that they can't handle
MFA. So, that is my understanding from the Chief Information
Officer.
But this is information you would have to get from them.
They know this better than we do, but that is my understanding,
is that it is something like that, where they are
technologically having difficulty actually handling it on the
infrastructure that they have right now.
Mr. Case. So, is it your understanding, from your
perspective, that the target date implementations, are any of
them reliant on supplemental funding, or insufficient
personnel, or inability or unavailability of technical
resources?
I guess what I am asking is, what are the obstacles to
getting them done fast, and can we do anything about any of
those obstacles?
Mr. Greenblatt. Well, I think one undercurrent for
everything with respect to IT and cybersecurity is finding
qualified staff. It is very difficult in the public sector to
hire the types of folks with the types of experience that you
need in the IT security space, so that is underlying sort of
all of this.
With respect to these specific recommendations, I don't
know the answer to that, whether there are technological
hiccups or supplemental funding. We can get back to you on
that. I think that is a fair question that I just don't know,
off the top of my head.
Mr. Case. OK, thank you. I guess I have heard it said or
described, or at least my understanding of cybersecurity cyber
attacks is they kind of fall into a couple of different
categories. One would be state-sponsored for state goals, as we
apparently or may well have seen just recently with respect to
Guam. Another is issue-oriented to influence a particular
issue. Another would be extortion disruption, so money. And
then the fourth category would just be to see whether you can
get away with it.
Talking about DOI specifically for now, I guess my real
question is what is the direct subject of a cyber attack to
DOI?
What is the real exposure at DOI?
Ms. Cruz Cain made reference three or four times to
offshore oil, so I assume that it is our management of our
natural resources themselves, and the implications to our
economy and our defense. But where does a cyber attacker tend
to engage with DOI?
Mr. Greenblatt. Again, I think you would have to go to the
Department with respect to specific attacks and where they came
from. But I think what is fair to say is that DOI houses
significant information, be it proprietary information related
to oil and gas sales and from the energy leasing, offshore
security, offshore oil and gas extraction and security issues
as we were saying a second ago.
But you know we have hydroelectric dams that power
hydroelectric power plants that feed into the electrical grid.
So, I don't know how an attack could compromise, say, an
electrical grid or something along those lines. These folks are
very, very creative, and very malicious. It is sort of
impossible to know at this point. But I think the full scope of
the damage is fairly daunting if we were to see an attack
unfold.
Mr. Case. Thank you very much.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Collins, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had some other
questions, but as you all were speaking, Inspector General, you
led me to a whole bunch of other questions.
Being in the private sector, in the trucking industry, I
mean, this is something we deal with daily because of the
nature of what we are in, and the possibility of getting
hacked, mostly from the monetary side of it. So, I have a few I
was just going to run by you. If it doesn't apply to you and
maybe Ms. Cruz Cain, if you can answer it, then just feel free
to jump in there.
You did the study in 2022, and you said you had a
reasonable timeline for them to implement this, correct? What
was that timeline?
Mr. Greenblatt. We can get you the dates in particular.
Mr. Collins. Was it 6 months, or 2 months, or----
Mr. Greenblatt. It is probably more than 6 months for us to
write the report. We share our findings with the Department,
especially in something like this, where we want them to take
steps to cure the problems before we were going public. So, it
is a good amount of time. It may be a full year.
Mr. Collins. OK. So, the problems, though, that you are
speaking about are maybe software-related, the reason they
can't use multi-factor authentication?
Mr. Greenblatt. Sometimes, certainly, like----
Mr. Collins. Are they just running old systems?
Mr. Greenblatt. It could be, yes. And that is what I have
heard. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Collins. OK.
Mr. Greenblatt. On some of the systems.
Mr. Collins. When you do multi-factor authentication that
you put in there--we all use phrases now, instead of just
passwords, it is easier to remember it, too. Is there a length
that you put in there for the password, the passphrase, and
then capital letters, numbers, and symbols, as well?
Mr. Greenblatt. You don't have to do that. That is the
beauty of the passphrase, is that it is designed to be easy to
remember. So, it can just be words.
What I have seen is between 16 and 64 characters long. That
is what I have seen, just generally speaking, out in the world.
But the longer you go, the more and more difficult it becomes
for a hacker to crack it.
Mr. Collins. Yes, I just know that the nature of people, if
you say, ``Give me three words,'' it is going to be ``at,''
``the,'' and ``I,'' you know.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Greenblatt. Fair enough. But I think what you can do is
you can limit the nature of what is a permissible passphrase.
Mr. Collins. Yes, that is what I am saying----
Mr. Greenblatt. You can limit that sort of thing. Again, it
is really length, not the quality of the words.
Mr. Collins. So, when you recommended that they implement,
and you said it was high-quality assets first, is this now
agency-wide?
Mr. Greenblatt. The passphrases, yes. My understanding is,
again, this is a question that they can give you a better
answer. But, yes, my understanding is that they have
implemented on the passphrases, getting away from the
passwords.
On multi-factor authentication, that is a longer fuse,
because they have some of those legacy systems that are very,
very old that apparently can't handle multi-factor
authentication.
The other thing, by the way, when you were just asking a
second ago about the software, they had a number of systems
that could handle multi-factor authentication. But they were
allowing people to solely use passwords. So, what we are saying
is turn that bypass off.
Mr. Collins. Yes, are you all doing, for lack of better
words, follow-up hacks? I mean, my IT group does it on a
monthly basis.
Mr. Greenblatt. We are doing a number of penetration
testing. We have a number of jobs in the works, and that is
what the team does on a day-to-day basis.
But on this issue we now have turned it over to the
Department and, hopefully, they will be doing that on their
own.
Mr. Collins. Is that something, Ms. Cruz Cain, that you
would answer?
Ms. Cruz Cain. We don't have any work planned at Interior.
We really respond as requests from Committees or Members. So,
if that is something that you would like us to do, we would be
more than happy to take on another password job, or look at
multi-factor authentication at Interior.
Mr. Collins. I know this may be off subject, but you all
don't do phishing expeditions with e-mails to see if people
bite, I mean, that is another way that people hack in pretty
easy.
Mr. Greenblatt. The Department should be doing that on
their own. Any agency should be doing penetration testing on
their own. We could conceivably do that sort of thing, but we
take a risk-based analysis on where we can add the most value.
But the Department, in theory, should be doing that as part of
its regular, day-to-day maintenance, if you will.
Mr. Collins. So, you set up the parameters, right, for any
agency, you set that up. Do you have password expiration dates,
where they have to change the passwords? Do you recommend that?
Mr. Greenblatt. We did. But if you have passphrases, you
don't--
Mr. Collins. I know, passphrase.
Mr. Greenblatt. Yes, you don't need to. For passphrases,
they are so robust that you actually don't need to change them.
That is part of the problem with the passwords, is that you
need to change them every 60 to 90 days, and people need to
make them easy to remember. But that makes it easier to hack.
With the passphrases, if they are long enough, you don't need
to change it.
Mr. Collins. My time is expired, but I will tell you that
in my world we always say those are famous last words.
Mr. Greenblatt. There is no question that the hackers and
their technology will evolve. There is no question about that.
I am not saying that this is the forever answer, but right
here, right now, this is the best technology that we can do.
And they are going to have to do something pretty robust to
figure it out.
Mr. Collins. Right.
Sorry, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. Just as long as it is not ``Run, Spot, run,''
right?
[Laughter.]
Dr. Gosar. The gentlewoman from Nevada, Ms. Lee, is
recognized.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member Stansbury. Before I get into my question for Ms. Cruz
Cain I just wanted to ask Mr. Greenblatt.
The software that DOI is using, sometimes when I am using
software there are limitations on the length. So, you are
saying the software that DOI now uses does not have that
limitation, or do we need to invest in new software?
Mr. Greenblatt. Those are great questions for the agency.
They have dozens of different systems at play.
Ms. Lee. Oh, OK.
Mr. Greenblatt. So, I don't know each and every one of
theirs and what their length requirements are, but that is
something that I would think they can change, they can modify.
But my understanding is that they have moved to passphrases of
an appreciable length, like I said, 16 characters or something
along those lines. But that is a good question for them to
flesh out.
Ms. Lee. Ms. Cruz Cain, in your opinion, does DOI have the
sufficient resources to address these threats and make the
needed changes?
Ms. Cruz Cain. We have made the observation that they are
challenged by their IT budget. Most of their IT budget, about
83 percent of it, goes toward just operating and maintaining
its IT systems. And that includes a lot of the aging and legacy
systems that we have been mentioning, which do not allow newer
technologies to be used, such as multi-factor authentication.
And it really hinders the ability to deal with the new cyber
risks. You are constantly going back to outdated software,
outdated hardware, and these legacy systems.
So, that is one challenge that we have noted at GAO, that
they are spending about 83 percent of their budget just
maintaining. And we really are asking them to shift their focus
of their budget to development, modernization of those legacy
systems, and making enhancements that would better position
Interior to modernize those legacy systems, and then address
the associated vulnerabilities with those systems, and be able
to engage with the new cybersecurity technologies like multi-
factor authentication.
Ms. Lee. Do you have any dollar estimate on what is
necessary, or is that something I need to get from DOI?
Ms. Cruz Cain. No, that is definitely something you need to
get from the DOI.
Ms. Lee. All right. I am also deeply concerned, being from
the West, on a potential cyber attack on critical DOI water
infrastructure. As you know, 40 million people rely on the
Colorado River and its reservoirs, which have long been under
DOI care, including Lake Mead, which is the main water source
for my hometown and home state of Nevada.
With this in mind, how do you think infrastructure under
the DOI, whether it is water resources, power grid maintenance,
or oil and gas would be impacted by a hack?
Mr. Greenblatt. I think it would depend on the hack and
what they did. But it could be devastating. Like I said, it
just depends on where, and how, and what they do with it. If
they are just stealing information versus doing something
actively malicious, it is impossible to know.
But also, they could be using the pathway into the
Department to then try to get up to higher-level access to
other departments that DOI may be connected to. So, that is the
kind of thing, they may be a pass-through if they are connected
to other networks. It is very difficult to say, but it could be
devastating.
Ms. Lee. Can you expand on the measures that DOI is taking
right now to ensure that we prevent such a hack?
Are you comfortable that they are taking the measures, or
is this a resource issue that we need to give them more funding
so they can modernize?
What is the, I guess, the chicken-and-the-egg type of
thing? What are the priorities?
Mr. Greenblatt. So, there are a couple of answers to that.
First of all, with respect to implementing the passphrase
requirements, that looks like that has happened, I think that
is 100 percent. I remember speaking with the Chief Information
Officer, and I believe he said that was 100 percent at this
point. So, on the passphrases, that is a good thing.
With MFA, that is going to take a little bit longer. But I
believe they are oriented in the right direction with respect
to MFA, it is just going to take a little heavier lifting for
them.
In terms of their specific timing on all the various
systems, you will have to get a breakdown from them in terms of
the individual ones.
The thing that was most troubling to me was the MFA, the
multi-factor authentication, with respect to the high-value IT
assets. The ability to bypass multi-factor authentication on
those systems was troubling. So, I believe they have a
constructive posture with respect to those systems, I just
don't know where they actually sit with respect to all of those
that had permitted the bypass or the password alone.
Ms. Lee. Great, thank you.
I am over my time.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlelady from Nevada. I recognize
the Ranking Member from New Mexico, Ms. Stansbury, for her 5
minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks again to
our witnesses for being here today. I wonder if we could start
with Ms. Cruz Cain.
What exactly did these attacks look like? I think we all
think we know what a cyber attack looks like, but what does the
experience of a hacker and an attack actually look like?
Ms. Cruz Cain. I think it depends on what kind of attack is
being executed. My colleague gave the examples of different
attacks. If you are looking on attacks to operational
technology, and when we did our report on the oil and gas
infrastructure, an attack on that operational technology, which
is the software and the hardware that are used to control the
industrial equipment, that is going to look very different
depending on who hacks. So, you can put malicious code into
some of the software and hardware, and that might take a little
bit longer to detect.
It could be a ransomware attack. Somebody could completely
shut down that operational technology, which makes it unable to
use the production, which would slow down oil and gas. It could
prevent water flow. It could do a lot of harm to the economy,
to our well-being.
I think it just all depends on what type of attack you are
trying to perpetrate.
Ms. Stansbury. Yes, and I think, like I said, oftentimes we
think we are all talking about the same things, but there are a
multitude of different kinds of actors and different kinds of
attacks that we are talking about here. So, the implications of
whether or not it is the password infrastructure of the
individuals who are holding files, who have access to shared
systems, who are operating systems that may be related to
energy infrastructure or water infrastructure, or it is just
the personal identifying information of Federal employees, all
of these things are vulnerabilities to these kinds of hacks and
these actors.
And as we were preparing for this hearing, I was actually
sharing with some of the staff that I am a former Fed myself. I
used to work for a Federal agency, and we actually experienced
a hack while I was working for a Federal agency by a foreign
actor. And I can tell you they were inside our system, we
studied them, we shut them down, and we made sure it never
happened again. But these hacks can have very significant
implications for agencies, so we take them very, very
seriously.
And Ms. Cruz Cain, we were interested in particular in the
report that you helped to co-author on privacy, dedicated
leadership report. And one of the recommendations in that
report suggested that our agencies institute privacy leadership
in each of the agencies. Could you tell us a little bit more
about what that means, what it would look like, and how
Congress could help to support an initiative like that?
Ms. Cruz Cain. Sure. What we found when we were looking at
the 24 CFO Act agencies was that outside of the ones who were
mandated by law to have a chief privacy officer that serves at
the executive level alongside the CIO, the CFO, and other high-
level executives, most of the agencies differed. Some of the
chief privacy officers could have been their CIO. They could
have been just a person who was in charge of privacy.
So, we also noticed that their responsibilities differed.
Some of them solely focused on privacy, which was very few, but
others had different responsibilities, some were doing records
management, as well; some were doing financial management; some
were doing information technology.
And with the increasing nature of these cyber attacks, GAO
and all of the agencies that we talked to really think that
having someone, some executive-level senior official focused
just on privacy as their only responsibility will really
elevate privacy to where it needs to be in all of the agencies.
Not only do you have the personal information of your
employees, you also have proprietary information in many
agencies, different types of information that, if leaked, could
be very harmful for the Federal agencies.
And in our report, the matter to Congress was to just go
into law and say there should be a senior official at that
executive level that can have visibility into privacy, and
bring that to the table when you are making the high-level
decisions.
Ms. Stansbury. So, really standardizing that leadership
within each of the agencies. And I think that brings me to my
final question for this panel, which is for Mr. Greenblatt.
We had the opportunity to chat briefly before the hearing,
and one of my questions, which you touched on, but I want to
just ask you to expand on a little bit more, is about DOI's
leadership in addressing not only the password considerations,
but also these other cyber risks that have been talked about
today in this hearing.
Talk to us about what Interior has been doing to address
these vulnerabilities, and what we in Congress can do to help
support the Department of the Interior and other agencies on
their journeys in securing their cyber programs.
Mr. Greenblatt. Yes, like I said, we have had a very
constructive engagement with them. They concurred with all the
recommendations with respect to this report, and they have
already implemented some of them. We have to close those
recommendations. They give us the information for us to close
them. They have done that with one of the recommendations that
we have to then sort of go through and make sure that it is
done. The other ones are pending.
But, so far, the posture has been very constructive. I
engaged with the Deputy Secretary and with the CIO on these
topics, and I know that they at least have represented to me
that they are taking it very seriously, and I have no reason to
challenge that.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you. And I know we are out of time,
but certainly we will be looking to both the OIG, as well as
GAO for recommendations for how we can address this at the
structural level, whether that is funding, as my colleague
brought up, or through statutory and leadership needs within
the agency. So, thank you.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlelady. I am going to start with
you, Inspector General.
Are there any problems for the Department of the Interior
to access high-end technology?
Mr. Greenblatt. No, I think they could, subject to FedRAMP
authorization and that sort of thing. But no, I don't think
there are any barriers that are unique to DOI, as opposed to
other Federal agencies.
Dr. Gosar. So, on these passwords, are there random checks
on employees?
Mr. Greenblatt. I do not know the answer to that question,
actually.
Dr. Gosar. Would that be something of value?
Mr. Greenblatt. It could be, sure.
Dr. Gosar. I mean, I get lazy, and all of us get that
notice that you have to change your password. So, I mean, from
that standpoint it would be nice to know that they are
implemented. I think that it sounds like that is one area we
can really close.
Mr. Greenblatt. Certainly, they have certain parameters on
what you can do. It has to be a certain length and there may be
some prohibited terms, I don't know. But that is the kind of
thing that I think in order to set it up, it has to meet those
parameters. I don't know if they do checks following the setup.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Ms. Cruz Cain, the GAO has been sounding the
alarm over the cybersecurity vulnerabilities at BSEE since
2015. Finally, in 2022, BSEE hired a cybersecurity specialist
to address vulnerabilities to offshore infrastructure. But
Bureau officials said the initiative would be paused until the
specialist is adequately versed in the relevant issues. Do you
have any update on this?
Ms. Cruz Cain. The one update that Interior gave us was
that they are, in fact, developing their cybersecurity strategy
that encompasses all the elements that we recommended, and they
anticipate the strategy being done at the end of this calendar
year.
Dr. Gosar. And then you will follow up with that?
Ms. Cruz Cain. Absolutely. We do normal follow-up for all
recommendations.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Now, from your vantage point at GAO, is
there a prioritization process that you see that should be
followed in addressing these cybersecurities?
Ms. Cruz Cain. Well, definitely, the strategy is the key.
You have to have a strategy. You have to identify your cyber
risks. And each sector and each agency is going to have
different priorities and different cyber risks.
So, you have Interior's internal systems that will probably
have different risks to them. And then, with BSEE, they have
the offshore oil and gas infrastructure. So, our report focused
on that, and wanted them to just have a strategy. How are you
going to identify your risks? How are you going to assess those
risks? What are your objectives? What are your activities and
performance measures that you are going to measure up to when
you are putting your cybersecurity strategy into place? Roles
and responsibilities are important, and also coordination with
CISA and any other entities that they need to talk to in order
to make their strategy successful.
But then lastly, as we have mentioned, the needed
resources. What resources are they going to need after they
have identified all their risks and made the strategy to
actually be able to take the actions that the strategy wants
them to take?
Dr. Gosar. I have gone over to see some of these centers,
particularly like East Mesa, where we see the active
bombardment. It is pretty amazing to see those attacks coming
in, and how they are fronting them. Is Interior big enough to
have to be doing that type of qualification?
Ms. Cruz Cain. I don't have the answer to that question,
but I think all Federal agencies have skills that they need. I
know that they have recently hired their cybersecurity
specialist to take on, specifically, the oil and gas
cybersecurity role so they can start there. And in that
strategy and any workforce planning that they do for BSEE
specific to oil and gas, they should do their skills need. What
do they need to make those strategies successful? Where are
they going to get them?
As my colleague mentioned and GAO has mentioned, it is an
outstanding challenge in the Federal Government to have a
qualified IT workforce. So, there are going to be lots of
things that go into this strategy and making it successful. But
we don't have any indication that Interior cannot handle it.
Dr. Gosar. OK.
Inspector General, how does the DOI coordinate with CISA?
Mr. Greenblatt. That is a very good question. Frankly, I
don't know the answer to that. I would have to defer to the
agency in that regard.
Dr. Gosar. Sounds good. Do you have any answer to that, Ms.
Cruz Cain?
Ms. Cruz Cain. I can tell you from the perspective that
their regulatory oversight of the oil and gas, they would
coordinate with CISA, being that that is a subsector of the
energy sector, and CISA being the--they are not the SRMA for
the energy sector, but they would have significant coordination
with CISA when it comes to attacks or threat information when
it comes to oil and gas infrastructure.
Dr. Gosar. I am going to end by asking each one of you,
what was the question you most wanted to have asked that we
feel is very important, and what was its answer?
I will start with you, Inspector General.
Mr. Greenblatt. I guess I am particularly proud of the
team, so how they accomplished the password cracking, I think,
is pretty fascinating. If you will just bear with me for a
moment, and I can explain it, because it was fascinating to
this layman.
But, basically, we took the 85,000 passwords from the
Department, which are then made into what is called hash, which
is 30 characters to prevent. It is a security mechanism
designed to protect those passwords. So, we took the hashes of
the 85,000 passwords in the Department, and then the team built
a dictionary of 1.5 billion words. This is multiple different
languages, government terminology, pop culture references, and
passwords that had been hacked in prior hacks that were posted
online, put that all together and then did permutations of
those, 31 million permutations of each one of the 1.5 billion
words, which led to 46 quadrillion potential passwords.
Then they compared those two things. They compared the
hashes to the hashes of the 46 quadrillion potential passwords,
and compared them. That, in the first 90 minutes, led to 16,000
hits. Those are the easy ones. Those are the password1234's of
the world. And then it took a little bit longer for them to get
through and get those few thousand remaining ones.
So, that is something that I am particularly proud of the
team, in how they conceived of this, and how they pulled it off
for less than $15,000.
Dr. Gosar. Wow, that tells me that there is still hope for
me as a Pictionary player.
[Laughter.]
Dr. Gosar. So, Ms. Cruz Cain, your question?
Ms. Cruz Cain. Sure. I think pointing out one of the most
critical actions that the Federal Government needs to take to
better protect our critical infrastructure, I wanted to make a
plug for updating our national infrastructure protection plan.
The most recent update has been 2003. We have been in
discussions with DHS, and they mentioned that it might be until
September 2025 that this plan would be fully updated.
So, it is, in GAO's opinion, very important that we have a
timely update to this plan. That is going to allow each of the
16 sectors to update their sector plans, and then those
subsectors like oil and gas and energy to update their specific
subsector plans to address cyber risks.
So, from the top down, the most important action we can
take is updating that plan, and also filling the vacant
cybersecurity director role. The coordination amongst all
Federal agencies can really benefit from getting a permanent
cyber director, and being able to have the leadership from that
office be how each Federal agency approaches their
cybersecurity posture.
Dr. Gosar. That really helps breaking down the silos, as
well.
I want to thank the panel for your testimony today, and
there will be some written questions for you from Members.
Thank you very much, and we will seat the second panel.
Mr. Greenblatt. Thank you.
Ms. Cruz Cain. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Mr. Collins [presiding]. All right, we will get started
with the second panel. As you can tell, I am not Mr. Gosar, and
I am a freshman. So, I am in the trucking business, this is not
what I do for a living. But we are going to go ahead and get
started.
I will introduce our second panel of witnesses. And if I
mess up your name, I am totally sorry.
We have Mr. Brian Cavanaugh with the Heritage Foundation;
Mr. Dean Cheng with the United States Institute of Peace; Ms.
Rhea Siers with the Johns Hopkins University; and Dr. Charles
Clancy, Sr. with the MITRE Corporation.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, press the ``on'' button for the
microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of the 5 minutes, your light will turn red,
and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses in this panel to testify
before Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Cavanaugh for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN CAVANAUGH, FELLOW FOR CYBERSECURITY,
INTELLIGENCE, AND HOMELAND SECURITY, HERITAGE FOUNDATION,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Cavanaugh. Chairman Collins, Ranking Member Stansbury,
and members of the Committee, as the government increasingly
relies on interconnected systems, cloud computing, and data-
driven decision-making, the very fabric of our national
security, economic stability, and public trust hangs in the
balance.
Cybersecurity is no longer a mere accessory or an
afterthought. It is the cornerstone on which the functioning of
our government rests. The landscape of cyber threats is ever-
evolving, with the cyber threat posed by China to U.S.
infrastructure significant and complex.
First, China has demonstrated a high level of
sophistication in cyber capabilities, including cyber
espionage.
Secondly, China's large-scale and persistent cyber
campaigns target every sector of our critical infrastructure,
including communications, manufacturing, utility, maritime
government, and information technology. Volt Typhoon, a PRC-
sponsored hacking group, has been specifically targeting
sectors that support Pacific operations for the past 2 years.
Finally, China's ability to leverage vast resources, both
in terms of human capital and technology such as AI, quantum
computing, and essential chip manufacturing, enhanced their
cyber capabilities. The scope and efforts and the nature of
their capabilities underscore the potential for significant
economic and national security consequences, especially as the
United States and China lurch toward an impending conflict.
Meanwhile, Russia, Iran, and North Korea have all focused
on improving their ability to target critical infrastructure,
including underwater cables, water treatment facilities, and
operational control technologies, such as those used by
offshore energy platforms. Our adversaries believe that
demonstrating the ability to compromise such infrastructure can
achieve the goal of influencing foreign policy outcomes.
Meanwhile, the U.S. Government approach to cybersecurity
has seen its share of challenges, from a lack of prioritization
and chasing trends to its inefficient approach to the private
sector and lack of accountability for government employees. To
overcome these challenges, it is crucial for the government to
recognize and prioritize risk as a fundamental component of its
cybersecurity strategy. By prioritizing risk, the government
can allocate resources effectively, adopt a proactive approach,
and ensure accountability in its cybersecurity efforts.
Technology is rapidly developing and evolving. However,
this does not mean that the government can erratically chase
after the shiny object. Instead, the U.S. Government should
find ways to close the detection gap. A recent IBM report
highlights the average time to identify and contain a data
breach is 287 days, with malware residing on systems for over
180 days.
More policies and more people are themselves not a
solution. The model the government has embraced is flat-footed
and clumsy. It is an approach that keeps them in a constant
state of response and recovery, awaiting alerts from the
private sector and then managing damage control messaging
afterward. We must become forward-leaning and take meaningful
steps towards addressing the risk and mitigating cyber threats
to our critical infrastructure. This includes engaging with
small businesses that are driving innovation.
Government procurement practices must evolve and foster
innovation, especially in the tech sector. Identifying and
authenticating users is a fundamental security control, yet, as
we just heard, a recent DOI Inspector General report
highlighted lackadaisical policies and procedures that enabled
the cracking of 21 percent of active user passwords. The report
demonstrated that the front door to the Department had been
left open by its employees.
From a repercussion perspective, we all have a role to play
in vigilance. And just like how resilience starts with the
individual, so too does the responsibility of cybersecurity.
The government needs to take a firm stance on accountability at
the employee level. U.S. Government employees are central,
important, and have immense power. With that must come
responsibility.
We must strike a delicate balance between harnessing the
power of innovation and securing our digital infrastructure to
counter the evolving threat landscape. To do this, Federal
departments and agencies must focus on three things: first,
they must prioritize infrastructure by risk; second, focus on
closing the detection gap; and third, strengthen personal
accountability at the employee level.
Thank you for the invitation to testify today, and I look
forward to our discussion.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Cavanaugh follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brian J. Cavanaugh, Visiting Fellow for
Cybersecurity, Intelligence, and Homeland Security, The Heritage
Foundation

My name is Brian Cavanaugh. I am a Visiting Fellow for
Cybersecurity, Intelligence, and Homeland Security at The Heritage
Foundation. The views I express in this testimony are my own and should
not be construed as representing any official position of The Heritage
Foundation.
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee:
In today's digital era, where technology pervades every aspect of
our lives, the critical importance of cybersecurity for federal
departments and agencies cannot be overstated. As our government
increasingly relies on interconnected systems, cloud computing, and
data-driven decision-making, the very fabric of our national security,
economic stability, and public trust hangs in the balance. The threats
we face in cyberspace are relentless, sophisticated, and pervasive,
posing a significant challenge to the integrity and resilience of our
nation.
Cybersecurity is no longer a mere accessory or an afterthought; it
is the cornerstone on which the functioning of our government rests.
Federal departments and agencies store and handle vast amounts of
sensitive and classified information, ranging from critical
infrastructure blueprints and defense strategies to personal records
and financial data. Any breach or compromise in these systems can have
catastrophic consequences, undermining our national security, eroding
public confidence, and jeopardizing the very foundations of our
democracy.
The interconnectedness of our digital infrastructure means that a
single vulnerability can ripple across multiple agencies, putting not
only individual departments at risk but the entire government apparatus
as well. The consequences extend beyond bureaucratic headaches; they
can disrupt essential services, compromise emergency response systems,
bring a halt to the economy, and undermine the trust citizens have
placed in their government to protect their interests. The threats we
face transcend borders and adversaries, requiring a unified and robust
approach to fortify our cyber defenses.
Threat Landscape

The landscape of cyber threats is ever evolving, with adversaries
constantly honing their tactics and exploiting vulnerabilities. Nation-
states, organized crime syndicates, and even lone actors seek to breach
our defenses, steal sensitive information, manipulate data, and wreak
havoc on our systems. The realm of cybersecurity demands constant
vigilance, adaptability, and a proactive stance to anticipate, detect,
and respond to these threats in real time. We cannot afford to be
reactive; we must be several steps ahead, pre-empting attacks and
safeguarding our digital assets with an unwavering commitment.
The People's Republic of China (PRC) is an adversary of the United
States. After a decades-long engagement strategy toward China, we find
ourselves embroiled in a New Cold War with an even more capable
adversary than the Soviet Union. The threat posed by China to U.S.
infrastructure in terms of cyber is significant and complex. The Office
of the Director of National Intelligence assesses China currently
represents the broadest, most active, and persistent cyber espionage
threat to the U.S. government and private-sector networks.
China has long been recognized as a major player in the realm of
cyber espionage, and its capabilities and activities continue to evolve
and expand. The Chinese government and affiliated entities have been
attributed to a wide range of cyber activities, including intellectual
property theft, espionage, and targeting critical infrastructure
sectors. China's cyber operations pose a serious concern to U.S.
infrastructure due to several factors.
First, China has demonstrated a high level of sophistication in its
cyber capabilities, employing advanced techniques and tools to breach
networks, infiltrate systems, and exfiltrate sensitive data. Their
focus on intelligence gathering, particularly related to economic and
technological advancements, underscores the potential for significant
economic and national security consequences.
Secondly, China's large-scale and persistent cyber campaigns are a
cause for alarm. They have been accused of engaging in long-term,
strategic cyber operations, targeting a variety of sectors, including
government agencies, defense contractors, technology companies, and
energy infrastructure. Most recently, Volt Typhoon, a PRC-sponsored
hacking group, has been targeting the communications, manufacturing,
utility, transportation, construction, maritime, government,
information technology and education sectors in the U.S. The breadth
and persistence of these campaigns demonstrate a sustained commitment
to cyber operations, posing a persistent and evolving threat.
Moreover, China's ability to leverage its vast resources, both in
terms of technology and human capital, enhances its cyber capabilities.
The country possesses a highly skilled cyber workforce, often supported
by state-sponsored initiatives, and has invested heavily in research
and development to develop advanced cyber tools and techniques. This
combination of talent, resources, and strategic focus amplifies the
potential impact of their cyber operations on U.S. infrastructure,
especially as the U.S. and China lurch toward an impending conflict
over Taiwan and Chairman Xi's vision for a new world order.
While the Office of the Director for National Intelligence noted
Russia's cyber operations during the Ukraine war fell short of the pace
and impact they had expected, Russia continues to pose cyber threats to
the U.S. Putin is particularly focused on improving Russia's ability to
target critical infrastructure, including underwater cables and
operational technologies. It appears that Russia's belief in
demonstrating the ability to compromise such infrastructure during a
crisis achieves the goal of influencing foreign policy outcomes.
Iran has demonstrated a willingness to conduct aggressive cyber
operations on critical infrastructure, such as water treatment
facilities, and their expertise is improving at an alarming pace. While
their approach to cyberattacks remains opportunistic, it does not
diminish the susceptibility of U.S. critical infrastructure owners,
particularly as Tehran believes it must prove to itself that they can
push back against the West.
Cyber operations from North Korea have matured and are capable of
causing temporary, limited disruptions of some critical infrastructure
networks and disrupting business networks in the U.S. The North Korean
cyber program emphasizes cybercrime, focusing on financially motivated
cyber operations, such as conducting cryptocurrency heists--with on
such heist obtaining $625 million. However, cyber actors linked to
North Korea have conducted espionage efforts against a range of
organizations and continue to focus on cyber espionage geared toward
advancing Pyongyang's military programs.
Another threat that often goes unmentioned is transnational
organized criminals whose ransomware attacks continue to execute high-
impact ransomware attacks, extorting funds, disrupting critical
services, and exposing sensitive data. Critical infrastructure such as
health care, schools, emergency services, and manufacturing continue to
experience attacks aimed at disrupting services. The cost of ransomware
attacks is taking its toll on insurance markets, price increases and a
hesitation of new insurance carriers in the market are systemic of an
out-of-control problem set.
What Is at Risk

The growing trend of digital transformation within federal
departments and agencies brings immense benefits but also amplifies the
risks. The adoption of emerging technologies such as artificial
intelligence, Internet of Things, and cloud computing introduces new
attack surfaces and vulnerabilities that must be addressed with utmost
urgency. For its part, the Department of the Interior (DOI) houses
enormous amounts of data on its digital infrastructure. Whether it
relates to sustaining the health and productivity of public lands, the
development of U.S. Outer Continental Shelf energy and mineral
resources, or enhancing the quality of life of American Indians, Indian
tribes, and Alaska Natives, the DOI must safeguard the data, resources,
and infrastructure it utilizes to deliver its mission.
As noted in a recent Office of Inspector General (OIG) report,
lackadaisical policies and procedures enabled the OIG to hack 21
percent of active user passwords at the DOI using basic and inexpensive
means. Of the 18,000-plus accounts hacked, 362 accounts were senior
U.S. government employees and 288 accounts had elevated privileges.
Identifying and authenticating users is a fundamental security control.
The OIG was able to demonstrate that the front door to the DOI has been
left unlocked by its employees.
With over 1,600 structures on the outer continental shelf (OCS)
responsible for a significant portion of U.S. domestic oil and gas
production and at least 187 offshore wind farms currently being
developed for energy production, the Department of the Interior's
Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) must proactively
address cybersecurity risks. Modern exploration and production methods
are increasingly reliant on remotely connected operational technology,
a known vulnerability for cyberattack. A successful cyberattack on
offshore energy infrastructure could cause physical, environmental, and
economic harm. The effects of a cyberattack could resemble those that
occurred in the 2010 Deepwater Horizon disaster or cause market-moving
disruptions to energy production or transmission.
In the context of cybersecurity, the interconnected dependencies of
critical infrastructure mean that a breach or compromise in one sector
can have far-reaching consequences across multiple sectors. The ripple
effect of such an attack can cause widespread disruption, economic
losses, and potentially endanger public safety. The risk of
interconnected dependencies lies in the fact that critical
infrastructure sectors are often interdependent and share common
underlying systems and technologies. This means that a vulnerability or
compromise in one sector can be exploited to gain unauthorized access
or disrupt operations in another sector. For instance, a successful
cyberattack on a Bureau of Land Management system could potentially
impact the operations of a U.S. Geological Survey system or even a
Department of Commerce system.
Flaw in Current Approach

The U.S. government's approach to cybersecurity has its flaws, from
a lack of prioritization and chasing trends and buzzwords, to its
approach to the private sector and its soft response to U.S. government
employees entrusted with access to systems and data. Addressing these
four areas would represent a marked improvement for the government
sector of critical infrastructure.
The lack of prioritization of risk within the U.S. government is a
significant hindrance to its efforts in cybersecurity. Effective
cybersecurity requires a strategic and risk-based approach, where
resources and efforts are allocated based on the level of risk posed by
various threats and vulnerabilities. However, when risk is not
adequately prioritized, several detrimental consequences arise:
resource allocation inefficiency, a reactive approach to threats,
inadequate risk assessments, misallocation of efforts, and a lack of
accountability.
To overcome these challenges, it is crucial for the U.S. government
to prioritize risk as a fundamental component of its cybersecurity
strategy. This requires a comprehensive understanding of the threat
landscape, thorough risk assessments, and the establishment of clear
priorities based on potential impacts and likelihood of occurrence. By
prioritizing risk, the government can allocate resources effectively,
adopt a proactive approach, and ensure accountability in its
cybersecurity efforts, ultimately strengthening the resilience of its
systems and protecting national interests.
One sign that the government is misallocating efforts is its
willingness to chase after cybersecurity buzzwords or new trends. While
it is no secret that technology is rapidly developing and evolving,
this does not mean that the U.S. government can erratically chase after
the shiny object. Instead, the U.S. government should find ways to
close the detection gap, something alluded to by the IBM Security Cost
of a Data Breach Report 2022. According to the report, the average time
to identify and contain a data breach is 287 days, with malware being
undetected for an average of 180 days on systems.
The U.S. government's model for addressing cybersecurity is a flat-
footed and clumsy approach that keeps them in a constant state of
response and recovery--awaiting alerts from the private sector and then
managing messaging. Instead of waiting for the private sector to decide
to share information, the U.S. government must become forward leaning,
and take meaningful steps toward addressing the risk and mitigating
cyber threats to our critical infrastructure. This includes engaging
with small businesses and start-ups that are driving innovation in
cybersecurity. Procurement practices must evolve and foster innovation,
especially in the tech sector. Flexibility in requirements, streamlined
and agile procurement-process adoption, and incorporation of pilot
programs and testbeds would be a great start.
The risk of interconnected dependencies within critical
infrastructure highlights the urgent need for robust cybersecurity
measures, including personal accountability. From a repercussion
perspective, we all have a role to play in vigilance, and just like how
resilience starts with the individual, so, too, does the responsibility
of cybersecurity. The U.S. government needs to take a firm stance on
accountability at the employee level. U.S. government employees are
central, important, and have immense power. With that must come
responsibility--with the expectation that they become lead adopters in
proven security methods. Cyber and information technology policies need
to be treated as seriously as those regarding the unauthorized
disclosure of sensitive information.
A More Resilient Future

To address the threat posed by China and other cyber adversaries,
the U.S. government must take proactive measures to enhance
cybersecurity efforts. We must strike a delicate balance between
harnessing the power of innovation and securing our digital
infrastructure, employing robust encryption, multi-factor
authentication, and comprehensive threat intelligence to counter the
evolving threat landscape. Moreover, to address the critical importance
of cybersecurity for federal departments and agencies, we must
prioritize infrastructure by risk, focusing on closing the detection
gap and strengthening personal accountability.
Investing in research and development of innovative cybersecurity
technologies and techniques is crucial to stay ahead of evolving
threats. This includes leveraging technologies such as artificial
intelligence, machine learning, and behavioral analytics to detect and
respond to cyber threats in real time. While investing in cutting-edge
technologies and cultivating a highly skilled cybersecurity workforce,
we must promote a culture of cybersecurity awareness and resilience at
all levels of government.
Robust cybersecurity practices, threat intelligence sharing,
investment in defense technologies, and collaboration with
international partners are vital components of a comprehensive strategy
to mitigate the risks posed by China's cyber activities to U.S.
infrastructure.
The value of cybersecurity for federal departments and agencies
cannot be underestimated. It is the shield that safeguards our nation's
secrets, ensures the smooth functioning of our government, and
preserves the trust and confidence of the American people. We must rise
to the challenges that lie ahead, fortifying our defenses, embracing
innovation securely, and forging a united front against the ever-
present and evolving threats in cyberspace. Our future, our security,
and the integrity of our democracy depend on it.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Brian Cavanaugh, Fellow for
Cybersecurity, Intelligence, and Homeland Security, The Heritage
Foundation
Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar
Question 1. Is anything stopping the Department of the Interior
from allocating a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives?

Answer. In general, there could be several factors that may
influence the allocation of the Department's budget towards
cybersecurity initiatives including prioritization and mandates,
resource constraints, risk assessment, legislative and regulatory
requirements, and awareness and understanding.

The Department of the Interior's public facing priorities include:

Identifying steps to accelerate responsible development of
renewable energy on public lands and waters,

Strengthening government-to-government relationship with
sovereign Tribal Nations,

Making investments to support the Administration's goal of
creating millions of family-supporting and union jobs,

Working to conserve at least 30% each of our lands and
waters by the year 2030, and

Centering equity and environmental justice.

None of the publicly identified priorities discuss cybersecurity or
ensuring the security of stakeholders' data held by the Department.
These public facing priorities compete for funding alongside
cybersecurity initiatives.
While the Department's overall budget may be limited, given the
findings of both the OIG and GAO reports, there should be nothing
stopping the Department from re-allocating existing funding and
requesting future funding to address appropriate cybersecurity
investments. These investments should include cyber risk assessments,
investment prioritization, and the adoption of basic cybersecurity
protocols.
The department's leadership and decision-makers have demonstrated a
lack of adequate awareness of the importance of cybersecurity and its
potential implications. If there is a lack of understanding or
appreciation for cybersecurity risks, it will adversely impact the
allocation of resources to address those risks effectively. The
leadership of the Department are focused on centering equity and
environmental justice, while leaving the data it has been entrusted
with open to our adversaries.

Question 2. How can DOI better prioritize cybersecurity initiatives
with its existing budget?

Answer. The Department of Interior could better prioritize
cybersecurity initiatives with its existing budget by developing a
comprehensive risk assessment which assess the Department's current
cybersecurity posture, identifies vulnerabilities and potential
threats, and determines the potential impact of cyber incidents on
critical operations, systems, and data. This assessment will help in
understanding the specific cybersecurity needs and guide resource
allocation well into the future.
Additionally, the Department should develop a cybersecurity
strategy and policy. Establishing a clear strategy and policy framework
that outlines the Department's approach to cybersecurity. This should
include goals, objectives, and specific measures to protect sensitive
information, secure systems, and mitigate cyber risks. The strategy
should serve as a foundation for budget allocation and proper oversight
by both the OIG and Congress.
These two steps will help identify a long-term plan to fund and
address cyber-security efforts that are capable of planning for phased
implementation as well as be adaptable to unexpected developments in
the cybersecurity field. Providing comprehensive training and awareness
programs for employees at all levels--especially the leadership level--
to enhance the Department's understanding of cybersecurity risks and
best practices. Well-trained personnel are essential for implementing
effective security measures and responding to potential incidents, just
as well trained and educated leaders are to recognize the need for
adequate investment in cybersecurity measures.
The Department should also establish a regular review and update of
cyber-security policies. Continuously monitoring and assessing the
effectiveness of existing cybersecurity policies, procedures, and
controls ensures the Department remains aligned with emerging threats,
industry best practices, and regulatory requirements.

______

Mr. Collins. I thank the witness there for his testimony,
and the Chair now recognizes Mr. Cheng for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEAN CHENG, SENIOR ADVISOR, CHINA PROGRAM, UNITED
STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Cheng. Good afternoon, Chairperson Collins, Ranking
Member Stansbury, and other members of the Committee. My name
is Dean Cheng. I am a Senior Advisor with the U.S. Institute of
Peace, but my comments this afternoon are my own. My comments
this afternoon are intended to provide some context for better
understanding potential Chinese interest in cyber penetrating
and attacking the Department of the Interior.
Broadly speaking, the PRC employs cyber and network
penetration operations to gather intelligence, identify
vulnerabilities, map out networks, and otherwise prepare to
establish information dominance. The Department of the
Interior's areas of responsibility span a range of issues that
are of particular interest to the People's Republic of China,
including mineral and oil leasing, infrastructure management,
and relations with key Pacific Island nations.
The Department is, therefore, at great risk to Chinese
cyber penetration and attacks.
From the Chinese perspective, what matters is information.
Because the CCP sees the world today as living in the
information age, information has become the key currency of
power, both at the national and international level.
Information feeds and supports all aspects of comprehensive
national power and, therefore, all elements of information--
military, economic, political, technical--contribute to a
nation's power and, conversely, are potential elements that
should be hacked because they are also elements of
vulnerability.
The overall concept underlying Chinese activities is
information dominance. It is [Speaking foreign language]: the
ability to exploit information at times and places of one's own
choosing, the ability to move and analyze information more
rapidly and more accurately than competitors, and denying an
adversary those same capacities.
The PRC and, in particular, the Chinese Communist Party,
sees establishing information dominance as central to regime
survival. In this regard, Chinese cyber operations are
undertaken for a variety of purposes. This includes
intelligence gathering.
And let me emphasize here this is not simply military and
defense and intelligence community-related information. It also
includes business activities in the private sector. And we have
seen Chinese Government entities operate against private-sector
entities. It includes mapping out networks. It includes
political military targeting, but also industrial espionage.
For example, we have heard reference to Volt Typhoon, which
targeted U.S. infrastructure. We have also seen Chinese
entities hack cloud storage systems.
As well as political intelligence gathering, notably here
is the case of the OPM hack from several years ago. It is
interesting to note, I suggest, that OPM servers were housed
bureaucratically within the Department of the Interior. This
goes to the broader aspect of Department of the Interior
responsibilities, which includes management of public lands,
including drilling and mining, fisheries, offshore public
lands, offshore drilling operations. All of these are things
that, from the CCP's perspective, need to be mapped, monitored,
and potentially hacked.
For example, USGS is responsible for creating a critical
minerals list. The latest version was undertaken in 2022. What
has not yet occurred is a survey of critical minerals on public
lands. USGS is undertaking such actions. From the PRC's
perspective, not surprisingly, they would love to know the
results of a survey of U.S. public lands and what critical
minerals--including, for example, rare earths--might reside.
And from there, what companies might be contracted to extract
that, and what would be the infrastructure that would be built
out to move ores to processing facilities.
Finally, it is important to note here that the Department
of the Interior, through the Bureau of Insular Affairs, has
responsibility for interactions with a number of Central
Pacific Island countries, including the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, and Republic
of Palau. Your counterparts on the Armed Services Committee can
certainly go into significant detail on the importance of these
islands for U.S. operations.
Federated States of Micronesia, for example, surrounds the
island of Guam, one of our central geographic locations in the
Central Pacific. But the island of Kwajalein in the Republic of
the Marshall Islands is a key part of our space and missile
defense capabilities. So, with that in mind, I would suggest
that it is, above all, important to recognize that, while the
Department of the Interior's focus--by its title, of course--is
domestic affairs, because of the various bureaucratic
responsibilities, it is absolutely a high-priority target for
the PRC.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Cheng follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dean Cheng, Senior Advisor, United States
Institute of Peace

My name is Dean Cheng. I am a non-resident Senior Fellow at the
Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, and a Senior Adviser with the
United States Institute of Peace. The views I express in this testimony
are my own, and should not be construed as representing any official
position of either the Potomac Institute or the United States Institute
of Peace.
Chinese View of Information

Over the past half century, the leadership of the People's Republic
of China (PRC) has increasingly emphasized the importance of
information as it relates to national economic development and national
security. Beginning in the 1970s, the proliferation of
microelectronics, computers, and telecommunications technology has
accelerated the ability to gather, store, manage, and transmit
information. From the perspective of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)
leadership, information technology, including computers and
telecommunications systems, have permeated all aspects of society and
economies and become an integral part of a nation's infrastructure.\1\
Chinese analysts have dubbed this process ``informationization
(xinxihua),'' and see the world as shifting from the Industrial Age to
the Information Age.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ TAN Wenfang, ``The Impact of Information Technology on Modern
Psychological Warfare,'' National Defense Science and Technology (#5,
2009), p. 72.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
From the Chinese perspective,

Informationization is a comprehensive system of systems, where
the broad use of information technology is the guide, where
information resources are the core, where information networks
are the foundation, where information industry is the support,
where information talent is a key factor, where laws, policies,
and standards are the safeguard.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ State Council Information Office, Tenth Five Year Plan for
National Economic and Social Development, Informationization Key Point
Special Plans (October 18, 2002), http://www.cia.org.cn/information/
information_01_xxhgh_3.htm

In the face of this broad trend of economic, political, and social
informationization, Chinese analysts have concluded that national
economic development requires greater integration of information
technologies into all aspects of the economy, while defending against
threats to PRC national interests and security also must become
informationized.
Economic development in the Information Age is built upon
accessing, exploiting as well as analyzing and transmitting
information. While manufacturing, transportation, and other traditional
industries remain an essential part of a nation's strength, even those
are increasingly digitized, whether in terms of the designs that they
are producing or the electronic controls that govern the manufacturing
equipment and power networks that sustain them. Information technology
therefore permeates all aspects of the nation's economy, indirectly as
well as directly.
The spread of information technology similarly means that potential
adversaries have unprecedented access to each others' national economy,
as well as the broader population and the top decision-makers. Just as
the bomber and ICBM allows an opponent to directly strike a nation
without having to first break through ground or naval defenses,
information technology similarly outflanks traditional military forces.
The proliferation of information technology into society and economics
makes a nation broadly vulnerable to a range of new pressures and
threats.
These threats extend beyond information networks (e.g.,
vulnerability to denial-of-service attacks) and component computers
(e.g., computer viruses, malware). Instead, the very information itself
can constitute a threat, if, for example, its content erodes the morale
of key decision-makers, popular support for a conflict, or the will of
the military to fight. Consequently, China's interpretation of its
national interests has expanded, in step with the expanding impact of
information writ large on China.
More recent advances in information technology, including
artificial intelligence and machine learning, the Internet of Things
(IoT), big data and cloud computing, have further underscored the
growing reach and capability of those able to exploit information
networks through network warfare and cyber operations. These advances
also affect both economic and security calculations.
PRC Employment of Network and Cyber Operations

Because of the growth of interconnectivity, the CCP is able to
exploit its network and cyber capabilities for both economic and
national security gains.
In the military and security context, PRC network and cyber
operations are an integral part of intelligence gathering, just as they
are for most other nations, including the United States. Undertaking
such efforts is an essential part of the PLA's broader efforts to
establish ``information dominance,'' which PLA analysts view as an
essential prerequisite to fighting and winning future conflicts.
Because of the need to be able to rapidly exploit information more
effectively than an adversary in wartime, it is necessary to undertake
cyber and electronic reconnaissance of adversaries in peacetime. This
includes not only amassing electronic signatures of enemy
communications and weapons systems, but also surveying their networks,
understanding their organization, and constructing the ability to
attack those systems and defend against counter-attacks.
To this end, the Chinese People's Liberation Army (PLA) created a
new service, the PLA Strategic Support Force (PLASSF), in the massive
restructuring and reorganization announced on December 31, 2015. The
PLASSF brings together China's electronic warfare (EW), network and
cyber warfare, and space warfare forces into a single entity.\3\ As all
of these elements are linked to the gathering, exploitation, and
transmission of information, the PLASSF is very much China's
``information warfare force.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ For a more extensive discussion of the PLA SSF, please see John
Costello and Joe McReynolds, China's Strategic Support Force: A Force
for a New Era, INSS China Strategic Perspectives #13 (Washington, DC:
National Defense University, October 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of special importance here is the Network Systems Department (NSD)
of the PLASSF. This component of the PLASSF incorporates element of
what had previously been part of the PLA General Staff Department's 3rd
Department, which had been responsible for a variety of cyber espionage
activities. This includes the infamous Unit 61398, named in a 2013
Mandiant report and the first PLA unit publicly identified as a hacker
force.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Mandiant, APT1: Exposing One of China's Cyber Espionage Units
(February 2013) https://nsarchive.gwu.edu/document/21484-document-83
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The existence of Unit 61398 as a PLA unit also highlights a
fundamental difference between Chinese and Western execution of cyber
economic espionage. There are few reports of Western intelligence or
military forces being tasked with economic espionage. By contrast, the
PLA is part of a vast network of Chinese cyber forces that undertake
economic as well as national security espionage. Five members of Unit
61398, for example, were indicted by the US Department of Justice for
various cyber economic espionage activities over the period 2006-2014,
including attacks on Alcoa, Allegheny Technologies Inc., and
Westinghouse.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Department of Justice Office of Public Affairs, ``U.S. Charges
Five Chinese Military Hackers for Cyber Espionage Against U.S.
Corporations and a Labor Organization for Commercial Advantage,'' (May
19, 2014) https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-charges-five-chinese-
military-hackers-cyber-espionage-against-us-corporations-and-labor

As the Office of the Director of National Intelligence noted in
their 2023 threat assessment, ``China probably currently represents the
broadest, most active, and persistent cyber espionage threat to U.S.
Government and private-sector networks.'' \6\ Similarly, FBI Director
Christopher Wray observed in 2020 that Chinese espionage efforts are
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat
Assessment of the US Intelligence Community 2023 (Washington, DC: ODNI,
February 2023), p. 10, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/
assessments/ATA-2023-Unclassified-Report.pdf

not just targeting defense sector companies. The Chinese have
targeted companies producing everything from proprietary rice
and corn seeds to software for wind turbines to high-end
medical devices. And they're not just targeting innovation and
R&D. They're going after cost and pricing information, internal
strategy documents, bulk PII--anything that can give them a
competitive advantage.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Christopher Wray, ``Responding Effectively to the Chinese
Economic Espionage Threat,'' Remarks at the Department of Justice China
Initiative Conference, Center for Strategic and International Studies
(February 6, 2020) https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/responding-
effectively-to-the-chinese-economic-espionage-threat

These efforts in turn incorporate both military and civilian,
governmental and non-governmental elements, such that they outnumber
the FBI's cyber staff by 50 to 1.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Lauren Feiner, ``Chinese Hackers Outnumber FBI Cyber Staff by
50 to 1, Bureau Director Says,'' CNBC (April 28, 2023) https://
www.cnbc.com/2023/04/28/chinese-hackers-outnumber-fbi-cyber-staff-50-
to-1-director-wray-says.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Targeting the U.S. Department of the Interior for Network Attacks

Given the roles and responsibilities of the United States
Department of the Interior (DOI), at least some of this massive array
of cyber and network attackers are likely targeted at the DOI. For
example, the DOI has oversight of US public lands, including drilling
and mining rights. Within this purview is oversight of development of
leasable minerals, such as oil, natural gas, coal, phosphate,
potassium, and sodium, as well as locatable (or hardrock) minerals,
such as gold, silver, copper, and gemstones.\9\ Such resources are
clearly of economic importance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Congressional Research Service, Federal Lands and Related
Resources: Overview and Selected Issues for the 118th Congress, CRS
Report R43429 (February 24, 2023) https://crsreports.congress.gov/
product/pdf/R/R43429/42
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As important, the United States government has identified an array
of 35 critical minerals vital to national economic security, including
cobalt, fluorspar, and niobium.\10\ Until recently, there have been no
surveys of public lands to determine how much, if any, of these
critical minerals might be present. Under President Biden's Executive
Order 14017, however, the DOI is encouraged to have the US Geological
Survey, along with the Bureau of Land Management and the Department of
Agriculture's US Forest Service, begin such surveys. For the PRC,
accessing the results would provide useful insight into American
reserves and potential production capacity for these critical minerals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ US Geological Survey Communications and Publishing, ``US
Geological Survey Releases 2022 List of Critical Minerals,'' (February
22, 2022) https://www.usgs.gov/news/national-news-release/us-
geological-survey-releases-2022-list-critical-minerals
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, the DOI has oversight over leasing of both onshore and
offshore sites for oil drilling. Knowing the location of potential new
energy reserves, including offshore sites, would be strategically
valuable, as it could help the Chinese determine which companies, in
turn, to monitor and even penetrate through cyber and other means. As
important, sites that are tapped will require the construction of
substantial networks of pipelines and other infrastructure to extract
and move those resources. As a 2021 Joint Cybersecurity Advisory,
coauthored by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), noted, state-
sponsored Chinese actors have repeatedly targeted U.S. oil and natural
gas (ONG) pipeline companies in the past.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``Chinese Gas Pipeline Intrusion Campaign, 2011-2013'' (July
21, 2021) https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/
aa21-201a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONG companies may have their operating software attacked.
Alternatively, as with the May 2021 Colonial Pipeline incident, the
companies may be targeted for ransomware attacks, where the data is
made inaccessible (but is not destroyed). Although Colonial Pipeline's
networks moved oil from refineries to customers, other parts of the
overall energy supply chain, including from fields to refineries, could
also be targeted.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ ``About Shell Pipeline,'' https://www.shell.us/business-
customers/shell-pipeline/about-shell-pipeline.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, as the DOI is part of the overall US government
bureaucracy, it offers potential access to a range of systems not
necessarily related to its purview. The DOI, for example, housed the
data center for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). This was the
center that was accessed when OPM was hacked in 2015, exposing the
records of some 4 million current and former federal employees.
Notably, hearings into the hack indicated that DOI had some 3000
``critical and high risk vulnerabilities.'' \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ ``Thousands of Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities Uncovered at
Interior Department,'' FedScoop (July 15, 2015) https://fedscoop.com/
after-opm-hack-interior-cybersecurity-audit-finds-thousands-of-
critical-vulnerabilities/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oversight of Pacific Island States

Another reason for concern about Chinese network attacks and cyber
intrusions into the Department of the Interior is that the Department
is responsible for overseeing US relations with several of the
microstates of the central Pacific. One example is the Republic of the
Marshall Islands (RMI), an independent nation tied to the United States
by a Compact of Free Association. It comprises 5 islands and 29 atolls,
with a population of some 58,000 people. While only possessing some 70
square miles of dry land, these islands and atolls are spread across
750,000 square miles of central Pacific territory.\14\ As such, they
straddle waters that link the American west coast with the east Asian
littoral.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ 14 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, ``U.S. Relations with Marshall Islands,'' (July 15, 2018)
https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-marshall-islands/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This strategic position was made clear during the Second World War,
when U.S. forces ``island hopped'' through the Marshall islands, on
their way to the Marianas and eventually to Japan. Indeed, the battles
for Kwajalein and Eniwetok provided invaluable experience for later
battles on Guam, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa.
In the wake of the Second World War, the United States was granted
trusteeship over various central Pacific territories, including the
Marshall Islands. The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) gained its
independence in 1986. Under the original and subsequently amended
Compact of Free Association (CFA), RMI citizens can work, live, and
study in the United States, as non-immigrants.\15\ As of 2019, there
were some 27,000 Marshallese in the United States, a substantial
portion of the RMI population.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, ``U.S. Relations with Marshall Islands,'' (July 15, 2018)
https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-marshall-islands/
\16\ Susanne Rust, ``They Came Here After the U.S. Irradiated Their
Islands. Now They Face an Uncertain Future,'' Los Angeles Times
(December 31, 2019) https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2019-12-
31/marshall-islands-uncertain-future-us-marshallese-spokane
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, under the terms of the CFA, the United States provides
RMI with economic support and aid. The United States provides RMI with
some $70 million annually in various forms. This includes a jointly
managed trust fund. US government agencies and offices, such as the
Federal Communications Commission and US Postal Service, also provide
services to the Marshall Islands. This aid is scheduled to end when the
current amended Compact expires in 2023.
In exchange, the United States is granted exclusive and full
authority to RMI lands and waterways for security and defense purposes,
although RMI is free to conduct its own foreign relations. A key
element of both economic and security ties is the leasing of land and
lagoon space to the U.S. Army on Kwajalein atoll under the Military Use
and Operating Rights Agreement. The missile and space facilities there
are the second largest employer in the RMI.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, ``U.S. Relations with Marshall Islands,'' (July 15, 2018)
https://www.state.gov/u-s-relations-with-marshall-islands/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
RMI's Role in American Defense Efforts

Throughout the post-war period, the Marshall Islands have played an
important role in America's defense, especially in the context of
nuclear deterrence.
In the immediate post-war period, the United States conducted an
array of nuclear tests in the Marshall Islands. The 67 nuclear tests
conducted there between 1946 and 1958 included Castle Bravo, the
largest American nuclear test involving a 15 megaton device.\18\ It is
worth noting that this test was nonetheless dwarfed by four Soviet
tests, which ranged from 20-50 megatons.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories, ``Brief History of
Nuclear Testing in the Marshall Islands,'' (July 28, 2021) https://
marshallislands.llnl.gov/testhistory.php
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963, which effectively banned
above-ground nuclear tests, the islands have no longer been rocked by
nuclear explosions. RMI has continued to play an important role,
however, in maintaining America's nuclear deterrent posture. Especially
important has been the role of Kwajalein and the Ronald Reagan
Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site (RTS).
The RTS provides key support to US defense efforts in several ways.
The credibility of the American nuclear deterrent is sustained through
a program of regular tests of Minuteman III missiles. As recently as
August 2021, the US fired a Minuteman III with a Hi Fidelity Joint Test
Assembly re-entry vehicle onboard towards Kwajalein.\19\ Such tests
demonstrate to all observers, including America's adversaries, the
continuing functionality and reliability of the American nuclear
deterrent. This is becoming an ever more pressing issue due to the
aging of the Minuteman III, first introduced in the 1960s.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Air Force Global Strike Command Public Affairs, ``Minuteman
III Test Launch Showcases Readiness of U.S. Nuclear Forces' Safe,
Effective Deterrent,'' (August 11, 2021) https://www.stratcom.mil/
Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/2727368/minuteman-iii-test-launch-
showcases-readiness-of-us-nuclear-forces-safe-effecti/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The fact that these test shots cover some 4200 miles further
enhances the credibility of the American deterrent. Russian ICBM tests
from the Plesetsk Kosmodrome to the Kura test range in Kamchatka cover
some 3800 miles.\20\ Longer test flights provide more opportunity for
measurements of flight characteristics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Joe Saballa, ``Russia to Test Launch Advanced intercontinental
Ballistic Missile,'' Defense Post (May 5, 2021) https://
www.thedefensepost.com/2021/05/05/russia-to-test-launch-ballistic-
missile/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, given the size of the Kwajalein lagoon (which is one of
the largest in the world at over 600 square miles), one can target
warheads and dummy payloads into it, and thereby prevent their recovery
by other actors. In 2016, Chinese sailors seized an American unmanned
underwater vehicle (UUV) from international waters.\21\ There should be
little doubt that the Chinese, among others, would very much like an
opportunity to examine a dummy US nuclear warhead.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Terri Moon Cronk, ``Chinese Seize U.S. Navy Underwater Drone
in South China Sea,'' DOD News (December 16, 2016) https://
www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/1032823/chinese-
seize-us-navy-underwater-drone-in-south-china-sea/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The facilities at Kwajalein also support missile defense efforts.
The various radars and facilities provide American missile defense
planners and engineers with data to help improve missile interception
capability. This is of growing concern, as both Russia and China
modernize their own nuclear arsenals.
Nor are missile defenses only relevant to the nuclear side of the
deterrence equation. The PRC, for example, has deployed anti-ship
ballistic missiles, such as the DF-21 and DF-26. Both of these are
clearly intended to neutralize American aircraft carriers and other
maritime strategic platforms. Missile defenses would degrade Chinese
confidence that they can sink or damage American carriers, which in
turn would help deter China from using force against various neighbors,
from Japan to Taiwan to the Philippines.
In November 2020, an American SM-3 Block IIA missile successfully
intercepted an ICBM-type missile, launched from Kwajalein.\22\ This was
the first time that the SM-3, which can be deployed aboard an AEGIS-
equipped destroyer or cruiser, had destroyed such a target.\23\ This
radically improves not only American deterrence, but that of any allied
nation that has comparable AEGIS-type systems in their fleet. The SM-3
is already part of the Phased Adaptive Approach for NATO defense
against Russian missile threats. It is deployed in the ground-based
site in Rumania, and will be deployed to the site currently under
construction in Poland. Meanwhile, Japan has chosen to rely on its
fleet of AEGIS destroyers to provide missile defense for the Home
Islands, against North Korean and Chinese threats. The success of the
SM-3 Block IIA test means that this key US ally will be more secure in
coming years. The facilities in the Marshall Islands have played a key
role in improving American and allied security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ The Department of Defense, ``U.S. Successfully Conducts SM-3
Block IIA Intercept Test Against an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile
Target,'' (November 17, 2020) https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/
Release/Article/2417334/us-successfully-conducts-sm-3-block-iia-
intercept-test-against-an-intercontinen/
\23\ The War Zone Staff, ``The Navy Has Finally Proven It Can Shoot
Down an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile,'' The Drive (November 17,
2020) https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/37685/the-navy-has-finally-
proven-it-can-shoot-down-an-intercontinental-ballistic-missile
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the facilities in the RMI, including on Kwajalein, play a
central role in space surveillance. The United States Space Force
currently tracks some 26,000 objects in space. Because of the high
speed of objects in orbit, even a bolt or a screw can do enormous
damage to the International Space Station or an orbiting satellite. The
recently built Space Fence on Kwajalein provides the Space Force with
the ability to monitor objects as small as a marble.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Sandra Erwin, ``Space Fence Surveillance Radar Site Declared
Operational,'' Space News (March 28, 2020) https://spacenews.com/space-
fence-surveillance-radar-site-declared-operational/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This capability is of growing importance as America's competitors
and adversaries develop ever more capable space systems, many of which
are believed to be anti-satellite systems. The Russians, for example,
have deployed sub-satellites from larger satellites, much like
submunitions from a dispenser. In 2017, Kosmos-2519 launched Kosmos-
2521, a sub-satellite while in orbit. Kosmos-2521 subsequently launched
a sub-satellite of its own, Kosmos-2523. Both Kosmos-2519 and Kosmos-
2521 maneuvered in orbit.\25\ Meanwhile, China's new reusable space
plane apparently released an object while in orbit, and engaged in
rendezvous and proximity operations (RPO) with at least one other
object over the past year.\26\ All of these actions are difficult to
track, especially while also maintaining situational awareness over
26,000 pieces of other debris. Russia has since launched other
satellites that have behaved in a similar fashion, launching their own
sub-satellites.\27\ US space surveillance capabilities must maintain
watch over all these objects, if America's own satellites are to be
preserved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Gunter D. Krebs, ``Kosmos-2519/Kosmos-2521/Kosmos-2523,''
Gunter's Space Page Retrieved October 17, 2021, https://
space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/kosmos-2519.htm
\26\ Andrew Jones, ``China's Mysterious Spaceplane Releases Object
into Orbit,'' Space News (November 2, 2022) https://spacenews.com/
chinas-mystery-spaceplane-releases-object-into-orbit/, and Joseph
Trevithick, ``Chinese Spaceplane Docked with Another Object Multiple
Times Data Indicates,'' The Drive (May 9, 2023) https://
www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/chinese-spaceplane-docked-with-another-
object-multiple-times-data-indicates
\27\ Neel V. Patel, ``The U.S. Says Russia Just Tested an `Anti-
Satellite Weapon' in Orbit,'' Technology Review (July 23, 2020) https:/
/www.technologyreview.com/2020/07/23/1005568/us-space-command-russia-
test-anti-satellite-weapon-orbit-kosmos-2543/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ground-based Space Fence radar on Kwajalein is an essential
part of the American space surveillance network. It plays a key role in
helping the U.S. detect and track potential threats to its satellites,
including its missile early warning, strategic communications, and
reconnaissance platforms.
In addition to RMI, the United States has comparable special
relationships with the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic
of Palau. Relations with both of these states are also overseen by the
DOI. Both of these states are slated for additional US military
construction, but have also been courted by Beijing.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Kirsty Needham, ``Pacific Islands a Key U.S. Military Buffer
to China's Ambitions, Report Says,'' Reuters (September 20, 2022)
https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/pacific-islands-key-us-
military-buffer-chinas-ambitions-report-2022-09-20/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the PRC, which has been seeking inroads into the central
Pacific and to build expanded ties to the various states, gaining
insider knowledge of American positions, aid packages, and general
policy toward those states would be of enormous strategic advantage.
Moreover, as both RMI and the Republic of Palau maintain ties with
Taiwan, rather than the PRC, Beijing is intensely interested in gaining
any leverage it can to shift their diplomatic alignment.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Dean Cheng, Senior Advisor, China
Program, United States Institute of Peace
Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar
Question 1. Is there anything stopping the Department of the
Interior from allocating a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives?

Answer. There may be issues of reallocation of money within a
budget, and whether Congressional authorizations allow such
reallocations. For example, it may be that money cannot be shifted
from, say, Bureau of Land Management to Department of the Interior
(DOI) information services without prior authorization.
More importantly, however, is even within the DOI's information
services budget, how money is programmed. More money spent on
cybersecurity will almost certainly mean less money spent on some other
aspect of information management and information services within the
DOI. It may mean fewer updates of the web-site, or a lagging purchase
of new computers. So long as the information technology/information
services budget is (relatively) fixed, additional tasks will be a
matter of ``robbing Peter to pay Paul.''
One consideration, however, may be to determine better metrics of
information security, in order to assess the effectiveness of dollars
spent on information security. How well is DOI currently doing in terms
of securing its information systems?

Question 2. How can DOI better prioritize cybersecurity initiatives
within its existing budget?

Answer. Measuring effectiveness and determining efficiency of cyber
security is extremely difficult to measure, because it is essentially
assessing dogs that do not bark. For example, how does one assess
effectiveness of deterrence measures, other than ``no war occurred''?
Assessing cybersecurity initiative measure effectiveness might be
facilitated by conducting ``tiger team'' or ``red team'' attacks.
Indeed, this might provide USCYBERCOM with an opportunity to engage in
cross-departmental cooperation by staging ``attacks'' against DOI.
Alternatively, asking USCYBERCOM to help assess threats and security
capacity of DOI's information security would potentially help both
departments improve their level of operation.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. In May 2023, a Chinese Government hacking group
successfully launched a malware attack on telecommunications systems in
Guam and other parts of the United States. What were the consequences
of this breach and what can we learn from it to strengthen our
cybersecurity posture, especially in the Indo-Pacific region.

Answer. I believe several lessons have emerged.

One of the most basic is that the same cybersecurity
threat groups are often given different names by different
cyber-security firms, making it harder to assess how
extensively the threat entity has operated, where it has
performed prior penetrations, etc. The group ``Volt
Typhoon'' is also known as ``Bronze Silhouette'' among
other names. Encouraging cyber-security firms to not only
share data (they often do), but to either use the same
nomenclature would improve overall security by facilitating
a common understanding of the threat.

The threat is constantly shifting. ``Volt Typhoon''
attacks do not require downloading malware, but exploit
existing lines of attack. As important, it apparently
involves exploiting cyber security firms as an attack
pathway.

There should be little question that the PRC will engage
in disruptive attacks against critical infrastructure in
time of conflict, and most likely in time of crisis. This
is consistent with known People's Liberation Army (PLA)
writings, and suggests that policies and courses of action
predicated on the assumption that the PRC and PLA will not
conduct such attacks are badly mistaken. It is therefore
essential to plan now for both mitigation and response
strategies in the likely event of such attacks and ensuing
disruptions.

______

Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Cheng. The Chair now recognizes
Ms. Siers for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RHEA SIERS, SENIOR ADVISOR (CYBER RISK), TENEO,
WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Siers. Mr. Collins, Ranking Member Stansbury, and
Committee members, thank you for the opportunity to discuss
cybersecurity challenges. My name is Rhea Siers, and I have
worked over 30 years in both the government and private
sectors, witnessing the cyber threat to our national security
and economic well-being growing exponentially.
I will use a practitioner's approach, as someone who sees
the daily realities of defending our networks and responding to
cyber incidents.
The cyber playing field has evolved. Initially, cyber was
the primary domain of state actors. But to understand the
totality of the cyber threat challenge, we must acknowledge the
role and activities of non-state actors, as well. Computer
technology is now easily available to non-state actors, such as
organized criminals and hacktivists. They procure cyber tools
from state sponsors or the cybercrime underground: a robust,
full-service operation.
Years ago, the hallmark of state cyber actors was their
persistence, tenacity, innovation, and exploitation of human
error. Now, some of these non-state actors are displaying
similar performance and tactics.
Of great concern is the increasing impact of actors that
self-identify as non-state actors, but are controlled or
resourced by states. These groups often employ cybercrime
tactics, but their objectives align with their sponsor's
strategy. These groups are supported by our traditional
adversaries, such as Russia and China, and our newer cyber
adversaries, such as North Korea and Iran.
Two examples: The Russian Sandworm group linked to Russian
military intelligence is a very sophisticated cyber presence.
In 2017, they caused a shutdown at the global maritime giant,
Maersk, leading to significant monetary losses and disruption
to the worldwide supply chain. The Lazarus Group is a North
Korean-sponsored hacking syndicate. They have pursued numerous
attacks on an array of sectors worldwide. Their objective is
supplying the North Korean regime with funds with the dual
purpose of disruption in world markets and financial
transactions. Their cyber mentor in building capabilities, of
course, was China.
What are our adversaries after? They want access to
confidential data. Thus, their efforts to penetrate government
and private sector networks.
This isn't just spy versus spy. The government holds a
great deal of sensitive data that can give adversaries a very
good idea of our security vulnerabilities, from the financial
sector to oil pipelines.
This is not just about data. We see more threats against
industrial control systems, the instrumentation that operates
the industrial processes, from manufacturing plants to power
grids. There is potential for operational disruption and
damage. One recent example: the Chinese government-supported
hackers who targeted multiple U.S. oil and gas pipelines over
the past decade, mapping the industrial controls for potential
future operations.
Future cyber challenges are also emerging, from efforts to
infiltrate the supply chain of information technology, such as
the Russian SolarWinds operation, to the potential to alter
algorithms that are increasingly running our operational
technology.
So, how do we defend against traditional and newer
adversaries with the finite resources we have in the public and
private sectors?
What we don't want is something I call Chicken Little
cybersecurity. Recall the story of Chicken Little. He gets hit
in the head by some acorns, and he decides the sky is falling.
Every day we are hit with a barrage of bad cyber acorns,
threats, malicious software, data breaches. To keep the sky
from falling, you must assess the specific risks to your
organization, public or private. Your cyber defense ultimately
depends on your ability to do so.

The response to state and non-state cyber threats is to
focus and strategize; find the key vulnerabilities and risks;
realize that no government agency or private company is an
island unto itself. We cannot claim that we can repel any cyber
attack or neutralize all our cyber adversaries. Instead, we
must aim for cyber resilience, collaborative preparation, and
agile response that doesn't stop at the public-private
boundary.

Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Siers follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rhea D. Siers, Senior Adviser, Teneo
Subcommittee Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before to discuss the cyber threats to our
national security from State adversaries and their proxies. My name is
Rhea Siers and I have spent over thirty years in this area, both in
government and in the private sector and have watched the cyber threat
to our national and economic well-being grow exponentially. I approach
this topic from a practitioner's standpoint, as someone who has seen on
a daily basis the challenges of protecting our nation's critical
infrastructure and government and business operations from the inside
and outside. Those challenges are the direct result of our digital
world given the vast amount of personal, proprietary and operational
information flowing through all our networks. Frankly, it is a treasure
trove of information and potential disruption available to our
adversaries worldwide.
Prior to my current position as a Senior Advisory on Cyber Risk to
Teneo, I served in a variety of senior operational positions at the
National Security Agency including Deputy Assistant Director for
policy; since my retirement from the US Government Senior Executive
Service, I have worked as an attorney and advisor on Cyber Incident
Response, and as a Senior Cyber Defense Strategy Executive at Bank of
America. I am also on the faculties of George Washington and Johns
Hopkins Universities where I have developed and taught courses on Cyber
Threats, Strategy and Policy for the past fifteen years. My approach
today is a pragmatic one--not just discussing the changes in cyber
threats but the importance of planning for emerging threats as
technology continues to develop so rapidly. My advisory focus is not
just the response to crisis cyber situations but the very critical need
for advance planning to ensure resilience to attacks, disruption or
even worse, destruction of data and operational technology in our
networks. I'm all about demystifying cybersecurity and helping my
students and clients ask the right questions about their cyber defense
in the wake of daily hostile cyber activity.

In my testimony today, I will discuss the following issues relating
to state and other cyber threats to our national security and economic
stability:

1.  Cyber Actors: The Playing Field Evolves

2.  Potential Implications: Who is Hacking and What Are Their
Objectives?

3.  Responding to the Cyber Threat Challenge: Avoiding the ``Chicken
Little Cybersecurity'' Syndrome

1. The Cyber Playing Field Has Changed:

I admit, given my background, taking a bit of a long and
evolutionary view of cyber threats. When I started in this field, cyber
was very much the primary domain of state actors--intelligence services
and the military held the keys to cyber operations and were the most
successful adversaries. They dominated the activity, the attacks, the
use of cyber to penetrate networks to gain a national security
advantage, to collect intelligence and to seek economic advantage. They
possessed the technological resources to conduct electronic
surveillance and warfare both domestically and overseas. While that's
certainly still very true today, the cyber playing field has leveled
out a bit and the attribution--the ``who dunnit'' of cyber operations--
has become a bit murkier.
If we want to understand the totality of the cyber threat
challenge, we must acknowledge the role of non-state actors.
Significant technological advances actually make computer network
resources more widely available. Thus, nonstate actors, such as
organized criminals, and `hacktivists' are now taking full advantage of
available cyber capabilities. Certain tools are readily available--
either from state sponsors or the cybercrime underground, which
features a full service, one-stop shopping for tools such as
ransomware--that hold data hostage until a ransom is paid.
There is a growing and increasingly impactful category of actors
that self-identify as nonstate actors but are controlled or resourced
by states. They often employ cybercrime tactics and techniques, but
their objectives align with the State's strategy against adversaries.
One can call them a blended or hybrid threat, but ultimately many are
state-sponsored and supported. Of even greater concern, the non-state
cyber actors are improving all the time. Years ago, the hallmark of
state cyber actors was their persistence, tenacity, great use of
technology and exploitation of human error. Now these state proxies are
displaying the same persistence and use of more advanced cyber tools
and techniques. These proxies allow states to build further capacity
and also aid in the state's efforts to hide some of its cyber activity.

Just a few recent examples illustrate the challenge of state
sponsored cyber groups:

The Russian Sandworm group, which is linked to Russian
military intelligence, has been quite active. Sandworm is a
sophisticated cyber presence and is believed to have
conducted the 2015 BlackEnergy cyber attack against
Ukraine's power grid as well as the 2017 attack on the
global maritime giant, Maersk. Maersk's booking system and
loading systems were impacted. Maersk and all its global
shipping were shut down resulting in significant monetary
losses and great impact on the worldwide supply chain.
Sandworm has been active against Ukraine recently as well
in an effort to damage the industrial control systems that
run high voltage substations there--i.e. shut off power.

The Lazarus Group is a North Korean sponsored hacking
syndicate--they are known to have been involved in the
attack on Sony Motion Picture Entertainment here in the US
and have pursued attacks on the financial and
pharmaceutical sectors worldwide. While their key objective
is supplying the North Korean regime with funds, they also
often have a dual purpose of disruption in world markets
and financial transactions.

More recently, the Department of Justice indicted a number
of Iranians affiliated with the Iranian Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) for ransomware activities
``threatening the physical security and economy of the
United States''. These activities included the targeting of
critical infrastructure with ransomware.

As if the playing field wasn't complicated enough--there are no
shortage of targets for malevolent cyber actors. While certainly
government agencies at all levels are in the crosshairs of hostile
cyber states, the private sector in the US controls about 90% of
cyberspace; of even greater concern is the protection of our critical
infrastructure. For example, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) notes that ``more than 80% of the country's
energy infrastructure is owned by the private sector, supplying fuels
to the transportation industry, electricity to households and
businesses and other sources of energy that are integral to growth and
production across the nation''.
2. Who Is Hacking and Why? Potential Implications

To understand impact on the natural resources sector, it is
important to understand three different and multiple cyberattack
objectives--i.e., what benefits the cyber attacker is expecting to gain
from a successful intrusion or attack.
All of these objectives operate across the three main target areas
of commercial, industrial, and government sectors. A single operation
can also seek to affect multiple targets and have multiple purposes.
The fact that different targets share similar vulnerabilities only
strengthens the necessity for collaboration (not just information
sharing) across the entire cyber environment, regardless of whether the
target is a public or private entity.
Objective 1: Collection of and Access to Confidential Data
You name it, every commercial, industrial, and governing entity is
a potential treasure trove of information to the right attacker. This
isn't just ``spy vs spy''. Remember that the government sector holds a
great deal of sensitive data beyond plans and strategies including
intellectual property, personal and proprietary data. It also includes
data related to control systems, such as dams or water treatment
facilities--these are potential vulnerabilities that must be protected.
In some highly regulated industries, companies are required to report
their cyber and physical security strengths and weaknesses to the
government. Unauthorized access to those reports by one of our
adversaries is obviously a serious concern. This is not only about data
being accessed; there is the potential for data being altered with a
negative impact on operations and safety.
Of course, these attacks also focus directly on the private sector.
Just a few months ago, both the Department of Energy and the US
Intelligence Community warned of ``custom made'' malware targeting the
control systems for both electricity and natural gas. The warning
indicated that this hacking operation, probably conducted by Russian
state supported groups, were mapping the US energy infrastructure.
``Mapping'' is a key step in intelligence gathering--the precursor to
an ability to potential disrupt and even destroy energy industry or
other equipment.
Objective 2: Financial Gain
This second cyberattack objective is largely the motive of
cybercriminals seeking unauthorized access to funds, personal
information that can be used to pose as a victim and obtain funds, or
information about pending transactions or deals that can be used to
engage in such activities as insider trading.
One recent area of concern: criminal, ransomware and data extortion
targeting the industrial sector. We are seeing more and more threats
against Industrial Control Systems (known as ICS). ICS are the
different types of systems and instrumentation that operate or automate
industrial processes, anything from manufacturing plants to power
grids. Previously, ransomware used to focus on information technology
and data access but has now expanded to this operational technology. An
intrepid cybercriminal, including state sponsored groups, can threaten
to stop the production line, turn off the power, or in several recent
cases, turn off the oil or gas pipeline. They can do this simply by
threatening administrative or enabling functions. It doesn't take a lot
of imagination to see the potential harm to business and of course, to
a utility's customers and operations.

Example:

Colonial Pipeline (2021): Just the threat of a potential release of
data by the Cyber Crime group DarkSide caused Colonial Pipeline to shut
down its East Coast pipeline delivery system for gasoline, jet fuel,
and diesel. And the cybercriminals didn't even target the actual
pipeline; they went after its corporate data, encrypting it and
demanding a ransom. Unable to bill its customers, Colonial Pipeline
turned off the spigot, resulting in a significant shortage of gasoline.
This also demonstrated that blended threat that I referred to earlier
when cybercriminals conduct activity, sometimes tolerated, and
sometimes encouraged, by a nation state that views the attacks a
serving their interest, in this case, Russia.
Objective 3: Operational Disruption/Damage
Attacks attempting to disrupt or even destroy operational controls
and technology have targeted the entire spectrum of commercial,
industrial, and governmental targets and have used the full range of
cyber techniques and even cyber weaponry to achieve their goals. The
targets include commercial, industrial and government entities that are
heavily reliant on their computer network for operations. There has
been a steady increase in attacks on industrial control systems that
run manufacturing or utilities.

Methods: Disruptive operations often require more advanced tactics
including the collection of extensive intelligence and setting up a
presence in the target's network for a prolonged period of time without
detection. Most recently, ransomware has sometimes been added to the
attacks.

Example: Chinese government supported hackers targeted an array of
US oil and gas pipelines over the past decade, seeking ``strategic
access to industrial control networks that run the pipelines for future
operations rather than for intellectual property theft''.
3. Responding to Cyber Threats:

I have briefly outlined state and state-associated cyber threats
and the potential dangers to our national and economic security--but
it's time for some practitioner pragmatics--the big ``so what?''
You may have heard, especially about a decade ago, people referring
to cyber threats by states as a potential ``Cyber Pearl Harbor,'' a
catastrophic cyberattack on critical infrastructure, like power grids,
that would cause physical damage and injuries or death to our citizens.
Have we had a Cyber Pearl Harbor? Thankfully not. Is one theoretically
possible? Yes, but it is critical to give context to what the threats
mean without turning to untethered panic. This debate is also a red
herring; it sets a threshold for damage from a cyberattack that is
quite high, forgetting that lower-level attacks can cause significant
problems in everyday life as well as to our national and economic
security, a kind of death by 1000 cuts. And just a cursory look at
recent hacks of private-sector companies and government agencies should
remind us that smaller-scale intrusions can be disruptive, dangerous
and very costly even without catastrophic outcomes.
I tend to think of both the cyber and national security environment
as a set of concentric circles. That means simply that this is not just
an issue of direct impacts by direct attack on a specific target.
Rather this means that cyber state and non-state attackers aim at not
just their primary target, such as gas or energy distribution, but the
enabling functions often supplied by third party partners. When
attackers are frustrated by their primary targets, they turn to those
concentric enabling circles--suppliers who have some access into the
network or even the physical plant of the target. They gather
intelligence, conduct reconnaissance, gather organizational and
structural information and they search for the backdoor for
unauthorized access. States historically were most proficient at this
intelligence work; but that is no longer exclusively true. Once again,
state supported non-state actors have proven themselves agile learners
at collecting intelligence about their targets and taking the time to
penetrate their targets' networks to map them and assess them for
further attack.
This is also a problem that I like to call ``chicken little
cybersecurity.'' You might recall the story of Chicken Little: he gets
hit in the head by a couple of acorns and decides the sky is falling.
We are all hit with a daily barrage of bad news about cyberattacks and
intrusions--new malicious software, a new advanced persistent threat
(APT) group, or new backdoors into our networks. Not every cyber event
or newly discovered vulnerability applies to every company, government
agency or entity. Throwing money at your cyber problem without incisive
analysis and context is not going to keep the sky from falling on you.
If you cannot assess or link the specific risk to your organization or
to your sector, public or private, you are in serious danger of being
overwhelmed. If the risk is not fully assessed and related to actual
operations or potential fallout, you are limiting the efficacy of your
cyber defense.
The response to state and non-state cyber threats is to focus; find
the key vulnerabilities and risks; realize that no government agency or
private company is an island onto itself. We cannot claim, nor should
we, that we can repel any cyber attack or intrusion; instead, we must
aim for cyber resilience--collaborative preparation and well-practiced
response.
Thank you.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Rhea Siers, Senior Advisor
(Cyber), Teneo
Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar
Question 1. Is anything stopping the Department of the Interior
from allocating a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives?

Question 2. How can DOI better prioritize cybersecurity initiatives
with its existing budget?

Answer. Both of Representative Gosar's questions deal directly with
the specific details of the DOI budget. I am unfamiliar with DOI budget
details such as mandated vs discretionary spending, the conditions for
the reprogramming vs transfer of funds, or whether provisions exist
that might limit the movement of funds to new cybersecurity programs or
activities. I realize that these represent difficult choices and
prioritizations but cannot offer specific guidance.
With that caveat, I want to focus on the reality of funding
cybersecurity in federal agencies (and often in private entities). As
previously noted, successful cyber resilience necessitates not only
sufficient funding but consistent funding. In addition to the monetary
costs, there is also the challenge of finding human resources--people
with the right cyber and technology skills to institute best practices,
stay on top of technological advancement and to move with agility and
speed as necessary. Lack of funding and resources result in gaps in our
ability to protect today's threats; lack of resources negates our
ability to prepare strategically, operationally and coherently for new
threats and future risks. It is difficult to make our networks and
systems resilient when our resources are so limited that we can, at
best, put out fires and try to fend off the latest hack. I'm not
arguing for unlimited cyber funding; that would be unrealistic. I am
advocating consistent, prioritized funding that is built on a multi-
year program without interruptions, annual funding swings or ``salami
slice'' cuts lacking a sound rationale.

Questions Submitted by Representative Gallego

Question 1. Ms. Siers, in your testimony you use the phrase ``Cyber
Pearl Harbor.'' Can you elaborate on what this means and the likelihood
of such a threat occurring?

Answer. ``Cyber Pearl Harbor,'' a catastrophic cyberattack on
critical infrastructure, like power grids, that would cause physical
damage and injuries or death to our citizens. It could hypothetically
disrupt our daily lives, our welfare and our economy. The use of the
term was more prominent a decade ago as we began to understand the
potential ramifications of cyber activity and attacks. It certainly
attracted much-needed attention to cyber threats at that time. Have we
already experienced a Cyber Pearl Harbor? Thankfully not. Is one
theoretically possible? Yes, but it is critical to give context to what
the threats mean without turning to untethered panic.

This debate is also a red herring; it sets a threshold for damage
from a cyberattack that is quite high, ignoring that lower-level
attacks can cause significant problems in everyday life as well as to
our national and economic security, a kind of death by 1000 cuts. And
just a cursory look at recent hacks of private-sector companies and
government agencies should remind us that smaller-scale intrusions can
be disruptive, dangerous and very costly even without catastrophic
outcomes.

Question 2. You've detailed a number of existing threats in your
testimony and responses. What are some of the future threats of concern
in cyber security?

Answer. Given the pace of technological advancement, there is
clearly much potential for future threats in the cyber realm. I'll
focus on only two to provide examples of potential cyber risk. First, a
supply chain cyber attack--usually when your adversary targets a
trusted third-party vendor who supplies software or other services to
your agency or company. The Russians hacked by deploying malicious code
in management software used by thousands of government agencies and
private companies. The hack gave the Russians great access into many
public and private networks and is certainly a threat that could be
repeated in the future. Even when companies or agencies manage their
cybersecurity well, some of this is beyond their control because it
resides with software developed outside their own enterprise.

The second is a newer concern--relating to the use of Artificial
intelligence and machine learning that relies on data to make
predictions and decisions. It's what's used in self-driving cars or
translation tools for example. This is called ``data poisoning'' in
which the attackers tamper with the data used to build the models--and
``poisons'' the data, rendering it unreliable or inaccurate.

Question 3. In September 2022, the U.S. activated the 3rd Multi-
Domain Task Force in Hawaii to support the U.S. Indo-Pacific Command
and the operations of the first task force activated in the region in
2017. To what extent does cyber play a role in our multidomain
operations in the Indo-Pacific region?

Answer. Cyber is a critical part of our military operations--not
only via US Cyber Command but in electronic warfare functions,
intelligence and integrated into battle plans. The third multi domain
task force brings together cyber, electronic warfare and intelligence.
This activation supports the national security prominence of the
Pacific Theater. Cyber is critical for both readiness and
interoperability for all operations.

Question 4. To what extent is a cyber-attack a threat to our
military operations and national security posture in the Indo-Pacific
region? What are some potential consequences of such an attack?

Answer. In terms of a cyber attack--it would depend largely on the
nature of the attack. First, we should note that there is a very good
level of cyber preparedness by our military and a good amount of
contingency planning to deal with the cyber threat. However, this
preparedness does not inoculate forces in the region from disruption;
nor can we say with absolute certainty how cyber attacks might lead to
a serious escalation even beyond the Indo-Pacific region. There are
many potential consequences of such an attack--for example, if the PRC
Government makes the ill-advised decision to attack Taiwan, it will
have to disrupt our military (and our allies') communications--so that
threat is real and present. If an escalation ensues, there will be
significant economic consequences with global impact.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. The Offce of the Inspector General Audit found that
several DOI components lacked sufficient authorizations, and the DOI
did not conduct quality control reviews or submit those systems to
FISMA audits. These DOI offices included the National Park Service,
which manages Americans' transactions and reservations to national
parks through recreation.gov, and the Bureau of Trust Funds
Administration, which manages over $5 billion in trust for Native
Americans. Please describe how a breach at these two offices might have
real consequences for individuals.

Answer. These data breaches can provide unauthorized access to
Personal Identifiable Information (PII)--depending on the type of
transaction, anything from credit card numbers to birthdays to social
security numbers to passport numbers. The real consequences often occur
when this type of information is found on what is called ``the Dark
Web''--kind of the ``Star Wars Bar'' of cyber criminals where lots of
information can be procured. The information can be used for scams, to
procure other credit cards, and for any of us who have experienced this
form of identity theft--it is quite a hassle and can cause considerable
stress. In many cases, the victim has to replace their credit cards or
even other forms of identification such as driver's licenses or
passports. Victims may have their credit frozen for important
transactions like home mortgages or choose to freeze their credit while
investigations are being conducted. The other consequence is what the
breach does to the reputation of the office/organization that was
hacked--there are major reputational issues including a loss of trust
by clients/customers.

Question 2. Federal agencies like the Department of the Interior
increasingly rely on non-federal entities for services. For example,
Booz Allen Hamilton, a major consulting form, runs recreation.gov. What
are best practices for protecting federal assets that contractors have
access to when the federal government does not control the contractor's
cyber infrastructure?

Answer. There are already a number of requirements for contractor
cybersecurity especially in the Defense sector, such as those provided
by the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (DFARS) and
the Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification (CMMC). These provide
good practices and are based on the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) 800-171 (Controlled Unclassified information).
General best practices are familiar ones--including such items as
Multi-Factor Authentication, certain types of perimeter and endpoint
protection and internal penetration and vulnerability scans. I would
add that the federal agency itself must take proactive steps to monitor
compliance by contractors when possible and establish firm and clear
deadlines, accountability and requirements for notification in the case
of a contractor breach.

Question 3. There are concerns that the significant budget cuts
included in the recent debt ceiling deal would limit funding available
for federal cybersecurity, much like how the cuts to agency funding
recently proposed by Republicans could negatively impact our ability to
fulfill NEPA requirements. What impact does funding insecurity and
uncertainty have on an agency's ability to address cybersecurity
threats?

Answer. Cybersecurity and cyber resiliency are not inexpensive--and
this is not only a matter of dollars. In addition to the monetary
costs, there is also the challenge of finding human resources--people
with the right cyber and technology skills to institute best practices,
stay on top of technological advancement and to move with agility and
speed as necessary. Lack of funding and resources result in gaps in our
ability to protect today's threats; lack of funding negates our ability
to prepare strategically, operationally and coherently for new threats
and future risks. It is difficult to make our networks and systems
resilient when our resources are so limited that we can, at best, put
out fires and try to fend off the latest hack. It is difficult to
ensure cyber resilience when we put off replacing legacy systems or do
it in a piecemeal fashion. I'm not arguing for unlimited cyber funding;
that would be unrealistic. I am advocating consistent, prioritized
funding that is built on a multi-year program without interruptions,
sudden funding swings or ``salami slice'' cuts lacking a sound
rationale.

______

Mr. Collins. Thank you, Ms. Siers. The Chair now recognizes
Dr. Clancy for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF T. CHARLES CLANCY, SR., SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
GENERAL MANAGER, MITRE LABS, AND CHIEF FUTURIST, THE MITRE
CORPORATION, McLEAN, VIRGINIA

Dr. Clancy. Mr. Collins, Ranking Member Stansbury,
Committee members, thank you for inviting me to testify before
you today on this topic of critical national importance. My
name is Charles Clancy. I am a Senior Vice President at MITRE,
where I lead science, technology, and engineering for the
company.
MITRE is a non-profit, non-partisan research institution
that operates federally funded research and development
centers, or FFRDCs, on behalf of the U.S. Government. We
provide deep cybersecurity expertise across the executive
branch and the Federal judiciary.
Before joining MITRE, I led cybersecurity research and
development programs as a professor at Virginia Tech, and as a
scientist at the National Security Agency.
Over the past 5 years, the cyber threat environment has
continued to change. Organized crime continues to target
enterprise network environments with ransomware, including
those used by the U.S. Government. China and Russia have
elevated their offensive cyber programs into strategic
instruments of statecraft.
The Director of National Intelligence's annual threat
assessment concludes that China could almost certainly disrupt
oil and gas pipelines and rail infrastructure in the United
States, and would do so to deter U.S. military action by
impeding our decision-making, inducing societal panic, and
disrupting military mobilization. It also assesses that Russia
is focused on attacking U.S. undersea cables and industrial
control systems.
But let's, I guess, focus in a bit more on some of the
enterprise networks that have been germane to the discussion so
far today. I guess I want to differentiate that a bit from the
critical infrastructure that Department of the Interior has
oversight authority over.
So, starting with the internal enterprise networks that DOI
operates, they are all governed by requirements stemming from
the Federal Information Security Modernization Act, or FISMA,
which was originally passed in 2002 and has gone through a
number of legislative updates. This Act emphasizes a risk-based
approach to cybersecurity with protections commensurate to the
level of data that needs to be protected by those agencies.
Helping agencies implement FISMA is a number of key
standards from NIST. So, NIST provides their security control
baselines, known as Special Publication 853, and the Risk
Management Framework, or RMF. These all cover the things we
talked about in the earlier panels, including password
complexity and multi-factor authentication, and are best
practices across the entire executive branch.
The White House has also taken steps to move beyond these
tools and require Federal agencies to implement zero trust
architectures, which was part of an executive order 2 years
ago. DOI would be well served by developing and executing a
plan to implement the NIST Risk Management Framework, or RMF,
and the new and emerging Federal Zero Trust cybersecurity
principles that go beyond MFA, in terms of securing enterprise
networks.
Shifting gears to look at the privately-operated critical
infrastructure that the Department of the Interior has some
oversight over, this is sort of a different set of authorities,
a different set of levers that might be pulled to improve
cybersecurity. So, critical infrastructure is most often
operated by private organizations, subject to some form of
regulations.
Sector risk management agencies, or SRMAs, have been
mentioned a couple of times in passing so far during the
hearing, are responsible for the cybersecurity of those named
critical infrastructure sectors. SRMAs typically promote the
use of the NIST cybersecurity framework, another NIST document
that is really focused on cybersecurity for privately-operated
critical infrastructure systems.
While much of this ecosystem today relies on voluntary
compliance and information-sharing, the National Cybersecurity
Strategy that was published earlier this year by the White
House seeks to establish minimum cybersecurity requirements,
rather than a voluntary compliance regime for U.S. critical
infrastructure.
Recent reports from the GAO highlight cybersecurity
concerns with offshore oil and gas industry. While not
designated an SRMA, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement, or BSEE, does oversee security for this industry.
The Bureau could leverage its rulemaking authorities in
collaboration with other Federal partners to develop a minimum
set of cybersecurity requirements based on the NIST
cybersecurity framework, and that is consistent with the
National Cybersecurity Strategy.
Major operators of offshore energy and their corresponding
onshore transportation infrastructure could implement an
integrated strategy for securing both, which the intelligence
community assesses as specifically under threat from China.
Recent cyber attacks against Guam attributed to China are
also concerning. The tactics used by the CCP are not unique to
Guam. Given the strategic importance of Guam's critical
infrastructure to the Department of Defense, DOI and DOD could
develop a closer partnership on securing the infrastructure
upon which both the U.S. military and citizens of Guam depend.
This could include leveraging DOD's cyber protection teams and
other assets to collaboratively perform a cybersecurity
vulnerability assessment of Guam's infrastructure and systems.
Implementing any of these requirements come down to
workforce. Certainly, we have talked a bit about the
competitive nature of the cybersecurity talent base. I will
point out that the Department of the Interior does not have a
current permanent chief information security officer, and I
would recommend filling that position as soon as possible.
Other departments and regulatory commissions have consolidated
organizations focused on cybersecurity and resilience within
the industries that they regulate.
One option could be to establish a cybersecurity cell
within the Office of the Secretary that is focused on
coordinating cybersecurity strategy and policy across all
segments of DOI's regulatory and oversight apparatus.
Thank you. And with that, I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Clancy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Charles Clancy, Senior Vice President, MITRE

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, Ranking Member Grijalva,
and Committee Members:
Thank you for inviting me to testify before you today on a topic of
critical national importance. My name is Charles Clancy and I am a
Senior Vice President at MITRE where I lead science, technology, and
engineering for the company. MITRE is a non-profit, non-partisan
research institution that operates Federally Funded Research and
Development Centers (FFRDCs) on behalf of the U.S. Government. Among
other technical disciplines, our team of over 1,500 cybersecurity
professionals provide deep expertise across the executive branch and
federal judiciary, including in support of organizations like the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and U.S. Cyber Command.
MITRE's ATT&CK
TM
framework has become the de facto language
between government and industry for describing and combatting cyber
threats.
Prior to joining MITRE, I spent nine years as a member of the
faculty at Virginia Tech where I held the Bradley Distinguished
Professorship of Cybersecurity in the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, and served as executive director of what is now
the National Security Institute. I started my career at the National
Security Agency leading research and development programs.
Threat Environment

Over the past five years, the cyber threat environment has changed
considerably.

Among criminal elements we have seen the dramatic rise of
ransomware giving organized crime new business models for exploiting
enterprise computer networks and systems. This has fueled secondary
industries, such as hacker groups focused exclusively on penetrating
organizations and selling that access to the highest bidder. Well-
financed criminal hacker groups now develop new cyber tools on par with
nation-state hackers. While U.S. action against major ransomware groups
has stunted what was astronomical growth in the ransomware economy, it
remains a major threat.
Meanwhile China and Russia have elevated their offensive cyber
programs into strategic instruments of statecraft.
China's cyber program had been primarily focused on espionage:
stealing secrets from governments and intellectual property from
companies. However, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has expanded
their operations to also hack into critical infrastructure systems and
preposition access that could be used for strategic effect in the U.S.
and beyond.
Russia's espionage and information operations posture has similarly
expanded to include critical infrastructure. But unlike China, Russia
has the ongoing war in Ukraine as a backdrop for pulling the trigger on
their cyber weapons, normalizing destructive cyber attacks against
civilian infrastructure as part of military conflict. Beyond shifting
international norms, they are also gaining experience they can employ
beyond Ukraine, in Europe and North America.
The Director of National Intelligence released their annual threat
assessment in February in which they assessed that China could almost
certainly disrupt oil and gas pipelines and rail infrastructure in the
U.S. and would do so to deter U.S. military action by impeding our
decision making, inducing societal panic, and disrupting military
mobilization. It also assessed that Russia is focused on attacking U.S.
undersea cables and industrial control systems.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, ``Annual
Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community,'' 6 February
2023. https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2023-
Unclassified-Report.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importantly, the goal of inducing societal panic skews the nature
of traditional state actor cyber tactics. Beyond targeting specific
civilian infrastructure that has downstream military impacts, state
actors are now acting more like terrorist groups, using cyber attacks--
or the threat of cyber attacks--to induce fear.
With this as a backdrop, all federal agencies need to remain
vigilant against cyber attacks targeting their enterprise
infrastructure and take steps to promote cybersecurity within the
industries and jurisdictions they oversee.
Enterprise Security for the Department of the Interior (DOI)

Recent reports by DOI's Inspector General highlighted cybersecurity
concerns.\2\
,
\3\ While I am not able to assess these
specific reports, there are a range of recommendations and best
practices used by other federal agencies that could be beneficial if
adopted by DOI.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Office of the Inspector General, Department of the Interior,
``Semiannual Report to Congress,'' 31 March 2023. https://
www.doioig.gov/sites/default/files/2021-migration/
DOIOIGSemiannualReporttoCongressMarch2023.pdf
\3\ Office of the Inspector General, Department of the Interior,
``The U.S. Department of the Interior's Cyber Risk Management Practices
Leave Its Systems at Increased Risk of Compromise,'' 2020-ITA-030,
February 2023. https://www.doioig.gov/sites/default/files/2021-
migration/
Final%20Evaluation%20Report_DOI%20Cyber%20Risk%20Management_Public.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Much of the U.S. federal cybersecurity ecosystem is governed by
requirements stemming from the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act (FISMA) originally enacted in 2002, updated in
2014,\4\ and currently undergoing another legislative update in both
the House and Senate to account for the modern threat environment and
new defensive technologies.\5\ The act emphasizes a risk-based approach
to cybersecurity, with protections commensurate with the level of data
that needs to be protected by agencies. There are a variety of
resources that reinforce and provide detailed guidance on
implementation of FISMA, including Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) circulars,\6\ the NIST Risk Management Framework,\7\ and NIST's
security control baselines.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``Federal Information Security Act of 2014,'' Public Law 113-
283, December 2014. https://www.congress.gov/113/plaws/publ283/PLAW-
113publ283.pdf
\5\ Dave Powner, ``When it comes to federal cybersecurity policy,
the executive branch is far ahead of Congress,'' Nextgov, 17 June 2022.
https://www.nextgov.com/ideas/2022/06/closing-gap-cyber-policy-
focusing-fisma/368353/
\6\ Office of Management and Budget, ``Managing Federal Information
as a Strategic Resource,'' Circular A-130, June 28, 2016. https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/07/28/2016-17872/revision-of-
omb-circular-no-a-130-managing-information-as-a-strategic-resource
\7\ National Institute of Standards and Technology, ``Risk
Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations,'' NIST
Special Publication 800-37, rev2, December 2018. https://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-37r2.pdf
\8\ National Institute of Standards and Technology, ``Security and
Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations,'' NIST
Special Publication 800-53, rev5, 23 September 2020. https://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-53r5.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response to continued threats from advanced threat actors, the
White House has taken steps to move beyond these tools and require
federal agencies to implement zero trust architectures, through
executive action \9\ and OMB memoranda.\10\ These provisions are
expected to be part of legislative updates to FISMA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The White House, ``Executive Order on Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity,'' EO 14028, May 12, 2021. https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-
improving-the-nations-cybersecurity/
\10\ Office of Management and Budget, ``Moving the U.S. Government
Toward Zero Trust Cybersecurity Principles,'' M-22-09, 26 January 2022.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/M-22-09.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DOI would be well served by developing a plan to implement the NIST
Risk Management Framework and Federal Zero Trust Cybersecurity
Principles into their enterprise network infrastructure.
Critical Infrastructure Security

A decade ago, a variety of executive \11\ and legislative \12\
actions created much of the critical infrastructure cybersecurity
environment we operate in today. Critical infrastructure is most often
operated by private organizations and subjected to some form of
regulation. These actions established Sector Risk Management Agencies
(SRMAs) responsible for cybersecurity of named critical infrastructure
sectors, ultimately led to the Department of Homeland Security
establishing CISA, and resulted in NIST creating its Cybersecurity
Framework \13\ to provide an approach to securing critical
infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ The White House, ``Improving Critical Infrastructure
Cybersecurity,'' EO 13636, 12 February 2013. https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/executive-
order-improving-critical-infrastructure-cybersecurity
\12\ ``Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015,'' Public Law
114-113, 18 December 2015. https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ113/
PLAW-114publ113.pdf
\13\ National Institute of Standards and Technology,
``Cybersecurity Framework''. https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Much of this ecosystem today relies on voluntary compliance and the
establishment of communities where sectors can freely share cyber
threat information called Information Sharing and Analysis Centers
(ISACs). While this approach has dramatically improved cybersecurity,
major gaps remain across every industry, and there are periodic calls
to shift voluntary compliance regimes to compulsory, with corresponding
push back from industry over the associated costs. The National
Cybersecurity Strategy published earlier this year seeks to establish
required minimum cybersecurity safeguards for U.S. critical
infrastructure.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Office of the National Cyber Director, ``National
Cybersecurity Strategy,'' March 2023. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2023/03/National-Cybersecurity-Strategy-2023.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent reports from the Government Accountability Office \15\ and
the National Security Agency \16\ highlight cybersecurity concerns
connected with infrastructure over which DOI has some oversight. While
not a designated SRMA, the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement (BSEE) does oversee security for the offshore energy
industry. BSEE could leverage its rulemaking authorities, in
collaboration with other federal partners, to develop a minimum set of
cybersecurity requirements based on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
and consistent with the National Cybersecurity Strategy. Major
operators of offshore energy infrastructure and their corresponding
onshore transportation infrastructure could implement an integrated
strategy for securing both, which the Intelligence Community assesses
is specifically under threat from China.
1

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Government Accountability Office, ``Offshore Oil and Gas:
Strategy Urgently Needed to Address Cybersecurity Risks to
Infrastructure,'' GAO-23-105789, October 2022. https://www.gao.gov/
assets/gao-23-105789.pdf
\16\ Joint Cybersecurity Advisory, ``People's Republic of China
State-Sponsored Cyber Actor Living off the Land to Evade Detection,''
PP-23-1143, May 2023. https://media.defense.gov/2023/May/24/2003229517/
-1/-1/0/CSA_Living_off_the_Land.PDF
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent cyber attacks against Guam attributed to China are also
concerning,\17\ though the tactics used by the CCP are not unique to
Guam. Given the strategic importance of Guam's critical infrastructure
to the Department of Defense (DOD) strategy, DOI and DOD should develop
a closer partnership on securing infrastructure upon which both the
U.S. military and the citizens of Guam depend. This should include
leveraging DOD's Cyber Protection Teams and other assets to
collaboratively perform cybersecurity vulnerability assessments of
Guam's infrastructure and systems.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Wired, ``China Hacks US Critical Networks in Guam, Raising
Cyberwar Fears,'' 24 May 2023. https://www.wired.com/story/china-volt-
typhoon-hack-us-critical-infrastructure/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Workforce and Leadership

A major challenge across the board in cybersecurity is workforce.
The cybersecurity workforce gap nationally continues to grow, with 40%
of the 1.9 million cybersecurity positions currently being vacant.\18\
In this climate, DOI has stiff competition in recruiting and retaining
cybersecurity talent. Partnering with an FFRDC could be a good part of
the solution, but longer-term, the department needs to build its
organic talent base. One option could be to target students graduating
from the Cybercorps Scholarship for Service program who have a federal
service commitment upon graduation.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Cyberseek, ``Cybersecurity Supply/Demand Heat Map,'' accessed
5 June 2023. https://www.cyberseek.org/heatmap.html
\19\ Office of Personnel Management, ``Cybercorps Scholarship for
Service,'' accessed 5 June 2023. https://sfs.opm.gov/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Department needs a permanent Chief Information Security Officer
(CISO). Such a position is critical to securing enterprise
infrastructure.
Other departments and regulatory commissions have consolidated
organizations focused on cybersecurity and resilience for the
industries they regulate. While BSEE has that remit, it only focuses on
offshore resources and reportedly has only one employee focused on
cybersecurity.\20\ One option could be to establish a cybersecurity
cell within the Office of the Secretary focused on coordinating
cybersecurity strategy and policy across all segments of DOI's
regulatory and oversight apparatus. The team could participate in
interagency efforts like the Cybersecurity Forum for Independent and
Executive Branch Regulators.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Kevin Sligh, ``BSEE proactively addressing cybersecurity and
offshore energy production,'' 3 January 2023. https://www.bsee.gov/
kevin-sligh-bsee-proactively-addressing-cybersecurity-and-offshore-
energy-production
\21\ Cybersecurity Forum for Independent and Executive Branch
Regulators, ``Charter''. https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1501/
ML15014A296.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion and Recommendations

DOI is not alone. It can leverage deep expertise across the
interagency to improve its own enterprise cybersecurity, and work with
key partners across DHS and DOD to help secure infrastructure over
which it has some oversight. With a proactive cybersecurity strategy,
it can build momentum by adopting best practices and forging
interagency relationships.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to T. Charles Clancy, PhD, Senior
Vice President and General Manager, MITRE Labs
Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar
Question 1. Is anything stopping the Department of the Interior
from allocating a greater percentage of its existing budget to
cybersecurity initiatives?

Question 2. How can DOI better prioritize cybersecurity initiatives
with its existing budget?

Answer. Thank you for these important and timely questions. As was
discussed during the hearing, DOI faces two separate cybersecurity
challenges: securing their own enterprise IT infrastructure, and
effectively governing the security of certain critical infrastructure
under their purview.

In general, some level of improved cybersecurity is possible within
current budgets, but robust implementations will require modernization
and new funding. The absence of new funding will require evaluating
budgetary tradeoffs between existing priorities and critical
modernization needs.
Enterprise IT

With respect to enterprise IT security, many of the baseline
recommendations from the Inspector General are achievable within their
current budget for many of their IT systems. Enabling and requiring
passphrases and multi-factor authentication requires little software
change, and is primarily changes to system policies. The costs are
primarily around user training, which should be absorbable into the
broader training requirements for federal employees.

However there are two areas that would likely require additional
investment above and beyond their current IT budget: deploying zero
trust, and addressing legacy systems.

Executive Order 14028 put into motion requirements for federal
agencies to adopt zero trust architectures to deal with increased
threats from cyber adversaries. Implementing zero trust requires
procuring and deploying additional software systems within the
enterprise, and implementing it fully often requires rearchitecting
enterprise networks with concepts like micro-segmentation. These
changes would best be achieved if done as part of a larger enterprise
IT modernization that looked to more fully embrace a FEDRAMP-approved
cloud-based solutions.

With respect to legacy systems, based on testimony during the
hearing, DOI has certain IT systems that are aging and lack the
capability to be upgraded with modern cybersecurity defenses. Many
federal agencies are facing these same challenges, such as the Internal
Revenue Service.\1\ While it may be possible to put ``band aid''
solutions on top of these legacy systems to achieve some level of
compliance, they represent serious technology debt whose modernization
costs only continue to increase over time. The solution is
modernization, the sooner the better. While these represent increased
costs in the near term, over time they represent cost savings as
smaller IT teams are needed long term when leveraging cloud-based
Software as a Service (SaaS) solutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-23-104719

Of course, the cybersecurity safeguards being discussed for DOI
represent really only the bare minimum for best practices by federal
agencies. A more comprehensive solution would be to fully embrace and
implement the NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF) within DOI's
enterprise systems.
Critical Infrastructure

Addressing cybersecurity for critical infrastructure under DOI's
purview, such as offshore oil and gas production, is implemented by an
entirely different portion of the DOI enterprise, and is more focused
on developing and promulgating cyber-security policy, and ensuring
appropriate compliance auditing across industry. Organizations like
BSEE are sufficiently resourced for baseline policy development, but
need to prioritize cybersecurity as part of their safety mission.
However, BSEE is likely insufficiently resourced to undertake the
needed auditing function. Many critical infrastructure sector risk
management agencies lack the needed resourcing to fully provide the
needed capacity building and compliance auditing for their industries.

______

Mr. Collins. Thank you, Dr. Clancy.
I want to thank all the witnesses for their testimony. We
are going to move into Member questions, and I am going to
recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Clancy, I want to kind of pick up on what you were just
talking about. And I may bounce around. I hope we have time for
several questions from Members. It looks like there are two of
us, so we may.
Government agencies and interacting. You said, if I heard
you right, that that may be an answer to find someone to
interact with all of these agencies. Is that right?
Dr. Clancy. Yes, the Department of the Interior has many
different pieces of the critical infrastructure apparatus over
which they have authority. And having a single point to
coordinate across the Department, I think, would be helpful,
and also coordinate up with the Office of the National Cyber
Director.
Mr. Collins. Mr. Cavanaugh, can you add to that? Do they
already talk within this agency, or is there any----
Mr. Cavanaugh. Sir, to answer that question, I think the
structure exists for that communication, as they are able to
participate in their sector-specific coordinating councils,
whether it be government facilities for the vast majority of
the Department of the Interior, or if it is the energy sector,
or food and Ag, even for the fisheries.
The challenge has been staffing at the Department of the
Interior, and identifying the appropriately staffed individual
or individuals that can cover those meetings and represent the
Department.
Mr. Collins. So, pretty much, that is what you would say
would be the barrier that is keeping them from sharing----
Mr. Cavanaugh. Being more proactive in that engagement
process. The structure is there, but it has not been a primary
focus for the Department.
Mr. Collins. And I don't know if any of you all can answer
any of this, or how much you delve into the DOI, but when we
were asking the first panel some of the questions, we were
talking about passwords. And I find it amazing that we have a
government agency that is just now identifying maybe changing
passwords to passphrases. I am in the private sector. We did
that years ago.
Hardware and software, does anybody keep an inventory as to
what needs to be upgraded, what hasn't been upgraded?
I mean, are we still using TRS 80 model 2s, or where is the
problem at in DOI?
Dr. Clancy. I guess I will say that, under FISMA there is a
set of requirements to specifically identify systems. And based
on the Inspector General's testimony, it sounds like there are
tens of such systems across the Department of the Interior that
have sort of separately received their authority to operate, or
ATO, which basically says that they have, among other things,
appropriate cybersecurity safeguards.
I believe the way it would work is they would go through
each one of those individual accredited systems and look at
what the gaps are for implementing some of these more
sophisticated cybersecurity protections, because each one
likely is different, could be run by different agencies or
parts of the Department.
Mr. Collins. Right. But it just seems like to me that,
ultimately, as Mr. Cheng was alluding to, that we would be
moving to a cloud-based system, where that is where you would
really clamp down on your multi-factor authentication, and that
shouldn't be a problem.
Mr. Cheng. Sir, one of the aspects that is, unfortunately,
in play here is the software and the hardware that runs it that
is embedded in a lot of the infrastructure itself, the
supervisory control and data acquisition systems, or SCADA.
These are, essentially, very small programs that make sure that
the pipelines run, et cetera. They have operating systems. In
many cases, they are still running off of Windows----
Mr. Collins. Don't say 98.
Mr. Cheng. Well, a little better, but Windows 7. And the
problem is that the chips that are running them, essentially
mini-computers, if you will do not have the capacity to be
upgraded. It is not like you can go in. You literally would
have to rip out the entire machinery, and put a new one in that
would be able to run Windows 10, Windows 11. But Microsoft has
stopped upgrading and security updating for Windows 7.
So, in addition to the specific computer issues that have
already been touched upon, there is that crossover to the
literal infrastructure side of what is the level of security
that is even possible on systems that were never designed to be
updated, and certainly had not expected to be hacked.
Mr. Collins. I would agree, I just don't understand how we
have agencies in the Federal Government that are that far
behind. That doesn't really make sense to me.
Dr. Clancy. I would say, from my perspective at MITRE, we
see the IT infrastructure of much of the entire executive
branch, and there are many agencies with 40-year-old systems
still running today.
Mr. Collins. I know I am out of time, but one last
question. I think it was Mr. Cavanaugh, you said hold employees
accountable. We don't hold employees accountable for not
following safety protocols, as far as even logging in?
Mr. Cavanaugh. Having almost 13-plus years experience in
the Federal Government, there is minimal accountability outside
of being remediated by additional training. So, if you had a
password issue, you were just assigned to take more security
training. There was no actual accountability beyond training
for employees.
Mr. Collins. I would have thought Colonial Pipeline at
least would have been a huge wake-up call.
Ms. Siers. Sir, let me add to this a little bit. We are
successful, and in Federal agencies where there is success and
accountability, it is because at the leadership level and the
manager level it essentially becomes part of your contract. So,
that has the way of changing the culture, focusing people.
I have personally, however, seen people lose their jobs
over issues where there is a pattern of poor password usage and
other abuses. So, I don't believe there is one answer for the
entire Federal Government, but I do also really believe it is a
leadership issue.
Mr. Collins. All right, thank you. I know my time has
expired. I recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Stansbury, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. All right. Thank you so much, Mr. Collins. I
want to follow up on some of the testimony that all of you have
given already.
The first is this set of folks who have been involved in
hacking and cyber attacks who are kind of in the interspace
between state actors and private actors. And I know Ms. Siers,
you talked a little bit about this in your oral testimony here
today. But tell us more about what kind of organizations are we
talking about. Are these professional criminal organizations?
Are they shops that have been set up by state actors that are
in a sort of quasi-private space, but doing contract work for
them?
And what is their motivation? Why are they attacking the
United States, and our systems, and our institutions?
Ms. Siers. I would say it is a little bit of all of those.
Let me just talk more about the purely criminal organizations.
This is an incredibly well-organized effort. You can buy
anything you need on the Dark Web, which is kind of the cyber
version of the Star Wars criminal bar. And you find all kinds
of tools, you find negotiators to negotiate ransom with any
victim. So, that is one category.
Then, of course, you have hacktivists, who generally claim
to have political purposes and oppose certain operations or
certain organizations.
And then you have this other group that we are not entirely
sure on occasion where they come from, but we know a couple of
things. One is they are either physically present or availing
themselves of servers in specific states, and it is the usual
suspects, to be honest: Russia, China, Iran, North Korea. And
they are at least given tacit approval to do what they do at
one end of the continuum. And at the far end of the continuum,
they have direct state support. And sometimes that even
includes--and we have seen this in Russia--moonlighting
intelligence officers, who actually go there after hours and
assist these groups.
We have also seen these patriotic hacktivist groups. Russia
has used them on a number of occasions. They are using them
now, they used them against Estonia. That is to afford them
some kind of plausible deniability, so that they are really
unable to point to a specific government figure.
So, you have this whole panoply. It makes attribution,
which is kind of our whodunit in cyber, sometimes somewhat
difficult, and it makes strategies to respond sometimes a
little bit difficult, as well.
Ms. Stansbury. Well, if there is one thing this hearing has
been, it is terrifying to really understand the full breadth of
the kinds of organizations and activities that are happening
out in the world here.
And Mr. Cheng, as you were testifying today, and I know in
your written testimony, as well, you mentioned the attack on
Guam and its telecommunication systems, and sort of touched a
little bit about the implications for a Chinese extension of
its sphere of influence in the South Pacific. I wonder if you
could talk a little bit more about that, and the implications
for the United States and for our strategic and global position
in the South Pacific, and our relationship with China.
Mr. Cheng. Absolutely, ma'am. As the People's Liberation
Army has expanded its array of missile capabilities, operations
within what is sometimes termed the First Island Chain,
stretching from Japan through Okinawa, Taiwan, the Philippines,
and down to the Straits of Malacca, have become much more
problematic. Whether or not U.S. air bases, U.S. aircraft
carriers, et cetera will be able to operate in those waters is
becoming more difficult.
So, the Department of Defense is intent upon establishing,
essentially, a fallback position in the Central Pacific through
what is sometimes termed the Second Island Chain, which would
stretch through Guam, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, et
cetera.
Notably, the Chinese have been working very hard to invest
and to develop infrastructure across this region, but they are
also monitoring what is going on there.
The other aspect to keep in mind is, especially on the
island of Kwajalein, which is part of the Republic of the
Marshall Islands and therefore within the DOI's remit, is an
array of key defense facilities, including the Ronald Reagan
Ballistic Missile Defense test site, a key site where we test
our ICBMs, which is essential to nuclear deterrence, but also
the establishment of the space fence, so that we can see what
is coming, basically, over the horizon.
These are key targets for Chinese espionage, but as
important in time of crisis or conflict would be facilities
that would be targeted, ideally, through cyber means simply
because of the distance from Chinese military forces. So, all
of these are essential to maintaining American dominance
through the Central Pacific region, and are primary targets for
Chinese kinetic and non-kinetic means of attack.
Ms. Stansbury. Well, thank you for sharing all that. One of
the things that our Committee is doing, and you mentioned this
in your testimony, while our Committee is primarily over the
domestic functions of the Department of the Interior, this is
the Committee that also oversees and does oversight over our
relationship with many of the associated states and territories
that are in that region. And we have just stood up a bipartisan
task force to look at many of these issues, which myself and
others are serving on.
I do have one more follow-up, which is really about the
last two questions I asked. And Dr. Clancy, I didn't realize
when I read your testimony initially that you had worked in the
national security space outside of the private sector. So, I
was really interested to hear that in your introduction.
You touched on this a little bit in your oral testimony,
but since you do have that background, I wonder if you could
talk a little bit more about what are some of the things that
you see Congress and our agencies can do to beef up that
relationship with DOD, and to make sure that we are really
protecting these critical, critical assets and pieces of
infrastructure on the cyber side so that we are not vulnerable
to the kinds of attacks and espionage that we have been talking
about.
Dr. Clancy. Yes. I think, specific to Guam, I think there
is a great opportunity for partnership with DOD, given they are
a major component of the ecosystem there.
The example I said in my testimony is leveraging DOD cyber
protection teams to go out and work collaboratively with the
privately-operated Guam utilities to help identify potential
vulnerabilities and beef up security.
Other things could be for the Department of Defense to
start including language in the contracts that they have with
local utilities for power, water, other sorts of things,
requirements that they meet additional cybersecurity
requirements. And while that would likely increase the cost of
those services to DOD, it would also provide resources back to
those utilities to help beef up the security, given there is
such a dependence on that.
I will note that it is not just Guam, though. Hawaii is
another big opportunity for DOD collaboration with local
utilities, and some of the other territories, as well.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you very much. And we will be working
on the NDAA in the coming months, and I think this is something
we would really love to work with the Majority on, is to figure
out how to make sure we are beefing up all of these resources.
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Dr. Gosar [presiding]. I thank the gentlelady, and she is
right on, because we have the Holman Rule, so we can go line
item by line item to make those priorities.
And Mr. Cheng, can you elaborate on the fundamental
difference between Chinese and Western execution of cyber
economic espionage? What is the fundamental difference between
the two?
Mr. Cheng. The fundamental difference, sir, is that the
West, for most purposes, is dominated by private industry.
There aren't too many state-owned enterprises, state-run
entities, and there is also a real separation of powers. Posse
Comitatus title 10 versus title 50 are just some of the
examples of how, in our system, the military is circumscribed
in what it can do.
So, the idea that a Western government would put its cyber
military elements out there to, say, steal data about X
industrial or economic process creates fundamental issues,
beginning with can the government order you to do that, to how
would you even disseminate that data. If you gave data on new
cars to Chrysler, Ford and GM would be unhappy. If you gave it
to all three of those companies, you have probably told
everyone in the world that you are engaging in cyber economic
espionage.
In the case of China, every one of those aspects is
different. The Chinese economy has substantial state-owned
enterprises, which means that you can share data directly
within the government because oil companies, steel companies,
shipbuilding, those are part of the government.
And the Chinese have publicly in their own writings noted
that the People's Liberation Army, which is a party army, it is
not a national military, it is part of the Chinese Communist
Party, it is supposed to do what the party needs it to do. And
if that means the party needs it to go and steal economic
information, intellectual property, map out private company
data, establish, you know--that is a legitimate order for the
PLA to acquire that data, which can then be shared within the
Chinese system because these state-owned enterprises, the main
beneficiaries, are part of the government, as well.
So, we are talking about a fundamentally different
ecosystem, a fundamentally different view of the role and
responsibilities for the armed forces. And let me note here
that Chinese description of their cyber forces--again, from
their writings--is the military, non-military governmental
entities, but also non-governmental entities ranging from
universities to private companies. The CCP is able to reach out
and employ a whole-of-society approach within which, therefore,
Chinese cyber economic espionage occurs. This is a very
different model than anything we see in the West.
Dr. Gosar. Wow. How much has the Chinese cyber capabilities
improved over the past 10 years? And have they outpaced the
United States in these capabilities?
Mr. Cheng. We are watching the Chinese steadily improve
their cyber capabilities. Pre-2015 a lot of their cyber
penetrations often left fingerprints. The Mandiant Report on
APT1 back in 2013 was able to determine a PLA unit 61398 cyber
activities because they were able to identify who some of these
players were, who in turn had essentially left digital
fingerprints of who they were.
Since 2016, they have become much tighter. It is harder to
identify. But I would defer to either other members of this
panel or people from our intelligence community who can provide
much greater detail.
Dr. Gosar. We have also heard today about staffing
challenges with IT professionals in the Department and
government-wide. What would prevent the Department from using
its contracting authority to overcome some of these challenges?
Could that be a potential short-term alternative?
Dr. Clancy and Mr. Cavanaugh, could you answer that?
Dr. Clancy. I think, certainly, it is a function of budget.
Many agencies and departments leverage outside contractors for
IT work all the time. Certainly, MITRE, as an operator of
federally funded research and development centers, we are
turned to often by many of those agencies for such tasks. It is
often just a function of having budget in order to do that.
Dr. Gosar. OK.
Mr. Cavanaugh. And from my perspective, the NIST cyber risk
framework provides a great opportunity for them to direct a
contractor to address some of those outstanding needs that they
have.
But I would caution that right now the tendency across
government is to chase after shiny objects and things you are
hearing in the cyber community: Zero Trust architecture,
polymorphic malware. We have spent a long time and a lot of
energy and money building walls around our systems, and not a
lot of time understanding what is on our systems and how to
observe if anything is there, capturing the point of the
fingerprints being left behind in other scenarios. It has just
not been a priority.
So, we need to prioritize the infrastructure that has the
highest likelihood and highest consequence for impact, and in
that process also start closing the ability to detect when
something is on our system.
Dr. Gosar. So, is the procurement process part of the
problem?
Mr. Cavanaugh. I would argue, yes. Right now, there is a
tendency to lean heavily in contract bundling, which doesn't
always net the outcomes that you are hoping for. The current
process makes it very hard for small businesses to engage, and
a lot of your innovation in the tech sector is being driven by
start-ups and small companies that are understanding the edge
of technology.
I would risk that the Internet of Things that we have
talked about for a few years now is now becoming the leading
edge of where cyber vulnerabilities will exist. And the
companies that are most apt to understand that and be able to
address those needs may not be your larger corporations and Big
Tech; it will most likely be small companies that have
understood that, and are addressing only that, and not being
driven by their corporate priorities.
Dr. Gosar. I am going to ask this last question for each
one of you to answer. What, if anything, is preventing the
Department from prioritizing cybersecurity in their annual
budget process?
I will start with you, Mr. Cavanaugh.
Mr. Cavanaugh. I think the point we have seen today is
maybe prioritization within staffing and leadership. So, they
don't have a CISO, Dr. Clancy?
Dr. Clancy. Correct.
Mr. Cavanaugh. Yes, that is a huge challenge. So, not
having a CISO and not having someone at the leadership level
guide and direct strategies are pointless without leadership
buy-in.
In terms of capturing how they get there today and
appropriately budget for it, they need to have a strategy that
identifies and prioritizes. They need to understand what it is
they want to close down on and where they want to look.
We spoke a little bit about offshore oil and gas. I would
also surmise that offshore wind, which is going to become a
growing thing, is going to be equally vulnerable as oil and
gas. Iran has already successfully proven that they are
targeting wastewater and water treatment facilities.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Cheng?
Mr. Cheng. Sir, if we look at a corporation, and it is
anything other than a cybersecurity company, IT security is an
overhead problem. It is not a profit center. And I would
suggest that, essentially, the same is going to be true not
only for the Department of the Interior, but the Department of
Commerce, even DOD and elsewhere, which is to say IT security
is not seen as the primary mission of the agency. It is part of
yes, I have to hire people, yes, I have to keep the lights on,
I have to buy new desks for people, et cetera.
As I believe it was the GAO witness testified, 83 percent
of the budget, when it comes to IT, is operations and
maintenance. It is keeping the computers running. Antivirus
software may be part of it, but it is largely, ``I have the
blue screen of death, how do I get my computer to turn back
on?'' not ``Are the Chinese rummaging through my files?''
So, making it a priority, I guess part of the issue is
going to be which part of the other responsibilities that are
part of DOI on its web page, are you going to ask us to lower
in priority or de-prioritize? Is it managing the national
parks? Is it overseeing offshore pipelines? Because unless you
elevate it to--and that would have to be true across a lot of
departments--``This is job two'', it is going to be other
duties as assigned.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Siers?
Ms. Siers. Well, let me talk about this a little bit from
the private sector. It is not a profit center until you are
hacked, seriously. And then everything changes. And that is
usually a good thing.
But the real problem, having listened to the term ``legacy
systems'' used continuously by the first panel, which, of
course, raises many concerns, the real issue is we are fighting
fires every day. So, we focus on the tactical, and we don't
talk about what Mr. Cheng referred to as the strategic issues
down the road.
So, when our funds are limited, we are putting out the
fires but we are not trying to consider what might happen, for
example, with some of the improvements in AI, and how that is
going to impact us. We are generally woefully unprepared for
that, because it is human nature to respond to the first thing
on your plate.
That involves leadership, again, and a certain form of
management in terms of your cyber and your infrastructure. And
in order to do that, you have to have a very disciplined budget
process, as well, that takes every part of your budget and
projects it 3, 4, 5 years ahead to see where the impact is
going to be, and see what risk it is really going to help with.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Clancy?
Dr. Clancy. I think that is a great point there. The legacy
system issue is, I think, also coupled in with the
cybersecurity issue. If you spend a whole bunch of money on
cybersecurity Band-Aids to put on top of legacy systems, you
may be throwing good money after bad. So, it might be better to
think about a broader IT modernization effort that includes
improving cybersecurity as part of it to get a more systemic
set of solutions.
Also, I want to note that that is specifically with respect
to their enterprise IT infrastructure. That is different than
having the right experts to help with the regulatory aspects of
overseeing the cybersecurity of the private sector-operated
infrastructure like the offshore oil and gas.
Many critical infrastructure sectors, specific agencies
have workforce shortages there. I think after the Colonial
Pipeline hack we realized how ill-staffed TSA was to help
respond. Same thing with the Florida wastewater attack a couple
of years ago, where EPA, again, was caught flat-footed without
a robust team of people who were really paying attention to
this.
So, I think there are sort of two different strategies.
There is a broader IT modernization strategy, I think, that is
needed for the enterprise infrastructure, but also getting the
right experts in to help with the regulatory and oversight
component.
Dr. Gosar. So, I am going to ask one thing. What was the
question that you wanted asked, and it wasn't asked, and what
is the answer? What keeps you up at night?
We are going to go back in reverse order. Mr. Clancy.
Dr. Clancy. I guess I will just note that I think with
China and Taiwan, we are in sort of a couple-year window here
to figure out how to combat large-scale cyber attacks against
U.S. critical infrastructure. And that window is getting
shorter and shorter, and I think we need to take aggressive
action to speed this up across all sectors.
I mentioned that, specifically, electric power, rail, oil,
and gas are all being specifically targeted by China to
incapacitate them so that, if they take action in Taiwan, we
are unable to respond effectively. And this is a scenario that
is only a few years down the road, potentially.
And the offshore oil and gas production is part of that
ecosystem, and is as vulnerable or more vulnerable than many of
the other aspects.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Siers?
Ms. Siers. I think the question I would have liked is what
are the consequences, truly, of hacking into a Federal agency.
I mean, what really happens to you? I am not talking about the
person who messes up the passwords.
And I think there are several levels of consequences we
have to think about. The first is standard law enforcement
indictments. We have seen a lot of them against the usual
suspects. They are useful in some ways.
And lately, we have also seen efforts, though, to disrupt
vulnerabilities writ large. And what it simply means is we are
not just focusing on a vulnerability that affects a Federal
agency, something wrong with a Microsoft application, for
example. We are seeing vulnerabilities challenged, information
being provided, patches being provided by government entities
for everyone to use.
And the third part of this, which I think is probably the
most important, I think the Ranking Member referred to the
takedown of Hive recently, a Russian group. In essence, the
U.S. Government, the FBI, hacked into it and took it down. It
also provided the keys to a whole group of victims of Hive,
both, I would believe, government and private sector.
So, I think we have to be clearer about what the
consequences are, and I think we have to develop that as we
develop this kind of culture in the Federal Government that
cybersecurity becomes a priority mission.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you.
Mr. Cheng?
Mr. Cheng. Actually, I guess I had two. My first question
that I wish had been asked, and I don't have an answer to at
all, is the extent to which, when there is a CISO at the
Department of the Interior, how often do they interact in
particular with Cyber Command and with the rest of the
intelligence community, not simply from a law enforcement
perspective, but broader, being informed about the nation state
actors, the gray zone actors, et cetera.
And then the other part of this would have been to ask,
actually, the two previous witnesses, are your agencies
engaging in two-factor authentication? Do you have, personally,
passphrases as opposed to passwords?
And what about the rest of the government? Is the
Department of the Interior unique, or is the Department of the
Interior actually not so bad because they only could penetrate
20 percent of the passwords? Commerce, Treasury, Energy,
Education, et cetera. How well do they do?
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Cavanaugh?
Mr. Cavanaugh. For myself, I think the question I would
have liked to have been asked is the vulnerability aspect. But
I can address that in a couple of terms real quick here, which
is things that keep me up at night.
Spending 3 years in the National Security Council as a
Senior Director for Resilience, the first phone call from the
Sit Room was usually to me before they woke other people up.
So, I have seen a lot of things that kept me up at night. But I
will say the pervasiveness of the nation state actors and the
ends to which they will be willing to go, it is a very cost-
effective measure, which is very expensive to defend against.
So, for them, this is a way to bleed people out. They can
instill a million paper cuts while you try and take care of all
your paper cuts. It is going to cost a lot of money.
And with that in mind, the things we could be doing
differently is looking at our vulnerabilities through three
lenses. From a software perspective, are we closing the
detection gap in our software? Do we see what is on our
software that shouldn't be there? And it gets back to the
hashes, and it gets back to some of the encryption
capabilities. It is not a hard lift, and I am sure there are
companies out there that are exploring this, and we just
haven't seen it yet.
On the hardware side, I think the CHIPS Act is a pretty
strong move to get a good understanding of supply chain, and
understanding what semiconductors mean to that supply chain.
So, I think there were some efforts in the NDAA last year
toward semiconductors. The ones that most worry me are
essential or legacy semiconductors, because they are the most
pervasive semiconductor in our systems, which I think they
account for 75 or more percent of semiconductors.
And then lastly, the human factor, which is going back to
the accountability piece, which we discussed earlier today, is
how do we instill accountability at the employee level with the
government employees who we entrust so much with.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I just have to tell you, we ask that
question because that helps us generate more questions, but it
gives us a better understanding.
So, I want to thank the panel. It has been an absolute
pleasure. I wish more Members would have attended, because it
is incredible, what we learned today.
The members of the Committee may also have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we ask that you respond to
them in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit those questions to the Subcommittee clerk
by 5 p.m. on June 12. The hearing record will be held open for
10 business days for those responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, we are
adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 4 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
