- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ASSESSING SOLUTIONS TO SECURE AMERICA'S OFFSHORE ENERGY FUTURE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING SOLUTIONS TO SECURE
AMERICA'S OFFSHORE ENERGY FUTURE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, April 18, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-112

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-447 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PETE STAUBER, MN, Chairman
WESLEY P. HUNT, TX, Vice Chair
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, NY, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jared Huffman, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Kevin Mullin, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Seth Magaziner, RI
Daniel Webster, FL                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Debbie Dingell, MI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Susie Lee, NV
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Vacancy
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Vacancy
Mike Collins, GA
John Duarte, CA
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, April 18, 2024.........................     1

Statement of Members:

Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     1
Kamlager-Dove, Hon. Sydney, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     2

Statement of Witnesses:

Martin, Nikki, President and CEO, EnerGeo Alliance, Houston,
Texas......................................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
McConn, Andy, Director, Head of Commercial Intelligence,
Enverus, Houston, Texas....................................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Zimmermann, Eric, Chief Operating Officer, LLOG Exploration,
Covington, Louisiana.......................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    20
Slocum, Tyson, Director, Energy Program, Public Citizen,
Washington, DC.............................................    27
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Questions submitted for the record.......................    33

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stauber

Press Release--Interior Department Announces $18.24
Billion in Fiscal Year 2023 Energy Revenue.............    35

Bloomberg News, ``China Drills in Deeper Waters to Cut
Reliance on Foreign Oil,'' June 10, 2023...............    46

Submissions for the Record by Representative Kamlager-Dove

Environmental and Energy Study Institute--Fact Sheet,
Proposals to Reduce Fossil Fuel Subsidies (2021).......    41

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ASSESSING
SOLUTIONS TO SECURE AMERICA'S OFFSHORE ENERGY FUTURE

----------

Thursday, April 18, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:32 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Pete Stauber
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Stauber, Graves, Duarte,
Westerman; and Kamlager-Dove.
Also present: Representative Carl.

Mr. Stauber. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Alabama,
Mr. Carl, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. Good morning. Today, our hearing focuses on a
pivotal topic for our nation's energy future: ``Assessing
Solutions to Secure America's Offshore Energy Future.''
The United States is blessed with substantial oil and gas
reserves, yet the full extent of these resources remains
partially untapped and, in some cases, inadequately understood.
Recent evaluations included in the 2021 Undiscovered Resources
Assessment by BOEM have illuminated the promising horizons that
technological advancements offer, potentially unlocking energy
reserves previously deemed inaccessible.
Though it is crucial to recognize that these promising
reports might just be the tip of the iceberg, our nation's
offshore energy resources represent not only a vital source of
energy security, but also a cornerstone of our economic
prosperity and environmental stewardship.
At the heart of this discussion lies the intersection of
international competition and future energy demand as we assess
viable solutions to Federal resource assessments.
As global energy markets evolve and demand continues to
rise, it is incumbent upon us to enable America to maintain its
leadership in offshore energy innovation and development.
Failure to do so risks ceding ground to adversarial nations and
jeopardizing our energy security. Forecasts tell us as much.
Just last year, 5 billion barrels of oil were discovered
globally, but energy data firms estimate by 2050 we will need
to discover over 17 million barrels per year to meet the global
energy demand.
BOEM's current 5-year plan and current Resource Assessment
Framework do not offer viable paths to significantly aid in
achieving this necessary level of discovery. One contributing
factor in the long list of issues is the current permitting
process, with timelines and agency decisions costing millions
of dollars, thousands of hours in labor, and years of time
before a decision is executed.
Streamlining permitting processes, fostering collaboration
between industry and government, incentivizing innovation, and
providing more opportunities to lease will be key to unlocking
the full potential of America's offshore energy resources.
Following through with these reforms could ensure that informed
decisions are made at the Department of the Interior,
preventing regrettable statements like Secretary Haaland has
made, who once admitted, ``I don't know what kind of minerals
were there. I don't think they were critical minerals.'' And
she was talking about the Duluth complex, the biggest untapped
copper nickel find in the world, in Minnesota's Iron Range in
the district that I am privileged to represent.
With this example in mind, we cannot afford to overlook the
pivotal role of geoscience exploration efforts informing our
energy decisions. By harnessing the power of data and analysis,
we can gain invaluable insights into offshore resource
potential and environmental impacts, as well as provide greater
access and incentivize actions for producers.
While offshore oil and gas production may face challenges
due to the course President Biden, Secretary Haaland, and
Director Cline have set, there are signs of opportunity. By
fostering dialogue, promoting collaboration, and embracing
innovation, we can forge a path toward a more secure,
sustainable, and prosperous offshore energy future for future
generations to come.
I will now put it over to our Ranking Member, Ms. Kamlager-
Dove, for her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome
everyone to the eighth hearing this Subcommittee has called
this Congress to discuss offshore oil and gas development. No
other topic has gotten nearly the same amount of attention. You
would be forgiven for thinking the oil and gas industry is in
some kind of crisis and in immediate need of government
assistance and intervention. But let's be clear: nothing could
be further from the truth.
American oil and gas production is at all-time highs, and
the United States is now the No. 1 exporter of oil and gas in
the world. This record oil production is and always has been
heavily supported by taxpayer dollars. For the American people,
it is and always has been a bad deal.
Since 1916, the Federal Government has gifted the oil and
gas industry over $470 billion in never-expiring tax breaks.
Mr. Chair, that is an awful lot of money. Fossil fuel companies
benefit from over 13 Federal tax breaks. Offshore drilling
companies can even write off the costs of cleaning up their
environmental disasters. BP deducted $5.35 billion of the
damages they owed for the Deepwater Horizon disaster, passing
those costs on to the taxpayer. All of this adds up to huge
savings for Big Oil.
The average American worker pays 24.8 percent of their
income in taxes. Meanwhile, in 2021, Exxon's effective tax
rate, what Exxon paid after claiming all of their tax breaks,
was 1.8 percent. That year, Exxon made over $66 billion in
profits. And what do all these taxpayer dollars we are paying
and investing buy us? Not energy independence. If we could
drill, baby, drill to energy security we would be celebrating
low energy prices and stability for American consumers.
Instead, we are still facing high costs at the pump and on our
utility bills while industry jobs decline.
So, when we hear today about the need to secure our
competitive advantage and drill for national security, we need
to ask: Advantage and security for who?
Over the course of the seven previous hearings we have
heard many compelling testimonies from advocates whose lives,
health, and communities have been harmed by pollution from
offshore oil and gas, whose lands are disappearing under a dual
onslaught from offshore infrastructure, stronger storms, and
rising seas, whose livelihoods are threatened by oil spills.
We have heard from an expert on the offshore oil and gas
workforce that jobs are disappearing and becoming less stable
and more unsafe as the industry learns to produce more with
fewer workers, cutting corners, pay, and safety.
And while American communities are bearing the burdens of
offshore oil and gas production, more and more of that oil and
gas is being shipped overseas, while big oil pockets the
profits.
True energy independence means producing clean energy for
our communities here at home. National security comes from
transitioning away from fossil fuels as quickly as possible,
ending our reliance on oil once and for all, and containing
climate change.
Instead of yet another hearing on offshore oil and gas, we
should be focusing on a different, primarily untapped offshore
resource: wind. A recent study found that offshore wind could
produce 90 percent of the nation's electricity needs in 2050.
Building out this energy would create significant economic
development opportunities across the country, from factories to
installations with family-sustaining union jobs while cutting
pollution and benefiting the climate.
The time to act is now, and I would be remiss if I did not
mention just days from the 14th anniversary of the Deepwater
Horizon disaster that our offshore oil and gas program is ripe
for another disaster. The Biden administration has taken steps
to address some of the risks identified by the non-partisan
Deepwater Horizon Commission. But at least one major risk
remains unaddressed: the use of categorical exclusions from
environmental reviews for deepwater drilling.
Deepwater Horizon benefited from multiple categorical
exclusions that exempted the rig from site-specific
environmental reviews, which the Commission determined
contributed to the disaster. As we remember the 11 lives lost
in the Deepwater Horizon explosion, it is simply inappropriate
not to carefully review the risks of each offshore rig, because
the stakes are too high.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.

Mr. Stauber. Thank you for your opening statement. We will
now move to introduce our witnesses.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red,
and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
Our first witness is Ms. Nikki Martin, and she is the
President and CEO of EnerGeo Alliance, and is stationed in
Houston, Texas.
Ms. Martin, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NIKKI MARTIN, PRESIDENT AND CEO, ENERGEO ALLIANCE,
HOUSTON, TEXAS

Ms. Martin. Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member, and members
of the Subcommittee, my name is Nikki Martin, and I am the
President and CEO of EnerGeo Alliance. EnerGeo members are the
geoscience companies and energy developers that use Earth
science to discover, develop, and deliver energy and low-carbon
solutions to our world. Many of our members operate in the
United States, both onshore and offshore across the Outer
Continental Shelf and extensively in the Gulf of Mexico.
Geoscience innovation has transformed energy, providing the
data needed to see and develop the resources beneath our feet
and off our shores, while also reducing the footprint of energy
exploration. Informed decisions regarding offshore energy
development, including petroleum, wind, natural gas, hydrogen,
and carbon capture and storage can only be made with the
evaluation provided by modern geoscience.
We are the industry that is making energy possible for the
world, and this is critical because 10 percent of the world
does not have access to electricity, and an estimated 3.5
billion people do not have reasonably reliable access to
electricity, meaning they spend more than 56 days per year
without power.
With the world population expected to increase to almost 10
billion by 2050, energy demand is expected to increase 34
percent. All sources of energy are required to meet this
demand. Even with the fastest growth expected and alternative
energy sources by 2050, as you mentioned, Chairman, we will
need about 17.5 billion barrels per year to be discovered, in
addition to resources already discovered to meet this demand.
In contrast, just last year we discovered 5 billion
conventional resources globally.
While the increasing demand for energy leaves little room
to argue, exploration is not required. Where the global
industry invests will be influenced by where it can acquire
geoscience data, good fiscals, and regulatory and policy
structures that are based in risk and science. Congress enacted
the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act for the expeditious
development of OCS resources to achieve national security and
economic policy goals, and reduce dependence on foreign
sources. Geoscience is essential to achieving these goals, as
the only technology available to accurately image the
subsurface and understand the nation's energy supplies before a
single energy source is developed or a single well drilled.
Surveys conducted in the Gulf alone have informed an over
fivefold increase in estimated recoverable reserves. Despite or
precisely because of its importance, the permitting of this
activity is too often stalled within regulatory agencies
without accountable timelines and impeded by activists opposed
to the energy development that may follow, whether that is
natural gas, petroleum, or even wind. It is unfortunately easy
to exploit the regulations in existing Marine Mammal Protection
Act regulations governing the potential take of these
activities. For example, although errors were discovered in the
current Gulf of Mexico Geoscience MMPA regulation 3 years ago,
proposed revisions were not made until early last year and are
still pending. In Alaska, almost every regulation issued for
offshore exploration has been challenged in court by activists
exploiting the MMPA's ambiguous provisions and duplicative
processes. At least one petition currently has stalled for more
than 2 years, with unexplained delays currently preventing new
geoscience surveys to update Alaska's North Slope.
The hearing brief noted lack of resource estimates in the
Atlantic. Six companies attempted to obtain survey permits that
would have provided updated estimates to over 40-year-old data,
but ultimately their quest ended in 2018 after nearly 7 years
toiling through a bureaucratic maze to obtain MMPA
authorizations.
Overly broad and unsubstantiated designations of critical
habitat also add uncertainty to the regulatory process, like
the area currently proposed across the heart of the Gulf of
Mexico for the Rice's whale based on very little supporting
data.
Since 2014, the number of geoscience surveys mapping the
OCS has declined. In order to stimulate new geoscience activity
which will inform the government's resource evaluation,
regulation should provide predictability and promote
competition and fiscal certainty. By setting reasonable
deadlines in the application process and removing unnecessary
duplication, Congress can ensure the agencies are accountable
to existing statutory timelines and prevent future
misapplication of the statute.
Geoscience investment will also come with reinstating
regular and robust lease rounds on the OCS and publishing the
long-overdue regulations for offshore carbon capture and
storage. This too would stimulate new geoscience activity.
We urge Congress to review OCSLA, the MMPA, NEPA, and ESA,
and pass meaningful modernizing provisions that will rectify
existing delays for geoscience authorization. These are
necessary steps to ensure the continued development of U.S.
energy resources and low carbon solutions for generations to
come. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Martin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nikki Martin, President and CEO, EnerGeo Alliance

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
For the record, my name is Nikki Martin, and I am the President &
CEO of EnerGeo Alliance. I lead a Board of Directors composed of the
CEOs from the world's leading geoscience companies. Our membership base
includes 60 companies spanning 50 countries. EnerGeo's mission is to
advance the energy geoscience and exploration industry through global
governmental, regulatory, and legal advocacy, communications,
environmental and scientific research, and standard development. We aim
to drive excellence in health, safety, environmental performance, and
sustainability.
I joined EnerGeo (then IAGC) in 2013 and have extensive experience
and background in environmental regulation and legal and government
affairs. I am an attorney and studied political science. Before
becoming the President & CEO of EnerGeo Alliance, I served as EnerGeo's
Vice President for Government and Legal Affairs. I am the former
Regulatory and Legal Affairs Manager at the Alaska Oil & Gas
Association and previously practiced law in Anchorage, Alaska. Earlier
in my career, I also served as staff to U.S. Senate President Pro
Tempore Ted Stevens and as a legislative aide to the Alaska State
Senate President and Alaska State House Majority Leader.
I present this testimony as President & CEO of EnerGeo Alliance.
Founded in 1971, EnerGeo is the non-profit global trade alliance for
the energy geoscience and exploration industry. EnerGeo Alliance member
companies include onshore and offshore geoscience survey operators and
acquisition companies, energy data and processing providers, energy
exploration and development companies, equipment and software
manufacturers, industry suppliers, service providers, and
consultancies. EnerGeo advocates for connecting more people and
communities with access to energy around the world--by communicating
factually, securing science-based policies, and promoting the
geoscience companies, innovators and energy developers that use earth
science to discover, develop and deliver energy, sustainably, to our
world. Together, we are Making Energy Possible.
Many EnerGeo member companies operate in the U.S., both onshore and
offshore across the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) and extensively
within the Gulf of Mexico (GOM). These companies play an integral role
in the successful exploration and development of offshore hydrocarbon,
wind and low-carbon solutions such as carbon capture and storage (CCS)
resources through the acquisition and processing of geophysical and
geological data.
Through reliable science- and data-based regulatory advocacy,
credible resources and expertise, and future-focused leadership,
EnerGeo Alliance continuously works to develop and promote informed
government policies that advance responsible energy exploration,
production, and operations. As the U.S. and global energy demand
evolves, we believe that all policymakers and energy companies pursuing
mainstay, alternative, and low-carbon solutions, should have access to
reliable data and analysis to support their forward-moving efforts.
At EnerGeo Alliance, we are proud of our unique collaborations
between industry, scientists, and governments to support sustainable
energy access. In the U.S., this includes EnerGeo's Gulf of Mexico
Proactive Regulatory Observational Program (GOM-PROP) to provide a
self-sustaining structure for the continued successful implementation
of, and compliance with, both present and future Incidental Take
Regulations (ITR), governing the operation of geoscience surveys in the
Gulf of Mexico (GOM) and providing comprehensive marine mammal
monitoring data.

Energy Demand: The global economy and oil demand are set to achieve
consecutive record highs in 2024 and 2025, alongside record lows in oil
intensity and consecutive global oil supply records, per U.S. Energy
Information Administration (EIA) projections.
Natural gas experienced record-breaking global demand, production,
and consumption levels in 2023--and these records are expected to be
broken again this year and in 2025 per the International Energy Agency
(IEA).
Global natural gas demand is also predicted to reach record highs
in 2024 and 2025 with natural gas remaining an integral and competitive
source for global electricity generation, heating, cooking, and
industrial demands, as well as environmental progress.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ TXOGA Quarterly Energy Economics Outlook
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Exploration will continue to play a critical role in ensuring
global access to energy in the future and now in the midst of the
energy evolution. By 2050, the world population is estimated to
increase to almost 9.8 billion.\2\ Total energy use is expected to
increase 34%, with an expected steady growth in mainstay sources of
energy (petroleum and natural gas constituting 50%) and faster growth
anticipated in all other sources.\3\ In this scenario, exploration will
be critical for the energy evolution. While about 5 billion barrels of
oil were discovered in 2023, by 2050 we will need to discover 17.56
billion barrels per year to match the global energy demand.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Source: 2023 Population Data Sheet--https://www.prb.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/12/2023-World-Population-Data-Sheet-Booklet.pdf
\3\ Source: EIA International Energy Outlook--October 2023 https://
www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/
\4\ Source: RystadEnergy UCube; Rystad Energy U.CubeExploration;
Rystad Energy research and analysis
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. has been blessed with energy abundance, while roughly 10%
of the world does not have any access to electricity. According to the
Rockefeller Foundation, more than 840 million people lack access to
electricity and over 3 billion people currently live in countries with
per capita energy consumption below the Modern Energy Minimum--1,000kwh
per year. Together, it is estimated over 3.5 billion people do not have
reasonably reliable access to electricity, meaning that they spend more
than 56 days per year without power.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ John Ayaburi, Morgan Bazilian, Jacob Kincer, Todd Moss,
Measuring ``Reasonably Reliable'' access to electricity services, The
Electricity Journal, Volume 33, Issue 7, 2020, 106828, ISSN 1040-6190,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2020.106828.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, 30% of the world does not have access to clean fuels for
cooking. Cooking with kerosene, coal or biomass is directly linked to
over 3 million premature deaths per year with women and children
disproportionately impacted.\6\ Removing access to unfavored energy
sources has disproportionate impacts on marginalized populations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ World Health Organization, ``Household air pollution'', https:/
/www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/household-air-pollution-and-
health#::text=Each%20year%2C%203.2%20million%
20people,air%20pollution%20data%20for%20details)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Populations around the world will need greater access to reliable
and affordable energy to not only thrive, but for the movement of goods
and people and for climate resilience, providing the necessary
feedstock for fertilization, refrigeration for foods and medicine,
irrigation, heating and cooling, and more. As a top priority of UN
Sustainable Development Goals, we need all sources of energy at the
table, to meet skyrocketing demand for energy security and energy
accessibility.
While we are at the start of what is being called an
``international upcycle''. where the industry invests now will be
influenced by where it has access to insight through geoscience data,
infrastructure, and supportive regulatory and policy structures.
Unfortunately, the United States is falling behind due to unnecessary
bureaucratic delays and shortsighted policies that elevate certain
forms of energy over others.

Our Surveys: Meeting growing demand for energy that is more
accessible, affordable, reliable, and cleaner will require greater
collaboration and geoscience-driven energy policies. The reality is, no
matter the preferred or prioritized energy source, virtually all
sources of energy needed to support the world's energy evolution
require ``eyes'' on something going in, out, or through the ground.
That sight is only made possible through the innovation and insight of
the energy geoscience industry.
Mainstay energy sources such as petroleum and natural gas, and the
lower carbon energy solutions such as offshore and onshore wind, as
well as carbon capture and sequestration, depend on geoscience. Energy
literally starts with the geoscience industry.
By providing invaluable information about the resources beneath us,
energy companies and policymakers can identify and prioritize high-
density, lower-carbon-intensive energy sources, locate where offshore
wind facilities are best suited for harnessing the energy from wind,
prolong the life of existing natural gas and petroleum assets, make it
possible to store carbon beneath the surface, and more.
As nations develop and implement their energy evolution goals to
make reliable, affordable energy available to their citizens and meet
Net Zero Emissions (NZE) policy ambitions, it is essential to
understand that those goals cannot and will not be realized without the
critical data and technology the geoscience industry provides.
Even though, by current market cap, geosciences are a small part of
the energy supply chain, when it comes to whether energy can be
accessed in any given region, we are the first and most pivotal part.
Resource Evaluation in the United States

The only viable process for the U.S. Government to understand the
country's resource potential is through geoscience surveys conducted by
advanced technology companies like those that comprise EnerGeo's
membership. According to BOEM's website, regarding resource evaluation,
``Every five years BOEM provides a comprehensive assessment of
undiscovered oil and gas resources on the OCS. The results are
presented as both Undiscovered Technically Recoverable Resources (UTRR)
and Undiscovered Economically Recoverable Resources (UERR). The
assessment utilizes a geologic play-based approach that incorporates a
complete analysis of geologic and petroleum system elements for the
UTRR, and an assessment of engineering and economic considerations for
the calculation of the UERR. DOI has released an Assessment of
Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources on the US OCS regularly since
1975.''
This information is not possible and would not be available to
policymakers and U.S. citizens without the geoscience industry
conducting surveys. By conducting surveys that image the subsurface
below the ocean floor, geoscience surveys provide the information
governments and policymakers need to make informed decisions in the
best interest of their citizens regarding accessing and developing
energy sources of all types, as well as developing low-carbon
strategies.
Based on information compiled by the subcommittee, BOEM last
updated its reserves report in December 2019, with their 2023
Comprehensive Inventory still relying on this outdated data for Gulf of
Mexico. Notably, there is a lack of reserves information for Alaska and
the Atlantic on their website.
Seismic and geoscience surveying is a well-understood and safe
industry practice, and informed policy decisions regarding offshore
energy development of any type can only be made with the evaluation
provided by modern seismic survey technology. In the more than 60 years
of geoscience surveys in the Gulf of Mexico, there has not been a
single reported incidence of sound from survey operations injuring
marine life. Tens of thousands of offshore geoscience surveys have
occurred throughout the world over the last 60 years using conventional
compressed-air arrays. In all that time, and across millions of
kilometres, there is no credible scientific evidence that sound from
geoscience surveys has had any significant impacts on marine life
populations, or the marine environment.
Unfortunately, the permitting of this activity, critical to
identifying the nation's energy supplies, is too often stalled within
regulatory agencies without accountable deadlines or timelines for
review, or impeded by extreme environmental advocacy organizations
exploiting existing regulatory and litigation processes.
Policy Challenges

Because the energy geoscience industry provides access to develop
energy through its imaging, it is very often the first presence of
energy development or exploration in a geographic area. Because of
this, our members often encounter obstacles and opposition to their
operations that are aimed at preventing the development of a certain
energy source--whether that's petroleum, natural gas, or even wind.
In some regions, extreme environmental advocacy groups prioritize
preventing any energy geoscience surveys from occurring and even label
geoscience research as ``the gateway drug to oil and gas''. As a
result, policymakers and energy companies are unable to access
important data needed to make informed decisions about future energy
development.
This has led to increased regulatory scrutiny and misinformation
about what geoscience research is and its impacts in frontier areas and
even in mature basins. Recent eNGO advocacy focuses on geoscience as
the linchpin to not only exploration but also increasing production in
mature basins includes the Gulf of Mexico.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.nrdc.org/stories/offshore-drilling-
101#environmental
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In order to stimulate new geoscience activity, policymakers must
prioritize geoscience-driven energy policies and regulatory frameworks
that remove uncertainty and delay, promote timely permitting decisions,
and support a quick pace of return on investment. Regulations should
provide predictability, promote competition, and provide fiscal
certainty, through risk- and science-based processes.
BOEM Permitting & NMFS Authorization Delays

In the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA), Congress
expressly mandated the ``expeditious and orderly development'' of the
Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) ``subject to environmental safeguards.''
43 U.S.C. Sec. 1332(3). Courts have since confirmed that ``the
expeditious development of OCS resources'' is OCSLA's primary purpose.
California v. Watt, 668 F.2d 1290, 1316 (D.C. Cir. 1981). Congress
enacted OCSLA to ``achieve national economic and energy policy goals,
assure national security, reduce dependence on foreign sources, and
maintain a favorable balance of payments in world trade.'' 43 U.S.C.
Sec. 1802(1). Congress expressly intended to ``make [OCS] resources
available to meet the Nation's energy needs as rapidly as possible.''
Id. Sec. 1802(2)(A).
Geoscience surveying has been and continues to be essential to
achieving OCSLA's requirements because it is the only feasible
technology available to accurately image the subsurface of the OCS
before a single well is drilled or a single energy source is developed.
Offshore geoscience surveys require authorizations from BOEM,
pursuant to OCSLA. See id. Sec. 1340. There is no requirement for an
applicant for an offshore survey permit under OCSLA to obtain an
incidental take authorization under the MMPA. However, unlawful
``takes'' of marine mammals incidental to lawful activities (such as a
permitted offshore seismic survey) may nevertheless be subject to MMPA-
based penalties. See 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1375. Accordingly, many applicants
for offshore survey permits from BOEM also request incidental (i.e.,
unintentional) take authorization under the MMPA from the National
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and/or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (FWS).\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ FWS has jurisdiction over polar bears, walrus, sea otters,
dugongs, and manatees. NMFS has jurisdiction over all other marine
mammals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this context, it is important to recognize that the permit
issued by BOEM authorizes the seismic survey and the MMPA authorization
narrowly addresses the incidental take associated with the seismic
survey. NMFS and FWS do not have jurisdiction over the survey; their
authority under the MMPA extends only to the authorization of
incidental take. Notwithstanding the limited role of FWS and NMFS, MMPA
authorizations are often the primary cause of administrative delay in
the offshore geoscience survey permitting process.
In the past decade, these problems have manifested in routinely
delayed permitting processes, inconsistent and misguided analyses of
potential impacts, and opportunistic advocacy litigation intended to
block or impede offshore development.
For example, in the Gulf of Mexico, BOEM requires an MMPA
authorization from NMFS prior to the issuance of a geoscience permit
under the current ITR. During the promulgation process, industry
pointed out mathematical errors in the finalized ITR from January 2021.
Proposed revisions have been pending since January 2023, further
delaying the process and sowing uncertainty and delay into the agency's
current authorizations of on-lease and off-lease geoscience activities.
At the same time, the number of geoscience surveys mapping the Gulf of
Mexico has been steadily decreasing since 2014.
In Alaska, unnecessary and unexplained delays in processing Marine
Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) authorizations prevent planned geoscience
surveys from providing the timely insight that would update resource
estimates. Currently, at least one petition for MMPA authorization has
stalled for more than two years preventing updated insight into the
resource potential on Alaska's North Slope.
In the Atlantic, approximately 30 years have passed since the
potential hydrocarbon resource base has been assessed with seismic
surveys. In the meantime, seismic surveys for ``scientific research''
have been conducted fairly regularly in the Atlantic OCS, in addition
to other geophysical surveys used to characterize the seabed and
subsurface for suitability of offshore wind energy facilities. Six
companies applied to BOEM for permits to conduct seismic surveying in
the Atlantic OCS--a process that started in 2011 when the first permit
application was filed, and ultimately ended in 2018 after nearly six
years of working to obtain MMPA authorizations from NMFS.
Although well-intended at the time it was enacted many years ago,
the MMPA's ambiguous, outdated, and unclear language has proven
unworkable for issuing incidental take authorizations for offshore
activities. Changes to the statute will significantly improve the
regulatory process for both federal regulators and the regulated
community.
In addition, overly broad and unsupported designations of critical
habitat add ambiguity and uncertainty to the regulatory process. On
July 24, 2023, NMFS proposed to designate over 28,000 square miles of
the GOM continental shelf and slope as critical habitat and asserts all
are ``occupied'' by Rice's whales.\9\ The most recent Stock Assessment
Report (SAR) published by NMFS places the Rice's whale population in
the GOM at 51 individuals.\10\ The proposed designation cuts across the
heart of GOM and expands known Rice's whale habitat to cover the
entirety of the 100-400m isobath throughout the central and western
GOM. This equates to an area of about 550 square miles--about eight
times the size of Washington, D.C.--for each individual animal,
assuming the animals are uniformly distributed. However, historical
detections, both visual and acoustic, are largely concentrated in the
De Soto Canyon area in the northeastern GOM, leaving an even broader
swath of the designated habitat likely devoid of animals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 88 Fed. Reg. at 47,455; id. at 47,460.
\10\ Hayes, S.A., et al. 2023. U.S. Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico
Marine Mammal Stock Assessments 2022. NOAA Tech. Mem. NMFS-NE-304.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NMFS's determination that the entire GOM is ``occupied'' is not
supported by the best available science or the record before the
agency. Just a few years prior, in its 2019 listing determination, NMFS
noted that Rice's whales are ``restricted primarily to a small region
along the continental shelf break in the De Soto Canyon area.'' \11\
Just weeks after releasing the Proposed Rule, NMFS again reiterated in
its stock assessment report that, ``Sighting records and acoustic
detections of Rice's whales in the northern Gulf of Mexico (i.e., U.S.
Gulf of Mexico) occur primarily in the northeastern Gulf in the De Soto
Canyon area, along the continental shelf break between 100 m and 400 m
depth.'' \12\ NMFS cannot rationally determine that the entire GOM is
occupied, while also explicitly stating that the De Soto Canyon hosts
the majority of the species and that the species has not been
documented outside of a narrow depth range.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Endangered
Status of the Gulf of Mexico Bryde's Whale, 84 Fed. Reg. 15,446, 15,460
(Apr. 15, 2019). NMFS revised the common name of the species from
Bryde's whale to Rice's whale in 2021. Endangered and Threatened
Wildlife and Plants; Technical Corrections for the Bryde's Whale (Gulf
of Mexico Subspecies), 86 Fed. Reg. 47,022 (Aug. 23, 2021).
\12\ Stock Assessment Report at 114; see Final 2022 Marine Mammal
Stock Assessment Reports, 88 Fed. Reg. 54,592 (Aug. 11, 2023)
(announcing release of Stock Assessment Report).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations to Stimulate Geoscience Activity

Specific to BOEM geoscience permitting, EnerGeo members have
experienced certain ambiguities and identified areas that may make the
permitting process run more efficiently in the following suggestions:

1.  Industry finds the timeliness of the permit process for
geoscience activities to be open-ended and uncertain.
EnerGeo has recommended that BOEM establish a certain
timeline for permit review and approval. The timing
requirements for drilling permit review and approval is a
good example that BOEM should strive to achieve for
geoscience permits.

2.  Industry has encouraged BOEM to explore the creation of an
electronic permit application process. Efficiencies for
permit processing and man-hours may be realized through
electronic permit applications. Many countries around the
world utilize electronic permit application processes. This
allows the applicant to monitor the status of the permit
process and timely provide any information requests from
BOEM. This has been seen to drastically decrease the permit
process timeline.

3.  Geoscience operations consistently utilize the same vessels
throughout the offshore U.S. BOEM should take steps to
create a catalogue of vessel information and certificates
to reduce permitting costs and burden hours.

4.  Industry encouraged BOEM to develop a catalogue of equipment used
in offshore geoscience activities, including Ocean Bottom
Nodes, Ocean Bottom Cables, Streamers, etc. This would
reduce the time needed to collect pictures and physical
samples of all parts and equipment deployed in the water
column. Permit applications could then reference these
materials to reduce the time spent.

5.  Regarding areas of the OCS that are not included in the 5-year
Oil & Gas Leasing Program, consider streamlined permitting
processes for geoscience activities.

6.  BOEM to consider incentivizing the acquisition of new data and
products through direct funding or favorable tax regimes.

7.  BOEM to work more efficiently with peer agencies such as the Fish
and Wildlife Service and NMFS to ensure unnecessary
roadblocks and ambiguity in regulations are removed.

EnerGeo encourages congressional direction regarding alignment
among the agencies.

Specific to NMFS MMPA authorization processes, EnerGeo members have
experienced extensive delay. They have identified problematic areas and
encourage regulatory and legislative solutions, including:

1.  IHAs involving offshore oil and gas-related activities are
rarely, if ever, issued within the timing requirements of
the MMPA. NMFS even states on its website that the IHA
permitting process takes at least six to nine months to
complete. The process often takes much longer. The MMPA
provides no consequences for such delay, nor does it
provide any incentives to NMFS and FWS to avoid delay.

2.  Because the MMPA contains no timing requirements applicable to
ITRs, the regulatory process for issuing ITRs often takes
years and, in the industry's view, is de-prioritized by the
agencies because other agency obligations are subject to
timing requirements and consequences.

3.  The ESA Section 7 consultation process is cumbersome and time-
consuming. The Section 7 process is also subject to
statutorily mandated deadlines, but those deadlines are
routinely ignored by NMFS and FWS without consequence. The
Section 7 consultation process is often a significant cause
of the delay in the issuance of an authorization under
Section 101(a)(5) of the MMPA, even though the substantive
standard governing the Section 7 process is less stringent
than the MMPA's ``negligible impact'' standard.

4.  Another significant source of delay in the issuance of MMPA
incidental take authorizations involves the estimation of
the number of ``takes'' that are expected to occur. Because
the MMPA's definition of ``take'' is extraordinarily broad
and ambiguous (more so than the ESA's definition of
``take''), FWS and NMFS struggle to determine what
activities actually cause ``take'' and, as a result, they
apply extremely conservative assumptions to ensure that
their ``take'' estimation modeling encapsulates all
conceivable ``take'' (and more). This process results in
estimates that are inaccurate and vastly exaggerate the
number of ``takes'' that will actually occur.

5.  The ``take'' estimation modeling exercises are considerably more
complicated and play an unduly important role in the
permitting process because the agencies are required to
demonstrate that the incidental take authorization will not
only have a ``negligible impact'' on the potentially
affected marine mammal stocks but also affect ``small
numbers'' of marine mammals. The term ``small numbers'' has
no biological significance whatsoever to the marine mammal
population and is a legal term of art that has notoriously
confused courts and regulators alike.

6.  All of these regulatory problems and inefficiencies create
fertile ground for legal challenges by advocacy groups that
will readily file any and all available lawsuits for the
sole purpose of impeding and preventing the energy
development of the OCS.

When it was enacted in the early 1970s (and subsequently amended),
the congressional intent behind the MMPA was cutting-edge and forward-
thinking. However, as described above, decades of regulation and
litigation have exposed some significant flaws in the MMPA. The primary
flaws in the MMPA stem from (i) poorly written statutory language that
creates ambiguity and uncertainty in the application of the MMPA's
legal standards, and (ii) procedural duplication and inefficiency.
These flaws result in agency delays, overly conservative and inaccurate
impact analyses, confusion by agencies and courts, and exploitation by
environmental advocacy groups. Fixing some of the obvious flaws in the
MMPA could result in tangible regulatory improvements that increase
efficiency, decrease uncertainty and risk, and ultimately benefit all
stakeholders, citizens, and the implementing agencies.
BOEM Carbon Capture & Storage Permitting

Geoscience also ensures that CCS projects are sited, designed, and
managed to ensure and demonstrate the long-term technical and
environmental integrity of the storage or sequestration.
In March 2021, the Biden administration set an ambitious goal of
deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind electricity generation by 2030
\13\ and has since highlighted new steps the United States was taking
to meet its ambitious 1.5+C-aligned goal of reducing emissions 50-52
percent in 2030, noting it would ``require responsible deployment of
carbon capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) and carbon dioxide
removal (CDR) technologies . . . CCUS has a critical role to play in
decarbonizing the global economy, particularly the industrial sector,
where process emissions are more difficult to address.\14\'' These
goals are simply not possible without the geoscience industry, and the
current regulatory delays will disallow implementing the vast offshore
CCS needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ FACT SHEET: Biden Administration Jumpstarts Offshore Wind
Energy Projects to Create Jobs https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/03/29/fact-sheet-biden-administration-
jumpstarts-offshore-wind-energy-projects-to-create-jobs/
\14\ FACT SHEET: President Biden to Catalyze Global Climate Action
through the Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate https://
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/04/20/fact-
sheet-president-biden-to-catalyze-global-climate-action-through-the-
major-economies-forum-on-energy-and-climate/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following this ambitious goal, the Administration mandated the
Department of Interior to publish CCS regulations by November 2022, a
deadline that was missed and is still outstanding with no end date in
sight. Policymakers should prioritize now the infrastructure required,
including ensuring the efficient permitting of geoscience surveys
needed for the identification and monitoring of the storage areas.
EnerGeo continues to call on BOEM and the current administration to
propose long-overdue regulations for offshore CCS. Particularly,
expanded permitting and permitting capacity with unambiguous, clear,
concise regulations and timely permitting decisions. Further,
regulations should prioritize timely, accessible geoscience data
throughout the life of the asset.

The energy geoscience industry has recommended the following to
BOEM on the development of offshore CCS regulations and encourages
Congress to support the following:

Defined timelines for approving or denying requested
permits.

The process should not differ in a significant way from
existing geoscience permitting processes for hydrocarbons.

The geoscience industry has a long history of obtaining
permits with the expectation that science-based mitigation
measures will match the potential impacts from activities.

The geoscience industry supports a research and evaluation
phase, pre-leasing.

Lease Rounds

Regularly held, predictable and well-defined lease rounds
should be held for CCS, if existing hydrocarbon leases will
not be available for CCS. Clarity from the agencies is
required on how leasing will be conducted for CCS.

Recognition by BOEM and Federal Agencies of the critical
role of existing geoscience data available for licensing
and bidding on CCS--and avoid disclosure of confidential
industry intellectual property.

Lease lengths should be consistent with hydrocarbon
leases.

On-Lease

Once leases have been awarded, or CCS work programs are
being developed, requirements for geoscience data to
confirm geological stability and for carbon injection
should be included.

Monitoring requirements throughout the lease term will
require geoscience activity to confirm the safe injection
and stability of depleted reservoirs and/or aquifers.

Post-Lease

Following the expiration of a lease term, continued
monitoring of the injection site will be required.

Liability should be borne by the Federal Government, ie:
Plume Leaks. At no time should liability surrounding the
sequestration site be placed on geoscience companies
providing data to the leaseholders or the government.

Conclusion

The energy geoscience industry is in the business of minimizing the
footprint of energy activity, by pinpointing where the resource is and
importantly where it is not, allowing companies and policymakers to
identify and prioritize high-density, low-carbon-intensive energy
sources closer to existing infrastructure and the end user, locating
where offshore wind facilities are best suited for harnessing the
energy from wind, prolonging the life of existing natural gas and
petroleum assets, and making it possible to store carbon beneath the
surface. Geoscience surveys provide the information governments and
policymakers need to make informed decisions in the best interest of
their citizens regarding accessing mainstay energy and alternative
sources, as well as developing low-carbon strategies. Currently, those
data acquired by our members make it possible for BOEM to publish
resource assessments. Nations cannot develop and provide opportunities
for energizing their economies without the geoscience industry, let
alone implement their energy evolution goals to make reliable,
affordable energy available to their citizens and meet Net Zero
Emissions (NZE) policy ambitions.
We urge Congress to review OCSLA, the MMPA, the ESA, and other
relevant statutes and pass meaningful modernizing provisions, that will
rectify the existing delays for geoscience survey authorizations and
urge the administration to implement regulations to provide for
efficient carbon capture and storage projects on the OCS. The energy
geoscience and exploration industry stands ready to partner in the
discovery and development of low carbon solutions and of energy dense,
low emissions sources of energy to power the world. Streamlining the
permitting process along with reducing the ability for outside special
interest groups to obstruct energy geoscience exploration is a
necessary step to ensure our continued development of energy resources
and low-carbon solutions for future generations in the U.S.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.

______

Mr. Stauber. Perfect timing. Thank you very much for your
testimony.
Our next witness is Mr. Andy McConn. He is the Director and
Head of Commercial Intelligence for Enverus, and he is
stationed in Houston, Texas.
Mr. McConn, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ANDY McCONN, DIRECTOR, HEAD OF COMMERCIAL
INTELLIGENCE, ENVERUS, HOUSTON, TEXAS

Mr. McConn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Enverus is a software, analytics, and AI company focused on
the energy sector. I serve as Director within the Enverus
Intelligence Research Division, which publishes research
focused on oil, natural gas, power, and the renewables
industries. Our role here today is to provide a commercial
perspective on U.S. offshore energy potential and the region's
role within the global market.
Our analysis suggests that, under current market
conditions, the U.S. offshore oil region oil and gas production
is unlikely to return to growth. We forecast that the current
slate of sanctioned projects can keep the region's oil
production near flat for only 2 years. Exploration drilling,
which is needed to replenish discoveries to maintain or grow
production, has been declining by a 14 percent annual rate
since 2014.
It is well known that growth momentum has shifted in
previous decades from the offshore region to onshore, namely to
shale resources, but we forecast that U.S. onshore oil growth
will moderate significantly this year and beyond. We estimate
that each of the main shale oil basins holds between 3 and 10
years of economically attractive drilling inventory, which
represents a sharp reduction from industry estimates of years
ago.
Producers' desire to preserve scarce shale inventory in
conjunction with the diminished role of growth-oriented private
capital and investors' desire for capital to be returned to
shareholders rather than reinvested for growth, all contribute
to our forecast of lower domestic oil production growth
onshore.
Shale's diminishing role, in conjunction with the dearth of
exploration activity and growth potential globally, provides an
opportunity for the U.S. offshore region. We believe the global
oil market is structurally under-supplied for the long term.
OPEC has regained control of the oil market. Investors are
looking for new potential sources of supply. A change to market
conditions such as higher oil prices and/or new government-led
initiatives could inject growth potential back into the U.S.
offshore energy sector. And indeed, we already see signs of
green shoots.
The most recent Gulf of Mexico lease sale, No. 259,
featured an increase in competition and bid value for high-
impact acreage in the growing lower tertiary play. Recent
applications of hydraulic fracturing technology in the play has
yielded some positive results. These tailwinds add to the
region's already recognized attractive features like low
emissions intensity, low above-ground risk, and high resource
estimates.
To summarize, exploration drilling has waned in the U.S.
offshore region in recent years, but growth potential has also
weakened onshore and in other energy-producing countries. The
global oil market is projected to become increasingly under-
supplied from non-OPEC regions. Long-term investors are seeking
new sources of supply. The U.S. offshore region offers many
attractive features to such investors, and a moderate change or
improvement in market and regulatory conditions could cause the
region to realize more of its growth potential.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify here today, and I
look forward to answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McConn follows:]
Prepared Statement of Andy McConn, Director, Enverus

A Commercial Perspective on U.S. Offshore Energy Potential

Focus

Congressional Testimony for the U.S. House of Representatives
Natural Resources Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Oversight Hearing Titled ``Assessing the Solutions to Secure America's
Offshore Energy Future''

Enverus is a software, analytics and AI company focused on the
energy sector. I serve as a director within the Enverus Intelligence
Research (EIR) division, which publishes research focused on the oil,
natural gas, power and renewable industries. Our role here today is to
provide a commercial perspective on U.S. offshore energy potential and
the region's position in the global market.

Our analysis, based on current market conditions, suggests that
U.S. offshore oil and gas production is unlikely to return to growth.
We forecast that the current slate of sanctioned projects can keep the
region's oil production near flat for only two years (Figure 1).
Exploration drilling, which is needed to replenish discoveries to
maintain or grow production, has been declining by a 14% annual rate
since 2014 (Figure 2).

It is well known that growth momentum has shifted in previous
decades from the offshore region to onshore, namely to shale resources.
But we forecast U.S. onshore oil growth to moderate significantly by
the end of the decade (Figure 3). We estimate that each of the main
shale oil basins holds between three and 10 years of economically
attractive drilling inventory, which represents a sharp reduction from
industry estimates years ago. Producers' desire to preserve scarce
shale inventory--in conjunction with a diminished role of growth-
oriented private capital and investors' desire for capital to be
returned to shareholders rather than reinvested for growth--all
contribute to our forecast of lower domestic oil-production growth
onshore.

Shale's diminishing role--in conjunction with a dearth of
exploration activity and growth potential, globally--provides an
opportunity for the U.S. offshore region. We believe the global oil
market is structurally undersupplied for the long term (Figure 4). OPEC
has regained control of the oil market. Investors are looking for new
potential sources of supply. A change to market conditions, such as
higher oil prices and/or new government-led initiatives, could inject
growth potential back into the U.S. offshore energy sector.

Indeed, there are already signs of green shoots.The most recent
Gulf of Mexico Lease Sale #259 featured an increase in bid value on
remote, high-impact acreage in the growing Lower Tertiary play (Figure
5). Recent application of hydraulic fracturing technology in the play
has yielded some positive results (Figure 6). These tailwinds add to
the region's already-recognized attractive features like low emissions
intensity (Figure 7), low above-ground risk and high estimates for
undiscovered technically recoverable resources (UTRR).

To summarize: Exploration drilling has waned in the U.S. offshore
region in recent years. But growth potential has also weakened onshore
and in other energy-producing countries. The global oil market is
projected to become increasingly undersupplied from non-OPEC regions.
Long-term investors are seeking new sources of supply. The U.S.
offshore region offers many attractive features to such investors. A
moderate change in market conditions could cause the region to realize
more of its growth potential.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Disclosure Statement:
Enverus Intelligence Research. Inc. (``EIR''), an intelligence
advisory subsidiary of Enverus, Inc., prepared this report. All
trademarks, service marks, logos, images and content used in this
report are proprietary to EIR and Enverus and may not be copied,
displayed, redistributed or shared without the express prior written
consent of Enverus.
Information contained herein has been compiled and prepared from
various public and industry sources believed to be reliable, but no
representation or warranty, expressed or implied is made by Enverus,
its affiliates or any other person as to the accuracy or completeness
of the information. The opinions expressed in this report reflect the
judgment of EIR as of the date of this report and are subject to change
at any time as new or additional data and information is received and
analyzed. EIR undertakes no duty to update this report, or to provide
supplemental information to any recipient of this report. The material
presented in this report is provided for information purposes only and
is not to be used or considered as a recommendation to buy, hold or
sell any securities or other financial instruments.
To the full extent provided by law, neither Enverus nor any of its
affiliates, nor any other person accepts any liability whatsoever for
any direct or consequential loss arising from any use of this report or
the information contained herein. The recipient assumes all risks and
liability with regard to any use or application of the data included
herein.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. I am going to ask
Representative Graves from Louisiana to introduce our next
witness.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Joining us today is
the Chief Operating Officer of LLOG Exploration from Covington,
Louisiana, just over to the east of our district, but we are
going to give them a chance to move their headquarters to our
district, whenever you are ready to do that. The Chief
Operating Officer has worked for decades in the energy
industry.
I appreciate you being here, and I look forward to your
testimony.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Mr. Zimmermann, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF ERIC ZIMMERMANN, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, LLOG
EXPLORATION, COVINGTON, LOUISIANA

Mr. Zimmermann. Good morning, Chairman Stauber,
Representative Graves, ladies and gentlemen of the House
Natural Resources Committee, and good morning to my fellow
guests. It is an honor to be here today. My name is Eric
Zimmermann, and I am proud to represent LLOG Exploration
Company, based out of Covington, Louisiana.
The offshore energy sector is a proven leader in solving
energy challenges and delivering diverse sources of energy to
the global economy. At LLOG Exploration, we remain committed to
operating in the Gulf of Mexico, which already produces some of
the least-carbon-intensive oil and gas production in the world,
while leading innovation and investment in technologies and
practices to continue to reduce an already-small environmental
footprint.
For the past 47 years, LLOG has developed some of the best
offshore projects available to the industry, with an
uncompromising commitment to safe practices and ethical
standards. We are one of the largest privately-owned
exploration and production companies in the United States, and
currently employ nearly 150 hard-working Americans, and use the
services of hundreds of contractors on top of that. Thanks to
advances in technologies and decades of operational experience,
we are achieving remarkable 68 percent success rate in the deep
water, and have drilled over 300 wells to date in the OCS, with
an additional 30 deep water prospects in the portfolio.
LLOG is a proud company headquartered in Louisiana with our
employee base in the Gulf Coast. We live and recreate in our
development areas, and we take seriously our responsibility to
maintain the health of the Gulf of Mexico and our coastline.
We also take seriously our obligation and duty to deliver
energy resources for our country and our community, for our
national security and economic advancement of our regional and
national economies. LLOG drilled our first deep water well in
2002. In the last 20 years, we have grown our capabilities into
ultra-deep waters while maintaining our focus on safety and
environmental responsibility.
Our largest current project today is the Salamanca
Development, which is a host facility that will support the
Leon and Castile developments. This facility will exist in over
6,000 feet of water and 300 miles south of New Orleans. When
installed next year, it will produce over 50,000 barrels of oil
per day. A unique aspect of Salamanca is that the floating
production unit is the first refurbishment of a facility that
was in production and is being brought back into commerce as a
producing asset. This operation will result in a reduction of
approximately 70 percent of emissions in the development of the
asset versus a new build facility. The other sustainable aspect
is that the major construction of this project has been
undertaken in shipyards and construction yards across Texas and
Louisiana versus all major construction for new build
facilities generally occurring in Asia.
For the foreseeable future, the offshore sector will play
an integral role in shaping an energy system that promotes the
provision of affordable and reliable energy, while
simultaneously continuing to reduce environmental impacts,
including emissions.
Despite LLOG and our peers across the offshore oil and gas
industry achieving great success in delivering increasingly-
lower carbon intensity in increasing quantities to Americans,
our nation's offshore oil and gas market is facing an issue.
With the smallest 5-year leasing plan in our history now in
effect, and companies confined to new development in primarily
only 2 of the United States' 26 offshore planning areas, we are
at a crossroads for the long-term success of our industry.
For this reason, it is critical for the United States not
only to take seriously the role that offshore resources play in
the security and well-being of the nation, but that Congress
and the executive branch take reasonable steps to ensure the
nation's offshore resources are accounted for, developed, and
available to consumers. This is key not only for our well-being
of our own citizens, but the well-being and security of the
people around the world that rely on American oil and gas.
We appreciate the tremendous work and efforts that the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has performed in resource
assessments, and that the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement has performed in keeping our waters safe, and want
to see these agencies have the ability to expand their
assessments in geographic regions. Without complete
understanding of our untapped offshore energy resources, and
without a comprehensive leasing policy and permitting law of
reforms that would allow American companies to bring those
resources to market, the United States risks operating at a
competitive disadvantage.
I look forward to answering questions from the Committee
today, and thank you again for the opportunity to represent our
state here in Washington, DC.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Zimmermann follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric Zimmermann, Chief Operating Officer, LLOG
Exploration Company, L.L.C.

The offshore energy sector is a proven leader in solving energy
challenges and delivering diverse sources of energy to the global
economy. Through the National Ocean Industries Association, the entire
supply chain of companies works together collaboratively to improve our
performance in all aspects of operations including, among other things,
emission reductions and workforce development. At LLOG Exploration
Company, we remain committed to operating in the Gulf of Mexico, which
already produces some of the least carbon-intensive oil and natural gas
production in the world, while leading innovation and investment in
technologies and practices to continue to reduce an already small
environmental footprint. With our management team averaging 34 years of
experience in the industry, we have access to an unparalleled knowledge
base that allows companies like ours to continue to help deliver
affordable, reliable energy for the American consumer.
For the past 47 years, LLOG has developed some of the best offshore
drilling prospects available to the industry with an uncompromising
commitment to safe practices and ethical standards. Headquartered in
Covington, LA, we are one of the largest privately-owned exploration
and production companies in the United States and currently employ
nearly 150 hardworking Americans and utilize the services of many
contractors as well. Thanks to advances in technology and decades of
operational experience, we are achieving a remarkable 68% success rate
in deepwater exploration, as well as a 94% success rate in deepwater
development, having drilled over 300 wells to-date, with an additional
30 deepwater prospects in the portfolio. LLOG is a proud company
headquartered in Louisiana with our employee base in the Gulf Coast. We
live and recreate in our development areas and we take seriously our
responsibility to maintain the health of the Gulf of Mexico and our
coastline. We also take seriously our obligation and duty to deliver
energy resources for its country and community for our national
security and economic advancement of our regional and national economy.
LLOG drilled its first deepwater Gulf of Mexico well in 2002. In
the last 20 years we have grown our capability into ultradeep waters
and deeper reservoirs, while maintaining our focus on safety and
environmental responsibility for years. Our first major development was
our Who Dat facility which was the first deepwater facility owned by a
private company in the Gulf of Mexico. We have proceeded to build
additional facilities and to commit to subsea tiebacks. One subsea
tieback that LLOG has recently completed was Taggart field which
involved a novel approach of tying a subsea discovery directly into a
third-party operator's subsea infrastructure, resulting in almost a 50%
reduction in carbon usage and months of timeline improvements.
Our largest current project is the Salamanca development, which is
a host facility that will support the Leon and Castile Developments.
The facility will exist in over 6,000' of water over 300 miles south of
New Orleans. When installed next year, it will produce around 50,000
barrels of oil per day. A unique aspect of Salamanca is that the
floating production unit is the first refurbishment of a facility that
was in production and is being brought back into commerce as a
producing asset. This operation will result in a reduction of
approximately 70% of emissions in the development of the asset versus a
new build facility. The other aspect is that the major construction for
this project has been undertaken in shipyards and construction yards in
Texas and Louisiana versus all major construction for new build
facilities occurring in Asia.
For the foreseeable future, the offshore sector will play an
integral role in shaping an energy system that promotes the provision
of affordable and reliable energy while simultaneously continuing to
reduce environmental impacts, including emissions. Importantly, for the
coming decades, oil and natural gas will remain a vital energy source
for Americans and our allies around the globe, even as we
simultaneously add low carbon sources into the mix and find ways to
lower the environmental impact of our already world-leading hydrocarbon
production operations.
Despite LLOG and our peers across the offshore oil and natural gas
industry achieving great success in delivering increasingly lower-
carbon intensity energy in increasing quantities to Americans and our
global partners, our nation's offshore oil and natural gas market is
facing a cliff. With the smallest five-year leasing plan in history now
in effect, and companies confined to new development in primarily only
two of the United States' 26 offshore planning areas, we are at a
crossroads for the long-term success of our industry.
For this reason, it is critical that the United States not only
take seriously the role offshore resources play in the security and
wellbeing of the nation, but that Congress and the Executive Branch
take reasonable steps to ensure the nation's offshore resources are
accounted for, developed responsibly, and available to consumers. This
is key not only for the wellbeing of our own citizens, but the
wellbeing and security of people around the world that rely on American
oil and natural gas.
Without complete understanding of our untapped offshore energy
resources, and without a comprehensive leasing policy and permitting
law reforms that would allow American companies to bring these
resources to market, the United States risks operating at a competitive
disadvantage.
ENERGY REALITIES

Energy lifts society and standards of living. A system of reliable,
abundant, and affordable energy is essential for meeting basic societal
needs, including healthy living conditions, health care, education, and
mobility, economic or otherwise. Oil and natural gas fill the fuel
tanks of passenger vehicles and airplanes. They are transformed into
the essential building blocks of smartphones, clothing, and medical
equipment. They are in so many products we use every day that they
underpin the conveniences of modern life.
Natural gas is recognized as a key energy source for providing
electricity, heating, cooling, and clean cooking. More than 750 million
people around the globe do not have access to electricity, which leaves
entire communities at a severe and fundamental disadvantage. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), ``Access to energy is critical
when it comes to the functionality of health-care facilities and the
quality, accessibility and reliability of health services delivered.
Electricity is necessary for the operation of critically needed medical
devices such as vaccine refrigeration, surgical emergency, laboratory
and diagnostic equipment, as well as for the operation of basic
amenities such as lighting, cooling, ventilation and communications.''
\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.who.int/activities/accelerating-access-to-
electricy-in-health-care-facilities
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Globally, 2.6 billion people do not have the means for clean
cooking and must use solid fuels such as wood, crop wastes, charcoal,
and dung in open fires and inefficient stoves. The WHO attributes 3.8
million premature deaths each year to indoor air pollution caused by
the fumes and soot generated by inefficient and dirty cooking.
The impacts of energy insecurity are not only experienced abroad;
44 percent of low-income American household's experience energy
insecurity, spending 10 percent to 20 percent of their income on energy
expenses.\2\ Energy insecurity has adverse consequences on both
physical and mental health. Millions of Americans are faced with the
``heat or eat'' dilemma, regularly having to choose between paying
utility bills and paying for food.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2020/ph240/radzyminski2/
\3\ S. Jessel, S. Sawyer, and D. Hernandez, ``Energy, Poverty, and
Health in Climate Change: A Comprehensive Review of an Emerging
Literature,'' Front. Public Health 7, 357 (2019).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy production in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico demonstrates that it
is possible to develop offshore resources while adhering to the highest
safety and environmental standards. A multitude of companies involved
in offshore energy development are working collaboratively to shrink an
already small carbon footprint. From electrifying operations to
deploying innovative solutions that reduce the size, weight, and part
count of offshore infrastructure--thus increasing safety and decreasing
emissions--the U.S. Gulf of Mexico hosts a high-tech revolution.
Currently, global oil consumption is approximately 100 million
barrels per day. Various scenarios forecast global oil consumption
volumes through 2050 and beyond, and nearly all of them predict
substantial oil production will be necessary through 2050. The facts,
data, and our experience make clear that we should focus on the U.S.
offshore region, and the Gulf of Mexico in particular, for securing
those vital resources.
Oil produced from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico has a carbon intensity
one-half that of other producing regions.\4\ The technologies used in
deepwater production--which represents 92 percent of the oil produced
in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico--place this region among the lowest carbon
intensity oil-producing regions in the world.\5\ Policies that restrict
domestic offshore development require imports to make up the shortfall,
and that supplemental production comes from higher-emitting operations
in other countries. Foreign providers generally employ less
environmentally conscientious production methods, which when combined
with the added emissions from transporting oil over great distances by
tanker, increases the amount of carbon released into the atmosphere
rather than decreasing it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Motiwala, and Ismail, ``Statistical Study of Carbon Intensities
in the GOM and PB,'' ChemRxiv, April 13, 2020.
\5\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-challenge-of-negative-
emissions/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Emissions reduction is a global challenge. As analysts at Wood
Mackenzie explain, ``Removing or handicapping a low emitter hurts the
collective global average.'' \6\ This is a debilitating solution with
devastating consequences. The better choice is to institute government
policies that promote cleaner and safer domestic production, less
reliance on higher-emitting foreign suppliers like Russia and China,
and the preservation of hundreds of thousands of American jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/opinion/could-restricting-oil-
production-in-the-us-gulf-of-mexico-lead-to-carbon-leakage/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the other hand, restricting U.S. offshore energy development
could eventually lead to Americans of every walk of life having to
contend with the issues Europe has been experiencing as a result of
disrupted supply from Russia, including potential industrial
curtailment and families having to make difficult choices between heat
and food. Our energy reality makes it clear that U.S. energy policy
should support U.S. offshore energy production of all types, including
oil and natural gas, as well as wind. Government policies play a
substantial role in the ability to develop energy in the U.S., whether
onshore or offshore, and whether the energy source is oil and natural
gas, wind, solar, hydrogen, or other sources. Obstructive government
policies inevitably lead to adverse consequences for our energy
security, national security, economic security, and decarbonization
efforts.
OFFSHORE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT ENHANCES ENERGY SECURITY

Oil and Natural Gas Will Be Crucial Energy Sources for Decades to Come
Oil and natural gas touch every part of our daily lives.
Fundamentally, ``Everything that is fabricated, grown, operated or
moved is made possible by hydrocarbons.'' \7\ The U.S. Department of
Energy states:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Mark Mills, Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2019

Oil and natural gas play an essential role in powering
America's vibrant economy and fueling a remarkable quality of
life in the United States. Together, oil and natural gas
provide more than two-thirds of the energy Americans consume
daily, and we will continue to rely on them in the future. In
addition to meeting our energy needs, oil and natural gas are
integral to our standard of living in ways that are often not
apparent. Several key advances in technology enabled a dramatic
increase in domestic oil and natural gas production over the
past 20 years. This increased production provides energy
security and economic benefits to the entire country, and
ongoing technology advances will help us to enjoy those
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
benefits into the future.

Oil and natural gas are used in many ways that are familiar to
consumers. Petroleum products power transportation, providing
fuel for cars, trucks, marine vessels, locomotives, and
airplanes. Natural gas generates more than one-third of the
electricity needed for dependable heating, air conditioning,
lighting, industrial production, refrigeration, and other
essential services, and tens of millions of Americans rely on
oil and natural gas to heat their homes directly and on clean
burning natural gas to cook their food. But petroleum products
do so much more than fuel our cars and power our homes and
businesses.

While perhaps less recognized, oil and natural gas also play
critical roles in supplying essential products and materials,
increasing agricultural productivity, and supporting the
expansion of new energy sources.

Oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids are building blocks
for a range of modern materials used to produce life-changing
prosthetics, energy-efficient homes, safer cars that go farther
on a gallon of gasoline, and hundreds more consumer products
that Americans use every day. Plastics and chemicals derived
from oil and natural gas make our food safer, our clothing more
comfortable, our homes easier to care for, and our daily lives
more convenient.

Natural gas is also a key ingredient for chemical fertilizers,
helping increase crop production and yield per acre planted,
and powering many important operations on the farm like crop
drying.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ U.S. OIL AND NATURAL GAS: Providing Energy Security and
Supporting Our Quality of Life, U.S. Department of Energy, September
2020, p. 4.

According to the United Nations, access to affordable, reliable,
and sustainable energy is critical to achieving many international
development goals, specifically, the eradication of poverty through
continued improvements in education, health, and access to water.\9\
Oil and natural gas play a central role in eliminating poverty and
raising the standard of living for millions by serving as a key form of
abundant and affordable energy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2016/goal-07/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OFFSHORE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT IMPROVES ENERGY AFFORDABILITY

The cost of energy is fundamentally driven by supply and demand,
and recently, global markets have been disrupted by a supply crunch in
both the oil and natural gas markets. The energy paradigm has shifted
over the past decade, with the United States rising to a position of
energy power and emerging as the leading producer of both oil and
natural gas in the world.

Vice Chairman of IHS Markit Daniel Yergin explains how things
have changed:

According to the old script, United States oil production was
too marginal to affect world oil prices. But the gap today
between demand and available supply on the world market is
narrow. The additional oil Saudi Arabia is putting into the
market will help replace Iranian exports as they are
increasingly squeezed out of the market by sanctions . . .. But
if America's increase . . . [in oil production] . . . had not
occurred, then the world oil market would be even tighter. We
would be looking at much higher prices--and voters would be
even angrier.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Daniel Yergin, ``America's New Energy Reality,'' The New York
Times, June 9, 2012

Mr. Yergin made this point in 2012 at the outset of the shale
revolution, but the significance of U.S. production for global energy
markets is as important as ever today. In fact, Mr. Yergin reiterated
this very point in February this year in the aptly title op-ed in the
Wall Street Journal, ``America Takes Pole Position on Oil and Gas.''
Analysts recognize that the downturn in the oil and natural gas
industry from 2014-2020, combined with ill-conceived policies and
investment approaches, led to significant underinvestment in oil and
natural gas exploration and infrastructure. According to Simon Flower,
Chairman, Chief Analyst at Wood Mackenzie and author of a weekly column
called The Edge, ``Underinvestment in oil supply will lead to a tight
oil market later this decade. It's a narrative that's gained increasing
traction as capital expenditure on upstream oil and gas has shrunk.
Spend in 2021 is half the peak of 2014 after slumping to new depths in
[2021's] crisis.'' \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-edge/is-the-world-
sleepwalking-into-an-oil-supply-crunch/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Flowers poses the question, ``How much new oil supply does the
world need?'' His answer is, ``A lot--we reckon about 20 million b/d
from 2022 to 2030.'' According to Flowers, ``This is the `supply gap',
the difference between our estimate of demand in 2030 and the volumes
we forecast existing fields already onstream or under development can
deliver.'' \12\ If his numbers are correct, a huge amount of new oil is
needed to close the expected gap between the supply and demand and help
bring stability and affordability to oil and petroleum product prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-edge/is-the-world-
sleepwalking-into-an-oil-supply-crunch/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rystad Energy echoes the concern about the supply gap and the huge
amount of investment needed to close it. According to Rystad, more
exploration for oil and gas is needed to supply the volumes needed
worldwide by 2050.\13\ In fact, it will take massive investment just to
keep pace with growing demand. Rystad suggests capital expenditures of
at least $3 trillion will be required to replenish declining production
from currently producing assets around the world to meet expected
global demand in 2050.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.offshore-mag.com/drilling-completion/article/
14188804/exploration-overdrive-urgently-required-rystad-energy-report-
claims
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are fortunate in the United States that our Gulf of Mexico
region is up to the task of delivering the oil and gas the economy
needs. Production numbers from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico place it in the
company of some of the largest oil producing countries. If the Gulf of
Mexico were its own country, it would be one of the top 11 oil
producing countries:

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration.

OFFSHORE LEASING PROVIDES AMONG THE LOWEST CARBON BARRELS IN THE WORLD

The U.S. offshore operates under one of the strongest regulatory
and oversight regimes in the world, which means production here in the
United States is more environmentally friendly than operations in many
producing regions in the world. The carbon intensity of the Gulf of
Mexico is 50 percent of that of other producing regions.\14\ Part of
the reason is that U.S. Gulf of Mexico developments deliver high
volumes of oil and gas with a far smaller physical footprint. In 2019,
18 offshore facilities (with a combined surface area equal to about
nine city blocks) produced 75 percent of offshore production.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Motiwala, and Ismail, ``Statistical Study of Carbon
Intensities in the GOM and PB,'' ChemRxiv, April 13, 2020.
\15\ Director Scott Angelle, BSEE Director, BSEE Presentation to
the Deepwater Technical Symposium, November 13, 2020.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Wood Mackenzie

Management practices and related regulations for venting and
flaring of methane in the offshore have helped to dramatically reduce
the practice in the Gulf of Mexico. The U.S. Gulf of Mexico accounted
for 15% of U.S. oil production in 2019, yet EIA data shows venting and
flaring emissions from offshore oil and gas operations accounted for a
mere 2.6% percent of nationwide energy production venting and flaring
emissions in 2019.\16\ EPA data also shows methane emissions from
offshore oil and gas production accounted for less than one percent of
total nationwide methane emissions in 2019.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/ng_prod_sum_a_EPG0_VGV_mmcf_a.htm
\17\ Draft 2021 Greenhouse Gas Inventory
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In short, the U.S. and the world depend upon reliable supplies of
oil and natural gas for a high quality of life and to lift people out
of poverty, and U.S. offshore production should be the basin of choice
for producing that energy because of demonstrably lower GHG and
environmental impacts for an energy source we will continue to need for
years to come.
In fact, a 2016 report at the end of the Obama administration--
issued under then-Secretary Sally Jewell--stated, ``U.S. GHG emissions
would be higher if BOEM were to have no lease sales . . .. Emissions
from substitutions are higher due to exploration, development,
production, and transportation of oil from international sources being
more carbon intensive.'' \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/oil-and-gas-energy-
program/Leasing/Five-Year-Program/2017-2022/OCS-Report-BOEM-2016-065--
OCS-Oil-and-Natural-Gas---Potential-Lifecycle-GHG-Emissions-and-Social-
Cost-of-Carbon.pdf. Although court decisions have questioned components
of the methodology the Obama administration used in this report, the
fundamental proposition remains--a ``no leasing'' scenario must
consider the impacts of fuel-switching, which, as shown by the outside
experts discussed below, will lead to higher GHG emissions because of
the unusually low GOM carbon intensity.

Recent research from multiple sources continues to validate the low
carbon benefits of U.S. Gulf of Mexico oil leasing and production: \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ A recent study by researchers at the University of Arizona and
elsewhere suggests that methane emissions from offshore shallow water
facilities has been underestimated. However, 92 percent of offshore oil
production is from deepwater, which is consistently recognized for low
methane and low overall carbon emissions. The recent study analyzed
just 8 percent of total shallow water facilities, with many of the
facilities outside of federal jurisdiction in state waters, using a
relatively new technique. Many NOIA members with facilities in federal
shallow waters have focused on methane management, deploying
technologies such as leak detection or electrifying activities to the
extent feasible. In any event, the offshore industry will continue to
review relevant data, including this recent research, as part of the
ongoing process of learning and improvement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wood Mackenzie:

According to Wood Mackenzie, reducing oil production from the U.S.
Gulf of Mexico would increase the average emissions rate for global oil
production:

Using our recently updated Emissions Benchmarking Tool, which
profiles emissions for more than 2,800 oil and gas assets
around the world, [researchers] Oberstoetter and Usoro were
able to compare the carbon intensity of the principal sources
of crude used in the US. Numerous factors drive the differences
in intensity: emissions in Venezuela, Colombia and Canada are
driven by the more energy-intensive processes needed to produce
the heavier crude qualities, while in Iraq flaring is the big
problem. The overall picture is clear, however: the deep water
of the Gulf of Mexico is one of the lowest-carbon sources of
oil used in the US, with only Saudi Arabia coming in lower. In
the light of that, Oberstoetter and Usoro argue, restrictions
on US production in the Gulf could end up having a
counterproductive impact on global emissions. ``Removing or
handicapping a low emitter hurts the collective global
average.'' \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/the-challenge-of-negative-
emissions/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
McKinsey:

In the report titled ``How the Gulf of Mexico can further the
energy transition,'' McKinsey describes four key factors that give the
deepwater Gulf of Mexico a ``low carbon advantage'':

First, in contrast to other regions where flaring natural gas
without a market is more commonplace, most of the natural gas
produced in the Gulf of Mexico is sold to local markets, which
results in minimal routine flaring and, consequently, less GHG
emissions. Second, the facilities have efficient, modern
designs that minimize methane leakage. Third, wells and
production facilities have a high throughput, minimizing the
number of energy-intensive processes required to bring on new
supply, such as drilling. And fourth, operators have made
active decarbonization efforts to stay in line with
environmental sustainability goals and in compliance with
regulations.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Brown, Di Fiori, Smith, and Yanosek, ``Deepwater Gulf of
Mexico's role during the energy transition,'' McKinsey, September 2022,
at pages 3-4.

McKinsey estimates production from the U.S. Gulf of Mexico could
decrease by about 800,000 barrels per day by 2040 without additional
projects beyond those that have already been sanctioned. In that
situation, McKinsey expects lost production would be made up by
substitutions from other parts of the world without much oil demand
destruction. The country would be able to import sufficient oil, but it
would come from higher-emitting basins, resulting in an increase in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
greenhouse gas emissions globally:

This supply reduction would have to be offset by alternative
sources to meet global demand, which could hinder net-zero
goals significantly. Because many other oil producing regions
globally have total unit costs similar to those in the Gulf of
Mexico, global oil price increases or substitution with other
energy sources wouldn't be expected, and global demand for oil
would remain unchanged. Instead, the reduced Gulf supply would
be offset by production increases from other sources, such as
other deepwater basins, shale, and OPEC. Based on the higher
emissions per barrel of this new supply, global emissions would
increase by 50 million to 100 million metric tons of
CO
2
e through 2040.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Brown, Di Fiori, Smith, and Yanosek, ``Deepwater Gulf of
Mexico's role during the energy transition,'' McKinsey, September 2022,
at page 6.

Offshore energy is a true story of accomplishing more with less--
creating more energy with less environmental impact. Offshore
production platforms are incredible edifices of continuously evolving
technology that allow enormous amounts of energy to be produced through
a relatively small footprint. Incredibly, 18 deepwater facilities,
which equate to about the size of only nine city blocks, produce about
the same amount of oil as the entire state of North Dakota.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Director Scott Angelle, BSEE Director, BSEE Presentation to
the Deepwater Technical Symposium, November 13, 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERMITTING

From a regulatory standpoint, federal government policy should
serve to eliminate potential roadblocks to investment in energy
projects, including offshore wind. As the Administration reviews and
reworks regulations, such as the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA), it will be important to ensure changes to bedrock environmental
policy are done in a way that enhances environmental protection and
energy development. Environmental stewardship and energy and economic
progress are not mutually exclusive; NOIA members have consistently
been leaders in both arenas. Promulgating rules that balance the need
for energy development with effective environmental stewardship will
provide the certainty massive investments require.
Timely, transparent and rational NEPA processes are of significant
importance to project developers, investors, employees, and contractors
whose jobs and livelihoods are tied to projects subject to NEPA
reviews. Preconstruction delays for projects typically add costs and
delay the delivery of the benefits that projects can bring. Delays and
associated cost increases may result in projects being canceled
altogether. In today's globalized economy, where there is a high level
of competition for the world's investment, increasing uncertainty and
delays in the federal permitting process can serve to drive investments
elsewhere. The United States needs these investments to remain
competitive and to support long term economic growth, as well as to
elevate the quality of life for communities that most acutely need
these investments.
Lack of clarity in the NEPA process does not only impact the time
it takes a federal agency to act, but also increases litigation risk.
Because of its broad applicability across sectors and agencies, NEPA is
often at the center of project opponents' litigation strategy in
seeking to delay and block both federal and nonfederal activities. In
response to the threat of litigation, agencies prepare NEPA analyses in
defense of potential litigation, attempting to anticipate every
possible objection that could be raised in court, however insignificant
and however detached from the intent of NEPA--with mixed ultimate
success. The result is that over time NEPA has become less about
informing agencies and the public of environmental impacts of
significance, and more about agencies attempting to avoid lengthy and
costly litigation. Several NEPA-related legal challenges have already
been filed over the approvals of the construction and operation plans
for the early-mover offshore wind projects. Congress should continue to
consider permitting legislation to streamline the process and reduce
the investment and litigation uncertainty.
CONCLUSION

Our national energy needs require continued supplies of oil and
natural gas. Continued U.S. offshore oil and natural gas development
provides vast benefits and a sensible pathway for energy security for
the next few decades. At the same time, the U.S. offshore sector is
contributing to the development of low and zero carbon energy options,
including offshore wind, hydrogen and carbon removal technologies.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the offshore
energy industry. LLOG and the members of NOIA stand ready to work with
policy makers to advance policies to ensure that Americans can rely
upon an affordable and reliable energy system built upon strong pillars
of energy, economic, and environmental security.

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you for your testimony. Our final
witness is Mr. Tyson Slocum. He is the Director of the Energy
Program for Public Citizen, and is based here in Washington,
DC.
Mr. Slocum, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TYSON SLOCUM, DIRECTOR, ENERGY PROGRAM, PUBLIC
CITIZEN, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Slocum. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, and members of the Committee. Like the Chairman said, I
am Tyson Slocum, and for the last quarter century I have
directed the energy program for Public Citizen here in DC,
where we represent the interests of household consumers.
Today, the United States is producing more oil and gas than
any nation in the history of world. As the Ranking Member
pointed out, we are the largest oil and natural gas producer on
the planet.
The President doesn't talk about this a lot, but under
President Biden's term, it is clear that the United States has
achieved fossil fuel energy dominance. The catch is that, while
we are producing record amounts of oil and gas, we are
producing more than we domestically consume. And that has
turned the United States into the world's largest fossil fuel
exporter.
We are exporting almost one out of every three barrels of
oil that we produce here in the United States every day. So, we
are exporting more than 4 million barrels of oil every day, and
an additional 6 million barrels of refined petroleum products
every day. China is the recipient of almost a million barrels
of exported petroleum from the United States every single day.
So, almost 1 out of every 10 barrels of petroleum exports from
the United States are going to one of our adversaries, China.
The Gulf of Mexico oil production has increased more than
40 percent over the last decade and every year of the Biden
administration. But growing shares of Gulf of Mexico oil
production is not going to result in lower energy burdens for
American families because the proximity of oil production is
going to be aligned with all of the export terminals, because
99 percent of all of our oil exports are being exported out of
the Texas and Louisiana Gulf.
The Gulf of Mexico oil and gas industry consistently fails
to meet their decommissioning obligations. As more of the
industry's profits come from exporting oil, it is outrageous
that the industry fails to invest those profits into abandoned
well cleanup and other liabilities. The GAO just months ago
estimates that the current Gulf of Mexico well cleanup
liabilities are as high as $70 billion in excess of what the
industry has pledged to support. That is a looming taxpayer
bailout that should not fall on the hard-working taxpayers of
the United States, but on the oil and gas industry that, as the
Ranking Member accurately pointed out, are experiencing some of
the largest profits in their history, primarily driven by the
fatter profits that they can earn from exporting America's oil
and gas.
As the Ranking Member pointed out, we are relying too
heavily on the use of categorical exclusions by Federal
offshore oil and gas regulators for exploration and production
plans. The use of such exclusions have to be discontinued in
order to ensure the protection of sensitive Gulf of Mexico
marine ecosystems.
Oil export terminals that are currently subject to the
Deepwater Ports Act should have to comply with a modernized
national interest standard that takes into account the consumer
and environmental effects of America's record oil exports,
including banning any such exports to foreign adversaries like
China.
This hearing is titled, ``Assessing Solutions to Secure
America's Offshore Energy Future.'' Any sort of balanced
approach would have to take into account the ability for the
Gulf of Mexico to produce renewable energy like from wind
power. Just in the last year, we have seen successful offshore
wind leases conducted by both the Federal Government and the
state of Louisiana that demonstrate the viability of offshore
wind to provide 100 percent clean energy for citizens and
industries on the Gulf Coast. We are seeing a proliferation of
offshore wind-associated industry in Gulf port communities that
need to be emphasized in order to continue to grow offshore
wind capability.
Thank you so much for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Slocum follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tyson Slocum, Energy Program Director, Public
Citizen

Assessing Solutions to Secure America's Offshore Energy Future:
Limitations and Liabilities of Offshore Oil and Gas Drilling

I am Tyson Slocum, and I direct the Energy Program at Public
Citizen. Public Citizen is a national consumer advocacy organization
with more than 500,000 members and supporters across the country. I
serve on two advisory committees to the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (Energy and Environmental Markets Advisory Committee, and
the Market Risk Advisory Committee), and am a faculty member at the
University of Maryland. I oversee Public Citizen's work on petroleum,
natural gas and electric power markets, including intervening in
adjudicatory proceedings at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
and the U.S. Department of Energy on behalf of household consumers.

The title of today's hearing is Assessing Solutions to Secure
America's Offshore Energy Future. No nation in history has ever
produced as much oil and natural gas as the United States does today.
We are not only the world's largest oil and natural gas producer, but
also the biggest exporter of petroleum and natural gas. Federal
offshore oil production in the Gulf of Mexico reached its 2nd highest
output in history in 2023, behind only 2019.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/
LeafHandler.ashx?n=pet&s=mcrfp3fm2&f=a

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration

The data quite clearly demonstrates that, during President Joe
Biden's term, America has achieved energy dominance: we now produce
more petroleum and natural gas than we domestically consume. But so-
called energy dominance in oil and gas production does not and cannot
deliver consistently low gasoline or natural gas prices to American
consumers, because our record exports ensure our domestic prices are
firmly linked to global markets, exposing Americans to inherent pricing
volatility.
Expanding production of oil and natural gas in the Gulf of Mexico
will provide no price relief for American consumers struggling with
stubbornly high energy burdens. Absent reforms, Gulf of Mexico oil and
gas operations will expose American taxpayers to looming liabilities
inherent in offshore oil and gas production. Indeed, today's hearing is
two days shy of the 14th anniversary of the BP Deepwater Horizon
disaster, one of the largest industrial catastrophes in American
history. Reforms are needed to ensure the protection of the Gulf of
Mexico marine ecosystem, American taxpayers, and our national security.

My testimony has four highlights:

A discussion of America's Offshore Energy Future must
include a commitment to expand offshore wind energy
production.

The BOEM Risk Management and Financial Assurance final
rule published April 15 is a necessary first step to
protect taxpayers by requiring offshore leaseholders to
post increased bonding requirements to ensure they can meet
their decommissioning obligations.

BOEM must discontinue the use of categorical exclusions
for offshore Gulf of Mexico oil and gas exploration,
development and production plans.

Oil export terminals subject to the Deepwater Ports Act
should comply with a modernized national interest standard
that takes into account the consumer and environmental
effects of America's record oil exports, including banning
any such exports to adversaries like China.

Wind Power Is Essential To Secure America's Offshore Energy Future

While Gulf of Mexico energy production has historically been
exclusive to oil and gas, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
completed its first successful lease sale for offshore wind in August
2023, with RWE submitting the winning $5.6 million bid for OCS-G-7334
off Lake Charles, LA--suitable for a wind system to power more than
435,000 homes.\2\ Some analysts noted the first auction results were
lackluster, as U.S. states on the Gulf of Mexico haven't implemented
electricity offtake agreements and other state policy mechanisms that
are driving a more robust wind energy industry on the offshore Atlantic
coast of the U.S.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ www.boem.gov/renewable-energy/state-activities/gulf-mexico-
activities
\3\ Kelsey Tamborrino, Gulf of Mexico offshore wind auction brings
in lackluster bids, E&E News, August 29, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That said, one of the reasons why RWE's bid may have been
successful was because the company signed a Memorandum of Understanding
with the regional electric utility, Entergy, on a plan to deliver
offshore Gulf of Mexico wind to Entergy's customers.\4\ To facilitate
equitable financing of offshore wind electricity offtake agreements, it
may be necessary to explore federal or regional funding of such
projects, so as not to overburden a single utility's ratepayers.
Coordination between Gulf of Mexico offshore wind developers and the
utilities responsible for delivering power to customers will be
necessary for the industry to grow in the region. BOEM is in the midst
of planning a second Gulf of Mexico offshore wind energy lease auction,
possibly executing the auction by October 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ www.entergynewsroom.com/news/rwe-entergy-partner-define-route-
market-for-offshore-wind-in-gulf-mexico/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following the August 2023 federal auction, Louisiana held a
successful lease sale in state waters, with Mitsubishi winning a bid
for its wind facility off the shores of Terrebonne and Lafourche
parishes, and Vestas securing acreage off the coast of Lake Charles.\5\
This is the first phase of Louisiana's target of generating 5 gigawatts
of power from offshore wind by 2035.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Heather Richards, Louisiana inks first-ever offshore wind
deals, Greenwire, December 14, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The job and economic benefits of offshore wind in the Gulf of
Mexico can be significant. A 2020 assessment by the U.S. Department of
Energy concludes that a single, 600 MW wind facility offshore from Port
Arthur, TX would support 4,470 construction jobs with $445 million in
gross domestic product (GDP) and 150 permanent jobs with $14 million
GDP annually from operation and maintenance labor, materials, and
services.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ www.nrel.gov/news/program/2020/studies-find-gulf-of-mexico-
well-positioned-for-offshore-wind-development.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gulf of Mexico ports and shipbuilding facilities can also be
calibrated to serve the offshore wind industry. More than 600 employees
are at work in Louisiana building the Eco Edison, the first U.S.-built
vessel to service offshore wind farms; Dominion Energy is spending $500
million on the first US-built wind installation vessel, the 472-foot
Charybdis, in Brownsville, TX; and hundreds of people are working on
the first US-built substation near Corpus Christi.\7\ Indeed, the U.S.
Department of Treasury just issued a ``clarifying'' notice expanding
the types of projects and areas that qualify for the Inflation
Reduction Act's bonus credit for energy communities, detailing how
offshore wind projects may attribute nameplate capacity to supervisory
control and data acquisition system equipment located in ports that
qualify as ``energy communities''.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2023-05-22/oil-workers-in-gulf-
of-mexico-find-jobs-in-offshore-wind
\8\ Notice 2024-30, www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-24-30.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Protecting Taxpayers From Offshore Oil and Gas Liabilities

Quite fittingly, on the deadline for Americans to file their income
taxes with the IRS, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management issued a
final rule April 15 to protect taxpayers by requiring companies seeking
to drill oil and natural gas in the Gulf of Mexico to put more money up
front to cover future well decommissioning liabilities.\9\ The rule is
necessary because oil and gas corporations have failed in their
responsibility to clean up and safeguard their non-operating wells in
the Gulf of Mexico. Thousands of jobs would be created by a program to
properly plug and decommission orphan wells in the Gulf of Mexico.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/oil-gas-energy/risk-
management/Risk_Rule.pdf
\10\ www.energypolicy.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/
OffshoreWells-CGEP_Report_ 111022.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to a GAO investigation released three months ago, more
than 2,700 wells and 500 platforms were overdue for decommissioning in
the Gulf of Mexico, with the federal government holding only $3.5
billion in bonds from companies to cover a potential well
decommissioning cost of as much as $70 billion.\11\ The offshore oil
and gas industry has an abysmal record of cleaning up its mess,
threatening the American taxpayer with billions of dollars in unfunded
cleanup liabilities. While this week's final Risk Management and
Financial Assurance rule is a good start to begin forcing oil and gas
companies to cover their own cleanup and decommissioning costs, the
rule doesn't go nearly far enough to hold the offshore drilling
industry accountable. BOEM needs to ``tighten eligibility on who can
bid on a lease or acquire an existing lease in federal waters. For
existing and future leases, we recommend that regardless of the lease
owner's size, each and every single well, and each and every piece of
infrastructure should possess financial assurance equal to the cost of
decommissioning and plugging and abandonment.'' \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Interior Needs to Improve Decommissioning Enforcement and
Mitigate Related Risks, GAO-24-106229, Jan 25, 2024, www.gao.gov/
products/gao-24-106229
\12\ Comments of Megan Milliken Biven, True Transition,
www.regulations.gov/comment/BOEM-2023-0027-1696
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nationwide, oil and gas production has soared over the past 15
years. Though domestic production has surged, exports have surged since
2015 when President Barack Obama negotiated and signed into law the
repeal of the 40-year old ban on exporting oil from the United States.
Exporting oil and refined petroleum products puts upward pressure on
domestic prices.
Over the past three years, oil and gas giants have been earning
record profits, as worldwide crude oil prices have remained above $65
per barrel since 2021, but the industry's history of boom-bust cycles
suggests that this state of affairs will now be permanent. Through the
2010s, oil and gas executives ramped up production at all costs, even
though doing so created a supply glut that depressed prices. Low oil
and gas prices then battered the industry in the late 2010s, and the
drop in demand caused by the coronavirus pandemic in 2020 caused prices
to plunge even further. More than 600 oil and gas companies filed for
bankruptcy from 2015 through 2021, including 274 oil and gas producers,
according to the energy industry law firm Haynes and Boone.\13\ Notable
offshore drilling bankruptcies include Cox Operating,\14\ Fieldwood
Energy,\15\ Diamond Offshore,\16\ and Noble Corp.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Haynes and Boone, LLP Oil Patch Bankruptcy Monitor 2022.
https://tinyurl.com/4sdyxh3p
\14\ www.nola.com/news/business/louisiana-oil-company-cox-
operating-files-for-bankruptcy/article_6ee3ad4c-06f4-11ee-af49-
e344fd063b30.html

\15\ https://grist.org/accountability/oil-gas-bankruptcy-fieldwood-
energy-petroshare/
\16\ https://investor.diamondoffshore.com/news-releases/news-
release-details/diamond-offshore-completes-financial-restructuring
\17\ https://gcaptain.com/noble-emerges-from-chapter-11-bankruptcy/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to failing to cover their own offshore well
decommissioning liabilities, the offshore oil and gas industry has a
poor track record of compliance with existing operational and safety
regulations. The Federal Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
has fined offshore oil and gas companies more than $46.5 million since
2000, according to Violation Tracker, a watchdog site.\18\ Meanwhile,
more than a decade after the 2020 Deepwater Horizon disaster, members
of the bipartisan commission formed to prevent a repeat of the tragedy
have said their reforms were ignored and have warned that another
disaster as all too possible.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Violation Tracker, Good Jobs First https://tinyurl.com/
ykebkd4p
\19\ www.nytimes.com/2020/04/19/climate/deepwater-horizon-
anniversary.html

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Public Citizen analysis of Violation Tracker data

In addition, oil production in the Gulf of Mexico involves massive
leaks of methane. Independent scientific research documents methane
emissions in the Gulf of Mexico oil operations far in excess of what
industry reports to the government.\20\ Media reports have documented
unprecedented methane plumes from Gulf of Mexico oil operations.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2215275120
\21\ https://lailluminator.com/2023/02/08/growing-body-of-research-
suggests-offshore-oils-methane-pollution-is-underestimated/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Discontinue Categorical Exclusions For Offshore Gulf Of Mexico Oil And
Gas Exploration, Development And Production Plans

The U.S. Department of Interior first utilized a categorical
exclusion from having a specific exploration and production plan from
having to comply with National Environmental Policy Act in 1981, and
its use by BOEM has proliferated since then, with BOEM using
categorical exclusions for a quarter of all Gulf of Mexico exploration
plans over the last several years.\22\ Indeed, Interior granted a
categorical exclusion to BP for its Macondo well that experienced a
catastrophic failure in 2010. BOEM's overreliance on categorical
exclusions puts the health and safety of people and the Gulf of Mexico
environment needlessly at risk. Interior should establish a policy
immediately terminating the use of categorical exclusions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ www.biologicaldiversity.org/campaigns/offshore_oil_drilling/
pdfs/BOEM-petition-re-categorical-exclusions-7-12-23.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
America's Record Exports of Petroleum and Natural Gas Reward China And
Place American Families At Risk Of Higher Prices

While the United States is today producing the most crude oil of
any nation in history, we are also the world's largest exporter of
petroleum.\23\ We exported nearly 1 million barrels per day of American
crude and refined petroleum to China in 2023, smashing the all-time
record.\24\ That means one out of every ten barrels of oil the United
States exported in 2023 went to China. Nearly all crude oil exports
(99%) exit the United States from the Gulf Coast, which means Gulf of
Mexico oil production is logistically slated for export.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=61703 and www.eia.gov/
todayinenergy/detail.php ?id=61584
\24\ www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/
LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MTTEXCH2&f=A
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2015, President Barack Obama negotiated and signed legislation
ending the 40-year de facto-ban on crude oil exports, retaining limited
emergency authority to control exports: ``The President may impose
export licensing requirements or other restrictions on the export of
crude oil from the United States for a period of not more than 1 year,
if the President declares a national emergency and formally notices the
declaration of a national emergency in the Federal Register.'' \25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Title I (``Oil Exports''), Section 101: www.congress.gov/114/
plaws/publ113/PLAW-114publ 113.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While Congress regulated natural gas as an essential utility
service when it passed the Natural Gas Act of 1938--deeming the natural
gas industry to be ``affected with a public interest, and that Federal
regulation in matters relating to the transportation of natural gas and
the sale thereof in interstate and foreign commerce is necessary in the
public interest'' \26\--there is no consumer protection equivalent for
petroleum. However, oil that is exported via deepwater ports are
subject to the Deepwater Port Act of 1974, which requires ``the
construction and operation'' of any deepwater port--including certain
oil export terminals--must ``be in the national interest and consistent
with national security and other national policy goals and objectives,
including energy sufficiency and environmental quality''.\27\ Congress
should clarify whether record oil exports to adversaries like China are
``in the national interest''.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ 15 USC Sec. 717(a).
\27\ 33 USC Sec. 1503(c)(3).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Tyson Slocum, Director,
Energy Program, Public Citizen

Mr. Slocum did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. During the hearing, Representative Graves challenged
several of your earlier statements on the environmental impacts of
offshore drilling and infra-structure. Could you please elaborate on or
clarify your statements for the record?

______

Mr. Graves [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Slocum. I appreciate
all of your testimony.
I will tell you what. Can I put you on the spot? You want
to go first? I have my displays over there, so I am a little
out of pocket here.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. This is bipartisanship at work. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Slocum, as I mentioned in my opening statement, we are
just days away from the 14th anniversary of the Deepwater
Horizon disaster. And one of the companies here today, LLOG,
bought out BP's interest in the block of the Outer Continental
Shelf where Deepwater Horizon occurred, everything other than
the actual wreckage, which still sits on the seafloor. Correct?
Is this true?
Mr. Slocum. I believe so, yes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK, so who financially backs LLOG?
Mr. Slocum. Well, actually, I just had a discussion with
Mr. Zimmermann before this, and he explained to me, and Mr.
Zimmermann could probably explain it better than I can, that it
is a privately-held company, and they do partnerships with
private equity on specific projects. In the past, that included
Blackstone, ArcLight, and others, but that the company itself
remains closely held by the family interests that founded it,
and some of the specific investments are done in partnerships
with certain private equity firms.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. And yet in 2019, they managed to sell
off a controlling stake in these assets that they have for a
cool $1.375 billion.
I want to say that LLOG is involved in several other
lawsuits, including being sued by several Louisiana parishes.
Can you speak to some of these lawsuits?
Mr. Slocum. Right. There are a number of local communities
throughout Louisiana that have filed lawsuits against the
offshore oil and gas industry for damages that the industry
have done to the communities and to the ecosystems and to the
very delicate ecosystems in these coastal communities that the
oil and gas industry has not met their obligations.
So, a number of these lawsuits by local communities, not by
activists, outside environmental groups, these are by local
governments that remain frustrated that the offshore oil
industry is not reinvesting enough of their local profits into
undoing some of the harm that has been done by digging these
pipelines to supply the offshore oil industry.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. And yet, before the sale in 2017, at one
of the wells nearest to BP's Macondo well, the well actually
exploded, yes, and caused the Deepwater Horizon disaster?
A corroded pipeline had spilled 672,000 gallons of oil. It
leaked, or discharge happened over a period of 32 hours. And
while LLOG managed not to admit any liability, they did settle,
I guess, yes, this year with the Federal Government for $3.1
million.
Mr. Slocum. Yes, that is my understanding. It was, I
believe, a corroded pipeline, undersea pipeline that ended up
leaking 16,000 barrels of oil, which is a very significant
amount. This happened in 2017, and they were forced to settle,
I believe, for $3.1 million.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Looking back over the last 14 years
since Deepwater Horizon, can you tell us if you believe there
is an increased culture of safety and accountability among
offshore oil and gas companies?
Mr. Slocum. We are not seeing a wholesale improvement in a
culture of improved safety. I think, when you look at the fines
as we have compiled, there continued to be a large number of
non-compliance violations across a spectrum of safety issues in
the U.S. offshore oil and gas industry, and that is very
concerning to me.
There is no such thing as a benign offshore oil or gas
development. There are always risks. And when we are providing
so many categorical exclusions for this development, when we do
not have a regulator that is enforcing the rules as strongly as
they should, I see a lot of liabilities, and especially, we
have an industry that is not funding its decommissioning
liabilities, again, as the GAO has pointed out.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. I am so concerned I am planning to send
a letter to BOEM requesting that they finally end the practice
of categorically excluding offshore rigs from environmental
reviews.
In the last few seconds that I have, BOEM recently adopted
a new financial assurance rule to incentivize timely
decommissioning. How can this rule help protect communities,
the environment, and taxpayer dollars?
Mr. Slocum. This final rule is a great step in the right
direction. It is going to require certain offshore oil and gas
firms to put up almost $7 billion in new bonds to ensure that
they have committed secure capital to pay for their
decommissioning costs.
But as the GAO pointed out just a few months ago, there is
$70 billion in overhanging liability for thousands of other
wells across the Gulf of Mexico. So, the industry is not
providing enough financial resources to clean up its own mess.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Stauber [presiding]. Thank you, Representative
Kamlager-Dove.
Before I begin my questioning I am going to ask unanimous
consent that this press release from the Department of the
Interior dated November 9, 2023 announcing the $18.24 billion
the Federal Government collected in revenues from energy
production on Federal lands and waters in Fiscal Year 2023.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

PRESS RELEASE

Interior Department Announces $18.24 Billion in Fiscal Year 2023
Energy Revenue

Thursday, November 9, 2023

https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/interior-department-announces-1824-
billion-fiscal-year-2023-energy-revenue

*****

WASHINGTON--Today, the Department of the Interior's Office of Natural
Resources Revenue (ONRR) announced the disbursement of $18.24 billion
in revenues generated in fiscal year 2023 from energy production on
federal and Tribal lands and federal offshore areas. U.S. energy
production under President Biden's leadership has reached an all-time
high on both public and private lands throughout the nation.

The disbursements provide funds for states and Tribes to pursue a
variety of conservation and natural resource goals, including
irrigation and hydropower projects, historic preservation initiatives,
conservation of public lands and waters, and investments in maintenance
for critical facilities and infrastructure on our public lands.

The Department's renewable energy programs yielded nearly $600 million
in revenue and is making significant progress toward the President's
ambitious clean energy goals. President Biden's Investing in America
agenda is growing the American economy from the middle out and bottom
up--from rebuilding our nation's infrastructure, to driving over $600
billion in private sector manufacturing and clean energy investments in
the United States, to creating good paying jobs and building a clean
energy economy that will combat the climate crisis and make our
communities more resilient.

This year, $1.43 billion was distributed to Tribes and individual
Indian mineral owners; $3.46 billion to the Reclamation Fund; $1
billion to the Land and Water Conservation Fund; $150 million to the
Historic Preservation Fund; $379 million to federal agencies; and $7.09
billion to the U.S. Treasury.

ONRR disbursed $4.72 billion in fiscal year 2023 funds to 33 states.
This revenue was collected from oil, gas, renewable energy, and mineral
production on federal lands within the states' borders and offshore oil
and gas tracts in federal waters adjacent to four Gulf of Mexico
states' shores.

The states receiving the highest disbursements based on those
activities are:

New Mexico                $2.93 billion
Wyoming                   $832.86 million
Louisiana                 $177.25 million
Colorado                  $153.24 million
North Dakota              $132.66 million
Utah                      $123.91 million
Texas                     $108.27 million
Mississippi                $52.58 million
Alabama                    $52.49 million
California                 $49.12 million
Alaska                     $44.81 million
Montana                    $36.18 million

The revenues disbursed to 33 federally recognized Tribes and
approximately 31,000 individual Indian mineral owners represent 100
percent of the revenues received for energy and mineral production
activities on Indian lands. Tribes use these revenues to develop
infrastructure, provide health care and education, and support other
critical community development programs, such as senior centers, public
safety projects, and youth initiatives.

Since 1982, the Department has disbursed more than $371.3 billion in
mineral leasing revenues. ONRR makes most of these disbursements
monthly from the royalties, rents, and bonuses it collects from energy
and mineral companies operating on federal lands and waters.

A complete list of states receiving revenues and FY 2023 disbursement
data is available on the Natural Resources Revenue Data portal.

______

Mr. Stauber. Mr. Zimmermann, given the production
efficiencies and low emission standards of oil extracted from
the Gulf of Mexico, can you elaborate on how increased
production could benefit downstream industries in non-offshore
production states?
Specifically, how might this lead to more accessible and
cost-effective products for critical sectors like health care
and manufacturing in my home state of Minnesota?
Mr. Zimmermann. Thank you, Chairman Stauber. My grandfather
is actually from Virginia, Minnesota. He worked in the Iron
Range, and his family was in the railroad industry in all of
northern Minnesota. Many of my days were spent in Lake
Vermilion over the summer in northern Minnesota.
Mr. Stauber. You are talking my language now, but keep
going.
Mr. Zimmermann. One of the things that I want to make sure
that people understand about the industry is that our industry,
even though in the Gulf of Mexico our operations happen along
the Gulf Coast, our stretch goes well beyond into all parts of
our country.
We talked a little bit about our partnerships. We have
multiple partnerships with many, many groups that come from
many walks of life, many states. One of our major partners
through the years, the Southern Ute Indian Tribe of Colorado,
has been a deep water partner of ours in accessing deep water
resources.
Furthermore, the ability to bring products from many parts
of the country. We access pipe and much of our tooling from the
states of the Midwest, Ohio, which access their ores from the
Iron Range in northern Minnesota. So, even though much of the
activity happens on the Gulf Coast, the feeder system is broad,
and is accessed through our entire country, and touches all 50
states.
Mr. Stauber. In your testimony, you mentioned advanced
technologies that improve safety and reduce emissions in
offshore oil production. Could you provide specific examples of
these technologies, and discuss how they might be applied to
future developments?
Mr. Zimmermann. Yes, one of the major technologies that we
have implemented is our subsea integrity management program,
where we use the technologies of LiDAR and remote-operated
vehicles to assess the health and welfare of the subsea
infrastructure in looking for minor movements and looking for
potential damage, to see if there are risks for future problems
well in advance of the problems manifesting themselves.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you.
Ms. Martin from the great state of Alaska, welcome. And by
the way, Alaska is the only state that has more mineral wealth
than the great state of Minnesota. And I think you know that.
What specific reforms or expansions in categorical
exclusions could BOEM implement to streamline the permitting
process, thus expediting the development of offshore resources
while still ensuring environmental safeguards?
Ms. Martin. Thank you, Chairman.
Unambiguous, clear, concise regulations that support timely
permitting is key to accelerate any sort of acquisition of
geoscience data required for virtually any energy source. So,
no matter your preference of energy source, as the United
States and Congress considers its future energy policies, it
requires eyes on something going in, out, or through the
ground. And that vision is only provided by geoscience.
So, we are certainly supportive of categorical exclusions
for geoscience activities, regardless of their energy
objective.
Mr. Stauber. OK, so given the advanced technologies used in
geoscience surveys, can you discuss how these technologies not
only improve the efficiency of resource exploration, but also
ensure the safety and environmental integrity of the
operations?
Ms. Martin. Yes, thank you for the question.
Geoscience not only shows where resources may be, but also,
importantly, where they are not. So, with increasing amounts of
geoscience, we have been able to delineate not only increasing
amounts of resources available to develop. And whether that
includes imaging the subsurface for harnessing the wind or
imaging the subsurface to determine where natural gas and
petroleum is, we are able to delineate what are the most
energy-dense, lowest-carbon-intensive sources on the planet.
And because of that, developers like LLOG are able to pinpoint
those before they even put a drill bit in the ground. They are
able to have the confidence and the proof that these resources
will provide energy density and low carbon intensity.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
Mr. McConn, you mentioned that OPEC has regained control of
the oil market. Could you explain why this shift has occurred,
and what impacts this might have on U.S. energy security and
market stability?
Mr. McConn. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, I do think there is a shift in global oil markets
specifically. We do think OPEC has regained control. The main
reason for that, just on fundamentals of supply and demand, on
the demand side we do see demand growing through the end of the
decade. I know there is a big debate and more uncertainty about
demand forecasts. But it seems increasingly clear to us and
industry participants that it will be very difficult for demand
to peak and start declining before the end of this decade, just
given the general correlations that we have had with
demographic and GDP growth correlated with oil demand growth.
And for those correlations to break seem unlikely to us.
So, demand is growing still, as it always has, and on the
supply side, while we do see growth in some Latin American
countries, it is really offsetting global declines. And the
U.S. onshore shale industry has provided much of the growth to
meet demand growth in previous years, and that is the key thing
that we believe is going to change. As the shale inventory is
diminished, producers have consolidated much of that resource
and they are incentivized to preserve inventory and not grow.
Mr. Stauber. OK, real quick, what kind of effect is the
Biden administration's unsupportive policies towards the
domestic energy industry having on the investment community
support for the offshore oil and gas industry?
And is the industry seeing necessary capital going to other
projects in other areas of the world instead of the United
States?
Mr. McConn. Yes. Generally speaking, investors do not like
uncertainty. There is a high degree of uncertainty in oil and
gas exploration already. Around 30 percent of exploration wells
are successful, so that scares investors already. And then
regulatory uncertainty. So, skipping lease sales, for instance,
can inject more uncertainty that stifles investment in the U.S.
offshore sector.
To the question of is capital going elsewhere, yes. As far
as growth capital in offshore regions outside of the United
States, I mentioned Latin America where most of the growth is
happening. So, that is one area. And really, one of the main
capital shifts that I would like to detail is not just to other
regions geographically, but the distinction between development
capital and exploration capital. I mentioned we need more
exploration capital if we want to ensure long-term supply and
growth for energy security and other reasons, and it is the
exploration aspect that has diminished recently.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. My time is up. I will now
recognize Representative Graves from Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to again
thank the witnesses for coming to testify today.
[Chart.]
Mr. Graves. You know, I am either lucky or good, I am not
sure which one, but this is a post that we did in social media
as well as in different letters dating back to early 2021,
where we predicted things like energy prices going up, energy
emissions going up, becoming more dependent upon foreign
sources of energy, and all these things have come true. Again,
I am not sure if it was lucky or good, but we nailed it. Let me
say it again, this was January of 2021. And, yes, you can have
this to put in your office.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves. And all this stuff was so predictable.
Mr. Slocum, you seem like a bright guy. But look, let's be
really honest. The things that you were saying, they just
weren't realistic at all.
No. 1, this Administration predicts that global energy
demand is going to increase, all right? This Administration
predicts it. And you are sitting here saying that, oh, well,
all this energy is being exported. Your organization opposes
pipelines. You have repeatedly come out and opposed pipelines
to actually transport the energy to other places in the country
that could use it. Maybe, for example, we could build a
pipeline to California so they can stop consuming more oil from
the Amazon rainforest than any other state in the country, in
fact, the top consumer from the Amazon rainforest. It is
completely unrealistic what you are saying.
What you should actually be doing if you care about the
environment, you should be asking that U.S. energy be exported.
The areas where Mr. Zimmermann and some of the other folks
produce actually has a 46 percent lower emissions profile than
the international average. We have the lowest or the second-
lowest carbon intensity sources of energy of anywhere else in
the world.
So, look, we can sit here and spin all these false
narratives that are going to result in further penalizing
American families that can't afford energy, or we can actually
follow the math and science and policies that actually support
better environmental outcomes.
So, let's look at some of the other outcomes as a result of
what is going on.
[Chart.]
Mr. Graves. You may be familiar that Iran just lobbed
hundreds of drones and rockets at Israel, hundreds of them.
According to some estimates, they have profited to the tune of
$65 billion, $65 billion additional profits over their baseline
on what they were making before because of flawed U.S. energy
policies.
This is what happens when there are voids. Voids are going
to be filled. Look at the spike in Iranian exports, dirtier
oil, they are using it to kill American troops and attack our
allies and interests around the globe. Whose hands have blood
on them? You are trashing the environment and, literally, lives
are being lost.
I am just going to ask you. Go back and look at the math
and science, and stop this proliferation of completely bogus
information.
Mr. Zimmermann, I want to ask you, how does it make you
feel when you hear people like this saying things that are
completely against U.S. interests, that are completely against
better environmental outcomes? You live in these communities.
Is it just your desire to go trash the environment where you
and your family live?
Mr. Zimmermann. We are proud to be in the oil industry, and
we see ourselves as the tip of the spear in providing energy
security for our country. We see ourselves as providing
economic security for our state. We live and recreate where we
work. I have never lived north of I-10, so the coast is very
important to me, and the environmental coast and the economic
coast is equally important.
I am a geologist by background, so people who get into
geology get into it because they love the outdoors, they love
the environment, they love their planet. And I can tell you
that that is consistent with all of the folks, proud folks, who
work in the oil industry in the Gulf of Mexico.
Mr. Graves. Mr. McConn, do you believe that we could
produce more energy cleaner in the United States and improve
the overall global emissions conditions?
Mr. McConn. Yes, the data suggest that emissions intensity
is lower domestically for production domestically than
internationally. So, yes, the short answer is yes.
Mr. Graves. Thanks. Mr. Chairman, I am out of time, but I
want to ask unanimous consent to include in the record an E&E
article that says, ``Californians already paying sky-high pump
prices. It might get much worse.''
And also an article from Bloomberg that says, ``China sets
record Russian oil imports in March.''
Dirtier oil profiting countries like Russia as a result of
flawed policies.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, an article, ``U.S. to reimpose
oil sanctions on Venezuela over election concerns.''
Mr. Stauber. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Chairman, all of these things were entirely
predictable. And it is remarkable to watch folks doubling and
tripling down on policies that harm our environment, our
economic conditions of families, and our energy and national
security. I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
We are going to go to a second round of questions, and I am
going to allow Representative Kamlager-Dove to start.

Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will say this
Committee does love to pick on California, but that is OK. We
have thick skin.

Mr. Chair, in response to the item entered into the record
by you, I would also like to enter into the record proposals to
reduce fossil fuel subsidies by EESI. It says that by Fiscal
Year 2022 subsidies exceeded revenue by $2.1 billion, which was
a net loss for the government. It goes on to talk about other
ways in which fossil fuel subsidies can be reduced.

Mr. Stauber. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, while we consider our energy resources, we also have to
consider the costs of developing those resources and who pays
those costs. And when it comes to oil and gas development, Big
Oil has gotten very good at passing the costs of their business
onto the public. So, I would like to take a moment to go back
to talking about BOEM, and to point out that when it is
estimating whether an offshore oil and gas resource is
economically recoverable, if it makes business sense for the
industry to go after that oil, the agency factors in the costs
of decommissioning the oil and gas infrastructure at the end of
its life.
Mr. Slocum, what risks does oil and gas infrastructure pose
to coastal communities when it is not properly decommissioned?
And why is it important to plug wells and clean up the
infrastructure quickly?
Mr. Slocum. Thank you very much for the question.
As pointed out in the dozens of lawsuits by coastal
parishes across Louisiana, laying all these pipelines through
very sensitive wetlands and cheniers erodes those sensitive
habitats and further exposes coastal communities to threats of
rising sea levels. And it has devastating impacts on other
industries in the region.
I just recently came back from southwest Louisiana. I don't
think it was Mr. Graves' district, but I was in Cameron,
Louisiana, where I met with shrimp fishermen whose catches have
been going down by 50 percent over the last few years as the
proliferation of LNG export infrastructure competes with their
fishing territories. So, there is harm, not just from an
environmental justice standpoint, but from a livelihood and a
cultural standpoint. And when I met with these Louisiana
fishermen, it is a cultural industry, it is an industry that
represents their culture, and it is quickly disappearing
because of the encroachment by the oil and gas industry. And
failing to require the industry to pay its necessary costs, I
think, is a huge liability.
And if I may, to quickly turn, I didn't have an opportunity
to respond to Mr. Graves. I do agree with Mr. Graves that I am
a very bright guy, so I appreciate that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Slocum. But I recall President George W. Bush, in his
2006 State of the Union address--this was the president that
oversaw our response to the terrorist attacks on 9/11--and he
said in his State of the Union that America's problem is that
it is addicted to oil, and he got applause from every Democrat
and every Republican in that room, because George Bush
understood that what has worked for us in the past will not
continue to work for us in the future. And producing our way
out of our oil dependence is just not feasible or sustainable.
And the technology of alternatives, especially off the coast of
Louisiana, and the job opportunities are immeasurable. So, I
just wanted to say that.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you. Earlier this year, at another
hearing on offshore drilling, Ms. Trevino testified that her
family lives, works, and goes to school in a sacrifice zone in
Houston, Texas. And every day she is exposed to concentrated
levels of pollutants. And then Ms. Robinson, another witness,
told us that oil and gas continued to promote a better economy
and well-paying jobs, yet Louisiana remains at the bottom for
education, housing, and health care.
So, Mr. Slocum, can you elaborate on how this singular
focus is missing a massive piece of the impact of this
development in terms of economies and otherwise, how we are
continuing to be reliant on energy and not focusing on some of
these other issues?
Mr. Slocum. Right. I think one of the fundamental problems
is that a lot of the players in the oil and gas industry,
particularly the foreign-based companies, they are delivering
the financial returns from their offshore oil and gas activity
to their investors and shareholders, many of whom are far
outside of the United States. So, we are not seeing enough
direct reinvestment and assistance to the communities that are
not directly employed or financial beneficiaries of the oil and
gas industry.
So, the benefits are not evenly distributed across many of
these communities. And, again, that is what I saw firsthand
just a few weeks ago in southwest Louisiana, is pretty
significant disparities between which communities are being
successful from oil and gas development and which aren't.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. Chairman Westerman, I
know that you have just walked in, but if you are ready for
your first 5 minutes of questioning, you are up, sir.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Take a breath.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
witnesses. I appreciate you being here today.
Mr. Zimmermann, in light of the suggested improvements for
BOEM, including closer collaboration with the industry for
comprehensive resource assessments, incentivizing exploratory
drilling, and regularly updating reserve reports, could you
elaborate on how these changes would enhance the United States'
ability to effectively manage and utilize its offshore
resources?
Mr. Zimmermann. Thank you for the question, and we support
the BOEM in their continued activity and assessments. We think
that the technology that they use is good. We think that there
is the opportunity to improve them through advances in seismic
technologies.
One of the great things about the Gulf of Mexico is, as a
geologist, you learn that there are multiple levels and
multiple places that we can continue to look. It is a salt
basin that is difficult to image. So, advances in seismic
technology and geologic theory have given us the opportunity to
access different zones that we didn't think were accessible
before and to understand the resources which can be accessed
within those zones.
Mr. Westerman. Yes, we know these modernizations are
essential for improving transparency and credibility, but also
for optimizing the economic, strategic benefits of our national
offshore assets. Could you elaborate on that a little bit?
Mr. Zimmermann. We have talked about the price of oil, and
the price of oil is a global indicator. We also have tremendous
amounts of royalties and taxes that we pay into the national
economy. So, there is a direct payment to the national economy,
and then there is the secondary economy, which is the folks who
work and breathe and are in the industry on a day-to-day basis.
And there is a lot of talk about production here, and I
think it is important to remember that production is a trailing
indicator of basin health. So, when Mr. McConn talks about
exploration drilling, that is the leading indicator. What are
lease sales looking like? What are exploration drills looking
like? And when we see those declining in the ways that we are
seeing in the Gulf of Mexico, it should give us pause as to
what the overall production potential of the Gulf of Mexico is
in the next few years.
Mr. Westerman. So, what is the lag time from when seismic
is done until we see production?
Mr. Zimmermann. From seismic to production can last as long
as 20 years. So, it is a long process, it is an expensive
process. But from when we shoot the seismic, the seismic needs
to be shot, processed, studied, and then the leases need to be
acquired, leases need to be studied, leases need to be drilled,
and then the developments go forward.
So, the shortest time frame may be in the 10 to 12, but I
would say the median of seismic shoot to production is probably
in that 12- to 15-year range.
Mr. Westerman. So, anybody who is trying to squelch seismic
work right now will probably be much later in their career or
even out of office before any of the negative benefits of that.
I won't say any of the negative benefits, but the real negative
benefits are felt.
And we hear this narrative today that America is producing
more oil than ever, and you have also mentioned something else
about the global markets for oil. And I hate to ask you to
state the obvious, but do oil companies set the price of oil?
Mr. Zimmermann. No, we categorically do not. We participate
in a global economy for oil and gas.
Mr. Westerman. And you may or may not know this, but what
was the most profitable oil company in the world last year?
Mr. Zimmermann. I have a guess, but I would hesitate to
speculate.
Mr. Westerman. It is Aramco. It wasn't a U.S. oil company.
It was actually an oil company that operates in an area where
they do, through their cartels, set oil prices.
So, our decisions here in the United States do affect the
global markets, and we have to have a long vision and foresight
to do the right things today so that down the road we are not
paying an even steeper price.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.

Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.

Before we go to Representative Duarte, I will ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record a June 10, 2023 article,
``China Drills in Deeper Waters to Cut Reliance on Foreign
Oil.''

Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]
China Drills in Deeper Waters to Cut Reliance on Foreign Oil

State-owned giant Cnooc spearheading offshore drilling
efforts

Wells at sea account for 60% of country's new oil
production

Bloomberg News, June 10, 2023, With assistance by Kathy Chen and Dan
Murtaugh

https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-06-10/china-s-offshore-
oil-drilling-expands-for-energy-security

*****

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

A concrete expanse the size of Monaco jutting off China's southern
coastline is the imposing centerpiece in Beijing's efforts to slow its
growing dependence on imported oil.

More than 15,000 workers can be on site at one time at the facility at
Zhuhai, near the gambling mecca of Macau. Run by a unit of China
National Offshore Oil Corp., it's been churning out production
platforms to be deployed in China's offshore oil fields.

The deepwater drilling push comes as China's aging onshore wells and
insatiable appetite for energy force it to become ever-more reliant on
foreign crude. The world's biggest oil importer gets more than 70% of
its supply from overseas, compared with less than 10% at the turn of
the millennium.

With its sprawling industrial base and deepwater ambitions, Cnooc, one
of China's three main state-owned oil firms, is on a spending spree to
develop the drilling technology currently dominated by western oil
majors. But pushing into waters contested by China's neighbors has also
put it in conflict with the US government.

Washington blacklisted Cnooc in 2021, saying that it acted in concert
with China's military to ``bully'' neighboring countries over its
disputed claims over large parts of the South China Sea. The company
has denied the allegations.

The Chinese oil major has developed the Bohai Sea between northern
China and the Korean peninsula into the country's largest oil field and
is expanding the Liuhua and other fields in the eastern South China
Sea. Wells at sea accounted for 60% of China's new oil production last
year.

``With significant untapped volumes offshore China, domestic offshore
barrels are expected to become an indispensable growth engine for the
coming decade,'' said Baihui Yu, senior research analyst at S&P Global
Commodity Insights. ``Technology progress and increased access have
enabled more drilling to be focused into deeper waters.''
China's Offshore Oil Push

China isn't the first country to have to go to sea to replace dwindling
onshore reserves. US drillers opened up the Gulf of Mexico in the
1960s, and European firms turned the North Sea into a major production
hub in the 1970s and 1980s.

Cnooc is China's exclusive offshore oil producer and its domestic
production grew to account for 23% of the country's total in 2021,
compared with 15% in 2013, according to company filings and BP Plc
data. The explorer is investing heavily to raise output by 4% to 6%
this year and then by a further 12% by 2025.

As well as geopolitical hurdles, the technical challenges of deep-water
drilling are also immense. On a recent weekday afternoon at the site in
Zhuhai, one of the world's largest such facilities, sparks flew into
the air as a small group of workers put the finishing touches on what
looked like the Eiffel Tower laying on its side.

The steel structure, called a jacket, will be dragged onto a boat and
taken 200 kilometers offshore, where its 338.5-meter-length will let it
stretch from the seafloor to above the ocean's surface. The jackets,
which need to be strong enough to withstand massive waves and typhoons,
are too large to be moved by crane so they are constructed horizontally
and rolled sideways onto a ship.
China Oil Import Dependency Rises

Oil majors like Chevron Corp. and Shell Plc are still the most advanced
players in the sector, with the technological capability to drill in
harsher and deeper offshore environments. But Cnooc is catching up.
A year ago it built the largest jacket in Asian history for its Haiji-1
field, and it's increasing exploration in deeper waters further from
China's coast. Cnooc expects to produce between 650 million to 660
million barrels of oil equivalent this year and is also participating
in projects globally, including Exxon Mobil Corp.'s mammoth find off
the coast of Guyana.

At another construction site in Qingdao, it's experimenting with even
more advanced technology, building a new cylindrical-shaped vessel
designed to float near the jacket and oil platform, processing and
storing the oil on board before offloading it onto tankers.

Technical progress like this has made some previously uneconomic
offshore fields now viable for development, according to the company.

______

Mr. Stauber. Representative Duarte, you are up for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it. Thank
you to the witnesses today.
Ms. Martin, you talk in your witness testimony about clean
cooking oils, access to clean heat and clean cooking oils.
Explain to me some of the personal health risks of alternatives
to natural gas in the home.
Ms. Martin. Yes, thank you, Congressman Duarte. We have
seen different debates here in the Western world about using
natural gas in your home. The reality is 30 percent of the
world does not have access to clean cooking, and that includes
natural gas. Instead, they are cooking over kerosene, coal, or
animal dung. And the World Health Organization estimates that
directly contributes to over 3 million deaths prematurely per
year. To put that in perspective, we shut down the whole world
for a global pandemic for that number, and this happens
reoccurring. Those deaths could be tremendously eliminated by
increasing access----
Mr. Duarte. The poorest folks in the world are lacking
natural gas?
Ms. Martin. Yes.
Mr. Duarte. So, are the richest folks in the world using
solar ovens or wind power?
Ms. Martin. No, sir. The world heavily relies still on both
petroleum and natural gas, and natural gas dynamic benefits
from fertilization to powering homes, industrialization, and
even the importance of ensuring climate resilience will remain
for many decades to come.
Mr. Duarte. Great. And Mr. Zimmermann, you speak to the
economic benefits broadly of the petroleum industry, of
petroleum products. I asked in a hearing in Agriculture a few
weeks ago if one of the witnesses would, in good faith,
recommend that a business build a new fertilizer-based chemical
manufacturer here in America today, given our policies towards
fossil fuels and industry in general.
Do petroleum products lift humanity in a broad sense?
Mr. Zimmermann. Petroleum products help everything that we
do, from the medical community to technology to every part of
life. And the access to those resources and the access to those
resources in a consistent manner and in a reasonably-priced
manner all help humanity.
And as we discussed, the increase of prices does have a
tremendous impact on the lower rungs of the socioeconomic. One
of the things that we are proud of in our industry, as well as
helping to provide the energy to the future, is the range of
people who work in our industry. We have the broadest range of
people, from folks who have little traditional education all
the way up to PhDs. And there is a place for those people to
work in our business and a place for them to make a good
living.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. Yes, I live in a rural part of
California, 18th highest poverty level in the country, where
they have taken the water off the farms and my families simply
can't afford it.
And I have personal friends from our public schools my kids
went to years ago that went off the oil fields because they
felt they could better their lives by moving to the oil fields.
But it is not just the oil fields themselves. We are talking
all the derivative products from the oil fields that get
offshored.
Mr. Slocum, you are a self-attested bright guy, right?
Mr. Slocum. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duarte. OK, got that on record. So, we are going to
stop drilling oil. We don't like the way it deals with the
shrimp fishermen. It goes through some lowland somewhere.
Now, we have had testimony from the Administration that the
Administration is against all pipelines, period. I live in
California. We would love to bring oil from the eastern oil
fields in Texas and New Mexico, the Permian out to California
through a lot of desert. No shrimp fishermen to worry about.
And it is not happening because this Administration doesn't
want pipelines.
So, we are shutting down oil leases, we are shutting down
oil transport. We are shutting down the oil economy which
includes many derivatives, many industries that many families
can better themselves on. I don't think those burning animal
dung today think they are quite finished with their climb up
the economic ladder. Are you going to subject these folks to
living the life they have today? Or what is your solution
outside of petroleum to realistically lift billions to a
standard of living where they have healthy, prosperous, and
opportunity-rich lives?
Mr. Slocum. Great question.
First, U.S. LNG exports cannot go to poor countries because
they cannot afford LNG. Bangladesh was priced out of the global
LNG market last year.
Mr. Duarte. So, we are going to make it scarce.
Mr. Slocum. And also, poor countries do not have the
domestic natural gas pipeline infrastructure to move LNG
exports from the coast into the interior. So, it is not a
realistic solution----
Mr. Duarte. Nor do they have chains for agricultural and
food products. Do we not expect them to eat cheese, or fruit,
or produce because they don't currently have the
infrastructure? We are just going to shut them out permanently?
Mr. Slocum. There are lots of solutions to clean up home
cooking that does not involve U.S. LNG, which cannot solve
those problems.
Mr. Duarte. I am sorry, I will have to yield back, but your
policies sound insensitive and mean to the most vulnerable
people on earth, and I really detest that.
Mr. Slocum. That is a complete mischaracterization of what
I just said. I am not being insensitive, and also----
Mr. Duarte. You are denying reality.
Mr. Slocum. I politely disagree on a contention that the
Biden administration is opposing all pipelines.
The Biden administration literally just recently approved
one of the largest oil export terminals for the Gulf Coast. The
Biden administration went out of its way to appoint Willie
Phillips as permanent Chair of FERC, who has taken a much more
permissive view of permitting natural gas infrastructure. And,
in fact, FERC Chairman Phillips proudly talks about how----
Mr. Duarte. Energy infrastructure is an issue of
promiscuity. I mean, you have to be permissive to allow the
carbon economy to grow and lift more billions of lives out of
poverty.
Mr. Slocum. Well, first, natural gas infrastructure must be
found to be in the public interest. And that public interest
determination must balance an array of different things like
the impact that burning fossil fuels has on destabilizing
climate change, the impact that it has on exacerbating health
and safety of local communities.
Mr. Duarte. So, if you aren't already up the economic
ladder, the Earth can't afford you to better your life. Is that
what I am hearing?
Mr. Slocum. That is absolutely not what I am hearing.
Mr. Duarte. Can the public around the world that can't
afford fossil fuels and natural gas afford nuclear? Can they
afford windmills and solar panels?
Mr. Slocum. In the global South, absolutely. Decentralized
solar systems are already generating clean and zero-emission
power.
Mr. Stauber. The Chair is going to intervene now.
Mr. Slocum. Yes, please.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Chair, I yield back.
And thank you to our witness.
Mr. Stauber. The Chair now recognizes Representative
Graves.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Slocum, I appreciate your answers, and I am
glad that you went down to Cameron Parish. It is outside of our
district, but it is clear to me that one trip down to Cameron
Parish doesn't make you any brighter on seafood issues than it
does on energy issues. So, let's go through a few things.
We represent the shrimping community. As a matter of fact,
Louisiana is the top shrimp producer in the United States, by
far. I sent a text to the guy who owns the largest--we call it
shrimp shed, and it is the place that buys the shrimp from the
boats--the largest one in the United States. And I said, ``We
have a witness testifying in our Committee right now saying
that shrimp catch is down because of offshore energy
production.'' That is all I said. I knew exactly what his
answer was going to be, because I actually do this for a
living, and have for an extended period of time.
His first text back was--and I will just use the
abbreviation, because I would hate to say this word--but
``BS.'' He then came back and said, ``That is stupid.'' And Mr.
Slocum, it is.
You made a comment earlier saying that pipelines result in
sea rise. You have no idea what you are talking about. I am
sorry, but you don't. And for you to sit here in front of this
Committee and be saying these things--the cause of land loss
and resiliency problems in Louisiana are because we put levees
on the river system. We put levees on the river system. We lost
over 2,000 square miles of our coast. That is the primary cause
of land loss. Our state used to grow three-quarters of a square
mile a year.
I mean, just sitting here and continuing to say things--
there is a Louisiana Shrimp Alliance. We have been working with
them for years. Do you know what the problem with shrimp is
right now? It is because our own government is funding foreign
aquaculture shrimp operations that then are turning around and
sending the shrimp back to us and undercutting prices because
we are subsidizing it and their governments are subsidizing it.
By the way, it is also filled with illegal chemicals.
We have legislation to try to stop that. If you want to
join us in that, I would love your support if you truly have a
heart for the shrimpers in Louisiana. But the things you keep
saying here are just completely false. And it is things like
this, it is false narratives like this that actually result in
awful policy.
I said earlier, this Administration's own EIA predicts that
there is going to be an increase in global energy demand, which
includes an increase in oil demand and an increase in gas
demand. By the way, the largest increase in energy sources in
Bangladesh--in fact, not even close--is gas. I am not an expert
on what the LNG issue is, but they have apparently figured it
out. And the largest, multiple times larger than any other
source, is increased utilization of gas, OK?
[Chart.]
Mr. Graves. So, this is energy production. I said it twice,
I am going to say it a third time: There is an increase
projected to be a global increase in oil and gas demand. We
produce it cleaner than just about anywhere else. This is
energy acreage that has been leased under the Biden
administration compared to other administrations. And the only
reason this one was done was not because he wanted it done, it
is because the IRA that Ms. Kamlager-Dove enthusiastically
supported required that he did it, because he didn't want to.
All right?
I mean, this is amazing. New energy leases under this
Administration, it is incredible. It is disgusting, what they
are doing. Jimmy Carter, over 100 times more energy production
than under this Administration.
Ms. Martin, I have talked about my frustration, but could
you talk a little bit about the bureaucracy under this
Administration in terms of regulatory, even things like getting
permission for seismic, and how that prevents us from being
able to produce more clean energy in the United States?
Ms. Martin. Congressman Graves, thank you for the question.
One of the things I love about representing the geoscience
industry is that it is really non-partisan. While geoscience is
best known for its tremendous improvement in step changes in
technology that have improved the discovery of resources like
beneath salt layers in the Gulf of Mexico like Mr. Zimmermann
referred to, we also support virtually any energy source
required or preferred in the energy evolution. So, the
permitting of these activities are absolutely key for any
energy policy.
Currently, the bureaucracies that exist particularly in the
permitting and authorizations of Marine Mammal Protection Act
authorizations have upheld, have stalled, delayed--
unnecessarily so--the permitting of geoscience activities time
and time again, whether that is Alaska, Gulf of Mexico,
Atlantic, which, as you well know, was a failed attempt by a
company, my own members, to update the resource estimates after
over 40 years.
Mr. Graves. Ms. Martin, do you believe that these efforts
and this bureaucracy is helping to improve the global
environment?
Ms. Martin. No, I do not. Of course, any time we are able
to provide updated delineation of the subsurface, the resources
that our citizens can access and benefit from right underneath
our feet and off our shores, is a benefit for not only energy
access and accessibility, but also for the environment.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I just want to make note. As the United
States has led the world in reducing emissions, for every 1 ton
we have reduced China has increased by 5, to where today China
is releasing more emissions than the entire developed world
combined.
Mr. Slocum, your focus is absolutely on the wrong country.
I yield back.
Mr. Slocum. May I respond to Mr. Graves?
Mr. Stauber. No, sir.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. It was a good debate this morning.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Tuesday, April 23. The hearing record will be held open
for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 10:46 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
