- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION TO CREATE PROSPEROUS. TRIBAL ECONOMIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION TO
CREATE PROSPEROUS
TRIBAL ECONOMIES

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, February 15, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-97

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-897 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

-----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, February 15, 2024......................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Ahasteen, Justin, Executive Director, Navajo Nation
Washington Office, Washington, DC..........................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Questions submitted for the record.......................    13
Rupert, Sherry, CEO, American Indian Alaska Native Tourism
Association, Albuquerque, New Mexico.......................    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Questions submitted for the record.......................    21
Bacon, Raymond, Executive Director, Yurok Tribe Economic
Development Corporation, Klamath, California...............    24
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Questions submitted for the record.......................    27

Morgan, Lance, CEO, Ho-Chunk, Inc., Winnebago, Wisconsin.....    29
Prepared statement of....................................    31
Questions submitted for the record.......................    33

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection
Fund, Statement for the Record.........................    42

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION TO CREATE PROSPEROUS.
TRIBAL ECONOMIES

----------

Thursday, February 15, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:18 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, Carl; Leger Fernandez.
Also present: Representative Huffman.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular affairs
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
economic diversification to create prosperous tribal economies.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from California,
Mr. Huffman, be allowed to sit and participate in today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. I want to first thank all of our witnesses for
making the trip here and being willing to discuss these
important issues.
Today's hearing is entitled, Economic Diversification to
Create Prosperous Tribal Economies. Today, we will hear from
tribal stakeholders on ways tribes have diversified their
economies to create jobs, revenue, and opportunities that
benefit tribes, tribal members, and their communities.
Every local, state, Federal, and tribal government knows
that a diverse economy is healthy and resilient and will
encourage entrepreneurship, innovation, and ultimately human
flourishing.
Since the 1970s, the Federal Government has embraced a
tribal policy of self-determination, which supports tribal
governments to self-direct both services provided to their
people and economic development plans that support tribal
government services.
Tribes have consistently sought to diversify their tribal
economies through various means so that they can expand
services to tribal members and build sustainable economies to
benefit current and future generations.
Many tribes have pursued agriculture, gaming, natural
resource development, business ventures, tourism, and other
avenues to build their economies. These ventures have impacted
not only tribes and tribal members, but also the surrounding
communities.
In January 2020, estimates showed that tribal governments
and tribal economic enterprises provided over 1.1 million jobs
within the U.S. economy, with most jobs held by non-tribal
members.
In many places, particularly our rural communities where
tribes are present, the tribe or tribal enterprises are the
leading employer in the area. For example, the collective
Tribal Nations of Oklahoma contribute $15.6 billion to the
economy and 113,442 jobs in 2019 alone.
Over the years, they also contributed over $1.8 billion to
public education and mental health services, with an additional
$84 million going to support schools, municipalities, and other
community initiatives.
All that said, the overall impact of tribes on the U.S.
economy is expansive and generally under-reported. However,
there continues to be many barriers for tribes when it comes to
economic development and diversification.
Real property is one of, if not the most, important
economic resource that our tribes have. Yet, there are still a
multitude of restrictions and requirements that could dictate
how and when land can be used, depending on its status.
This Subcommittee has held several hearings that have
highlighted how bureaucratic red tape can stymie land use and
natural resource development. Streamlining regulatory
requirements so they are not duplicative or burdensome is
crucial.
Tribal Nations and enterprises have also engaged in the
recreation and tourism industries to tell their own stories and
to develop unique experiences for domestic and international
tourists.
In 2021, American Indian Alaskan Native and Native Hawaiian
owned tourism businesses provided 117,852 jobs across 40,618
businesses. These Native tourism businesses contributed $14
billion to the total $1.7 trillion U.S. tourism related
industry.
Tribes have had to overcome the challenge of not having a
property tax base and have sought diverse revenue streams
through business ventures. They have developed corporate
structures that are sophisticated and innovative to enable
incomes to tribal governments so that governmental services can
be provided to members and supplement the Federal funds that
already support health and human services to our tribal
members.
I look forward to hearing all about how economic
diversification has benefited tribes and where we can go from
here.
I again want to thank the witnesses for being with us
today, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for
her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so very much, Madam Chair,
and I am always grateful for the wisdom and knowledge that our
witnesses bring to this hearing room and bring to our efforts
to improve issues and to address the issues that face Indian
Country and today to help us learn how to best diversify and
grow tribal economies.
Diversifying tribal economies and developing and expanding
economic opportunities for your communities is critical for
tribal self-determination and sovereignty.
Economic sovereignty is an essential element of tribal
sovereignty and the manner in which tribes have experienced and
grown that economic sovereignty is vast and growing. It is
innovative.
You are thinking out of the box, and you are getting things
done that benefit not just your communities, but as noted, the
rural communities within which you are located, the urban
communities that we must remember, many tribes are adjacent to
and located within.
Our work in this Subcommittee and in Congress should focus
on what do we do to remove the barriers to address the
injustices that may limit the manner in which you can grow your
tribal economic endeavors.
Over the last Congress in the last few years, we have made
progress with historic legislation like the Inflation Reduction
Act, which was intended to lower energy costs and open up new
areas of possibility for tribal growth.
The Infrastructure Law, because if we do not have the
broadband, the electricity, the water, you cannot have
business. The Chips and Science Act because we need to start
manufacturing in America what we need in America.
It can be done on tribal lands just as well, and
oftentimes, with better results and better opportunities than
off tribal lands because of unique situations that tribes bring
to the equation.
The Inflation Reduction Act increased funding for the
tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program from $2 billion to $20
billion to support tribal investment in energy-related
projects.
It also provided tribes access to direct pay tax
incentives, which will support tribal energy projects being
built more quickly and affordably through clean energy tax
incentives.
This was a priority of mine because I realized and
recognized that we were not able to monetize the traditional
tax incentives provided to the industry as we looked at
renewable energy. It was something, an oversight that existed
for decades, and now we are starting to change that.
The Infrastructure Law set aside $13 billion for tribal
infrastructure to fund essential services for tribes, from
broadband to transportation to water wide settlement. Once
again, without water you cannot grow a business.
And the Chips and Science Act required the National Science
Foundation to award grants through the Tribal Colleges and
Universities Program to increase participation in computer
science and education programs.
These historic investments made important projects
possible, such as $200,000 from the Infrastructure Law for the
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma to install electric vehicle charging
infrastructure to serve the larger Durant, Oklahoma area, or
the $4.7 million for Zia Pueblo in New Mexico to connect over
200 unserved Native American households and small businesses to
high-speed broadband.
As we continue to implement this historic funding, I look
forward to attending groundbreakings where we are putting up
solar panels, buying infrastructure lines, and building
essential facilities.
This funding is all a step in the right direction and can
be essential for tribes to provide the economic stability in
their communities and in the surrounding communities. But we
know the work doesn't stop with the funding, and funding is not
the only answer.
Once these programs are out there, funding and new
resources must be accessible to tribes, and programs should be
developed and implemented in coordination and with tribes in
the lead.
We need technical assistance to access the funds so we
don't leave a dime in DC when it can be put into the ground and
into projects in your communities. We need to make sure that we
address the complexities and the overlapping and multiplicity
of requirements to be able to use your very own land for these
projects, the leasing, the right-of-way. We need to get it down
and get it down so it is working and working quickly.
Otherwise, we really are not upholding our trust and treaty
obligations to Tribal Nations. Time and time again, this
Committee has heard how difficult it can be to get funding on
the ground and concerns regarding the lack of consultation in
expanding projects in their areas.
This cannot remain the status quo. While unemployment,
limited housing, limited workforce housing and undeveloped
infrastructure remain real issues in Indian Country, we in the
Federal Government, we in Congress, need to do more to make
sure these resources we are developing and implementing are
reaching your communities.
I look forward to hearing from each of you about how we can
get that done, about what we need to do to remove these
obstacles. We need to know how do we get the great things that
you are already doing from river restoration, tourism, clean
energy, natural resources project, all the businesses, the
manufacturing.
How can we make sure that this is not the end, but the
beginning as we build the blocks of economic sovereignty for
your communities?
Thank you once again for being here today. With that, I
yield back.

Ms. Hageman. Thank you. And I will now introduce our
witnesses for our panel.
Mr. Justin Ahasteen, how did I do with that?
Mr. Ahasteen. OK
Ms. Hageman. He is the Executive Director for the Navajo
Nation Washington Office, Washington, DC; Ms. Sherry Rupert,
CEO, American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association,
Albuquerque, New Mexico; and I also would like to recognize Mr.
Huffman for 1 minute to introduce the witness from his
district.
Mr. Huffman. Madam Chairman, thank you. I am proud to
introduce Raymond Bacon. He is the Executive Director of
economic development for the Yurok Tribe in my district.
It is California's largest Native American tribe. Ancestral
lands of the Yurok are on the beautiful north coast. And the
Yurok have supported countless strategic investments in
innovative strategies in our region.
They have a portfolio that includes 13 businesses, with
four sister corporations. They have carefully developed a
variety of revenue streams for economic resilience and expanded
their business operations to encompass several different
sectors: hospitality, of course, with their golf course;
cutting edge technology, with their aviation lidar mapping; and
a fuel mart division.
Their forward-thinking approach extends beyond traditional
sectors and is exemplified by the Telecommunications
Corporation the Tribe has, which is expanding broadband
accessibility in our region.
All of these are success stories that I think will
contribute to this important conversation today. So, welcome,
Mr. Bacon.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Huffman.
And finally, Mr. Lance Morgan, President and CEO, Ho-Chunk,
Inc., Winnebago, Nebraska.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the
light will turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light
will turn yellow, and at the end of 5 minutes, the light will
turn red, and I will ask you to please complete your
statements.
I will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify
before Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Justin Ahasteen for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JUSTIN AHASTEEN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NAVAJO NATION
WASHINGTON OFFICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Ahasteen. Ya'at'eeh, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Justin Ahasteen. I am Bilagaana born for
Totsohnii. My maternal grandfather is Bilagaana, and my
paternal grandfather is Kiis'aanii.
I am the Executive Director of the Navajo Nation Washington
Office, providing testimony on behalf of Dr. Buu Nygren,
President of the Navajo Nation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before this
Subcommittee on the topic of economic diversification in Indian
Country.
If I were to summarize the history of the Navajo economy in
just a few words, I would probably say interrupted progress.
The Navajo Nation was one of the largest Native American
tribes in the country, with over 400,000 enrolled members, with
a reservation stretching over 27,000 square miles in Arizona,
New Mexico, and Utah.
Even though the land has challenges, like limited water
resources, it also has enormous potential to sustain our
people.
For generations our people thrived, building homes, raising
livestock, and planting orchards until the United States
destroyed everything in the 1860s. We returned to our lands
after the long walk and began to rebuild.
But yet again in the 1930s, our wealth was taken away
through the livestock reduction program, which slaughtered two-
thirds of our livestock.
With limited water resources, the Federal Government told
us the only way to prosperity was through mineral extraction.
One of the largest jobs created by the Federal Government was
uranium mining, which employed thousands of Navajo citizens
during the Cold War, but left behind a legacy of radiation
poisoning, death, and open mines that have yet to be
remediated.
The Black Mesa Coal Mine generated millions of dollars in
revenue for the Navajo government, but ultimately depleted over
44 billion gallons of water from our aquifers, drying up
springs that our people relied on to provide water to their
families and to their livestock.
The most recent blow was probably when the Navajo
generating station near Page, Arizona, was permanently shut
down. The Navajo generating station had 538 employees, a
majority of whom were Navajo, and paid about $52 million in
wages every year.
The loss of that income severely damaged the Navajo economy
and the local community has yet to recover. Time and time
again, the Federal Government promised us jobs and prosperity,
but the promise was often illusory, and the jobs were a devil's
bargain.
For over 50 years, we have known that we need to diversify
our options, and we have worked tirelessly towards that goal.
We now have a dozen tribal enterprises that bring revenue to
the Navajo Nation government and provide good jobs to our
people, but it clearly isn't enough.
Despite an educated and talented workforce, we struggle to
make progress. Many citizens still lack basic infrastructure,
such as running water, sanitation, housing, and paved roads.
And our unemployment rate sits at about 57 percent. The
fact of the matter is, the Navajo Nation is not a small casino
tribe with a few hundred citizens that can live off the gaming
revenues.
We have a casino, but it is located far from major
population centers and only generate modest revenue. Even our
most successful enterprises cannot employ all of our citizens
directly, and they shouldn't have to.
We need a variety of businesses operating in the Navajo
Nation, representing all sorts of industries. We need to
empower our entrepreneurs to dream big and take risks that will
create the industries for tomorrow.
But sadly, this isn't happening. No company wants to invest
in a community with a dirt road that is effectively impassable
for weeks at a time. But we can't pave our roads without
gravel, and we can't dig our gravel pits without getting
permission from the Department of the Interior.
Many entrepreneurs use a mortgage to secure startup funds,
but our people don't own their homes, which means there is no
equity to leverage to start a new business.
I don't mean to sound overly pessimistic. There have been
great strides to help Indian Country since the self-
determination era began.
We have been the beneficiaries of many Federal programs
meant to help tribes start their own enterprises, and we hope
to benefit from even more.
Though my written testimony identifies problems with many
of the recent programs, one of these programs is the State
Small Business Credit Initiative, which we hope will provide a
perpetual infusion of capital to empower small businesses to
compete on and off the reservation.
But one thing that we do need is for the Federal Government
and state governments to get out of the way. The Dine people
are hardworking, creative, and we are ready to take on any
opportunity. But those opportunities will only come when tribes
are given exclusive jurisdiction over their lands and not
beholden to the Federal Government or the state governments to
dictate how business is done.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to building a diverse and sustainable Navajo economy
and creating opportunities for all members of our community.
I look forward to collaborating to improve the lives of the
Navajo people, and it is my sincere hope that our efforts will
be able to remove the barriers that stand in the way for a
prosperous Navajo economy.
I am happy to answer any questions that you may have, and
thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Ahasteen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Justin Ahasteen, Executive Director, Navajo
Nation Washington Office

Ya'at'eeh Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Subcommittee.

My name is Justin Ahasteen. I am Bilagaana (White), born for
Totsohnii (Big Water). My maternal grandfather is Bilagaana (White) and
my paternal grandfather is Kiis'aanii (Hopi). I am the Executive
Director of the Navajo Nation Washington Office, providing testimony on
behalf of Dr. Buu Nygren, President of the Navajo Nation (``Nation'').
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee on
Indian and Insular Affairs on the topic of economic diversification in
Indian Country. The Navajo Nation is one of the largest Native American
tribes in the country and provides critical governmental services to
over 400,000 members, half of whom reside our lands. The Navajo Nation
encompasses over 27,000 square-miles or just over 17.5 million acres,
stretching across 11 counties in three states--Arizona, New Mexico, and
Utah.
In 1868, the United States entered into a treaty with the Navajo
Nation, promising health care, education, agricultural assistance, and
to improve the wellbeing of the Navajo people in perpetuity. As such,
the United States government is legally and morally bound with a treaty
responsibility and a sacred trust obligation, to support the Navajo
Nation in addressing the many challenges we face, including in
developing our economy, which is proven to be one of the most effective
ways to increase the overall wellbeing of a people.
Given our land and population size, the social and economic needs
of the Navajo people are heavy in many of our communities, including a
lack of basic infrastructure such as running water, sanitation,
housing, electricity, paved roads, as well as a high unemployment rate
of 57% across the Nation. The strain on our tribal government is large,
making it difficult to provide adequate services to our Dine people.
The Navajo Nation is pursuing new and innovative ways to create
economic prosperity for our citizens, and we look forward to working
with this Subcommittee to advance tribal sovereignty, self-
determination, and the economic well-being of the Navajo Nation and all
of Indian Country.
Early Development of the Navajo Economy

With a population spread out across one of the more arid regions of
the American Southwest, life has never been easy for the Navajo people.
Despite the harsh living conditions of our environment, we adapted, and
we slowly built an economy that could sustain us. But as anyone
familiar with economics knows, capital is built slowly over
generations, but it can be destroyed in an instant.
In 1864, following a series of conflicts with American military
forces, thousands of Navajo men, women, and children were forcibly
removed from our ancestral homelands in what would become the states of
Arizona and New Mexico, and sent on a forced march of 300 miles, which
came to be known as the ``Long Walk.'' Hundreds of our people died on
the journey, and thousands more, approximately one in four, died during
the subsequent internment at Bosque Redondo.
Prior to the Long Walk we had spent centuries perfecting an
agricultural system that was suited to the conditions available. Then
Colonel Kit Carson and his men were ordered to force the Navajo people
into starvation by razing everything to the ground. As part of their
scorched earth policy, his men destroyed everything, burning our
villages, chopping down the peach orchards that once covered the floor
of Canyon de Chelly, and slaughtering our livestock, all of which
providing our people with shelter and a reliable source of sustenance.
Once we were allowed to return to our lands, we had nothing and had
to build our lives again from scratch. Most Navajo families maintained
small herds of sheep, cattle, and other livestock to provide a meagre
income through end of the 19th and the first half of the 20th
centuries. Just as the Navajo people began to accumulate some wealth in
the form of their herds, the federal government initiated the livestock
reduction program, citing concerns about the impact of the growing
herds on the local vegetation as a justification. The program led to
the slaughter of as many as two-thirds of our sheep, forcing a strict
quota on the number of animals we could own. This program devastated
the already-weak Navajo economy, throwing many families who were
already living in poverty into even greater hardship. It quickly became
clear that our people would have to look to outside sources for
additional income.
Shortly before the livestock reduction program was enacted, oil and
gas were discovered on the Navajo Nation. Anxious to gain access to
these precious resources, the Department of Interior established the
Navajo Business Council (the eventual primary legislative body of the
Nation in the form of the Navajo Nation Council) to certify mineral
leases on Navajo lands. Navajo leaders were not given much choice but
to allow outsiders to come and extract their natural resources. In time
these industries proved to provide some benefit in the form of jobs for
the Navajo people, but the jobs were often dangerous and while they
provided significant revenues, the harm caused by the industry often
outweighed the benefits.
Uranium mining employed thousands of Navajo citizens during the
Cold War, but left behind a legacy of radiation poisoning, death, and
open mines that have yet to be fully remediated, more than thirty years
after most of the mines ceased operations. The Black Mesa coal mine
generated millions of dollars in revenue for the Navajo government, but
ultimately depleted over 44 billion gallons of water from our aquifers,
drying up springs that our people relied on to provide water to their
families and livestock. The aquifer may take decades to fully recover,
assuming it ever does. The only saving grace of these operations is
that they provided jobs, but one by one each of them was shutdown,
leaving us with few viable alternatives. The most recent blow was
probably when the Navajo Generating Station (``NGS'') near Page,
Arizona was permanently shut down. NGS had 538 employees, a majority of
whom were Navajo, and paid about $52 million in wages every year. The
loss of that income severely damaged the Navajo economy, and the local
community has yet to recover.
Long before the NGS shutdown, we recognized that we could not rely
on a single industry forever to provide the growth and stability that
our economy needs. Rather than place all our proverbial eggs into one
basket, we have worked tirelessly for over 50 years to diversity our
economy. We have a dozen tribal enterprises that bring varying amounts
of revenue to the Nation, including a hospitality enterprise focused on
increasing our tourism industry; a newspaper and radio station; four
casinos; the Navajo Tribal Utility Authority; the Dine Development
Corporation--which for over 20 years have provided IT, professional,
and other support to governmental agencies and commercial
organizations--the Navajo Arts and Crafts Enterprise, as well as many
others. The Dine people are hardworking and creative, and ready to take
on any opportunity.
However, the fact of the matter is none of our enterprises makes up
for the revenue lost from our waning economy based on mineral
extraction. Despite our efforts to seize every opportunity, we find
that many opportunities are illusory. In many instances, the Nation
faces bureaucratic red tape which prevents us from accessing the
opportunities afforded to us or from creating opportunities for
ourselves. In other instances, the opportunity to create economic
development is fleeting and more time and money is needed from
Congress.
Below are examples of areas where the Navajo Nation and other
tribes have experienced difficulties in creating economic development,
as well as potential solutions on how this Subcommittee can assist us--
and all Indian Country--in overcoming them.
Gravel Pits and Unpaved Roads

Given the size and rural nature of our reservation, it is important
to the safety and well-being of our people--as well as for their
economic prosperity--that we have paved roads. Unfortunately, 77% of
our roads are unpaved roads, which equates to approximately 13,000
miles of unpaved roads. During poor weather, our unpaved roads can
become muddy and impossible to practically or safely traverse, which
forces drivers to either abandon their trips or find other ways around.
It is not uncommon for an unpaved road in poor weather conditions to
add over 2 hours to a trip.
The current cost per mile of pavement is over $3 million in the
Nation, three times higher than the cost per mile to pave a road in a
major metropolitan area like Phoenix. Much of this cost is due to
restrictions created by the Department of the Interior (``DOI'') which
have prohibited the Navajo Nation from using its own gravel pits.
Instead, we have been forced to import road materials from off the
reservation significantly driving up costs. Most recently, DOI has
informed the Nation that we would need to develop our own regulations
in order to access and use our own gravel pits. We have requested
technical assistance from DOI and the Bureau of Indian Affairs for what
specifically is needed in these regulations and have not received a
response.

Potential Solution: Amend the legislation and/or call on DOI to
make itself immediately available to provide technical assistance or to
reduce its regulatory requirements so we can access and use our gravel
pits on our reservation.
Fractionalization and Economic Development

Another barrier to paving our roads has been fractionalization. As
this Subcommittee knows, the Navajo Nation was able to make some of the
largest recoveries under the Land Buy-Back Program. This was important
for many reasons, including for the construction of paved roads. One of
the successes that we were able to achieve through the Land Buy-Back
Program was the paving of a road in our Casamero Lake Chapter. This was
impossible before because we were unable to locate the approximately
400 landowners needed to approve the construction. Through the Land
Buy-Back Program we were able to consolidate our interests without
having to locate these landowners and move forward with the
construction. The impact on the Casamero Lake Chapter has been dynamic.
Our people out there now have safer roads and improved access to
school, work, commerce, health, and emergency services.
Despite that success, there are still 1,200 fractionated parcels
held by nearly 15,000 landowners checkerboarded across our reservation.
These fractionated parcels prevent us from exercising our jurisdiction
over the lands and from providing critical resources such as water,
electricity, and other utility services. The result of these
fractionations is a substantial hardship on our people, which is
exacerbated by the chilling effect that these fractionations produce on
outside investors.

Potential Solution: Continue to fund and support the Land Buy-Back
Program.
Non-Metropolitan Statistical Area Designations

The Department of Treasury's Internal Revenue Service (``IRS'')
uses statistical areas defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(``BLS'') to distort the economic circumstances of the Navajo Nation,
which results in our being ineligible for various tax credit programs.
The distortion is that the Navajo Nation is not considered a stand-
alone non-metropolitan statistical area (``non-MSA'') and is instead
evaluated with consideration to counties in Arizona, New Mexico, and
Utah. The use of employment and other economic data from areas outside
the Navajo Nation to determine the economic health of the Navajo Nation
distorts the economic reality faced by our citizens and creates
negative effects.
An example of the negative effect our BLS statistical areas
classification is our ineligibility to use certain tax credits. Under
the Inflation Reduction Act (``IRA''), for instance, energy projects
can enjoy an Energy Community Tax Credit bonus when located in Energy
Communities for the purpose of supporting and revitalizing the
economies of coal and power plant communities. The Navajo Nation is a
coal and powerplant community, yet through the Department of Treasury's
interpretation of Section 13702 of the IRA, projects located on the
Navajo Nation will not necessarily enjoy the Energy Community Tax
Credit Bonus because the criteria for determining if a project
developed on the Navajo Nation is located in an Energy Community will
be reviewed using economic data from areas far beyond the Navajo
Nation. This result seems inconsistent both with Congress' general
intentions under the IRA and this Administration's focus on racial
equity and environmental justice through Executive Order 13985
(Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities),
Executive Order 14008 (Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad),
Executive Order 14096 (Revitalizing Our Nation's Commitment to
Environmental Justice for All), and the Justice40 Initiative.

Potential Solution: Call on BLS to revisit their non-MSA
statistical determinations through consultation with tribes.
Jurisdictional Issues

While fractionalization can create areas within our reservation
where we lack jurisdiction, our jurisdiction on our own lands is
limited due to dual compliance and taxation. Having to share our
authority and jurisdiction with outside governments not only harms our
sovereignty but also greatly reduces our ability to attract outside
investment onto our reservation.
Economics teaches us that to be competitive, communities need to
identify areas where they can establish a competitive advantage over
other communities. One way poorer countries have successfully built a
competitive advantage over the years has been to offer generous tax
rates that attract business investment. So long as non-Native companies
have to pay both tribal and state taxes, it is impossible for tribes to
offer competitive rates, leaving us with the option of either making
the business climate on the reservation less competitive than doing
business off-reservation in the state, or charging no tax at all,
eliminating an important revenue source that supports our tribal
government and services to our people. The same is true of
environmental and other clearances. We often find that a business needs
twice as many clearances to build on a reservation as they do off the
reservation, which can mean the difference of millions of dollars and
years to establish a large enterprise.
The fact of the matter is the Navajo Nation is not a small casino
tribe with a few hundred citizens that can all live off gaming revenue.
We cannot employ all of our citizens directly, nor is it advisable that
we do so. Central planning rarely works on a large scale, so we need a
variety of employers operating in the Nation representing a variety of
industries. Such diversity will enable us to build a more resilient
economy that can weather the changing economic climate in an uncertain
world. But building that kind of economy is going to require outside
capital and investment, and that is currently difficult given the
unfavorable business climate on most reservations due to the
jurisdictional overlap between tribal and state governments.
This is particularly true of our entrepreneurs. The beauty of a
market economy is that individual entrepreneurs can innovate and
produce new ventures that a central government planner could never have
dreamed of. We need to empower our entrepreneurs to dream and to take
risks, knowing that even failed ventures help pave the way for future
innovations and growth. That is why we have worked with the Department
of the Treasury to set up our State Small Business Credit Initiative
(``SSBCI'') program discussed in more detail below. By making loans to
small Navajo-owned businesses, we can help fill the credit gap that
exists on many reservations. But providing credit is not enough. Our
small business owners and entrepreneurs will face many of the same
challenges, if not more, that currently prevent larger investments on
tribal lands. That is why it is so important to eliminate some of the
barriers to entry that exist because of the jurisdictional overlap.

Potential Solution: End dual taxation and dual compliance
requirements for environmental and other clearance processes.
Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee Program

The Department of Energy's (``DOE'') Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee
Program (``TELGP'') was established by the Energy Policy Act of 2005.
The intention behind TELGP was to support tribal investment in energy-
related projects by providing loan guarantees to tribes seeking
financing for capital intensive energy projects to prevent tribes from
being shut out of capital markets due to a lack of commercial credit
histories or ratings. Recently, the funding for the program was
increased under the IRA from $2 billion to $20 billion, with an
additional $75 million allocated to the Department of Energy to run the
program. Despite Congress' intent to create important opportunities
through TELGP for Indian Country, not a single dollar has been used
from this program to guarantee a tribal loan for an energy-related
project.

Here are three examples of issues with the TELGP program and a
potential solution for each.

1.  The DOE requirement that a tribe or tribal entity first obtain a
credit rating from a nationally recognized rating agency defeats the
entire purpose of the loan guarantee program and is burdensome and
costly.

Obtaining and maintaining a rating can cost over $100,000 per year.
This is a significant cost for a tribe or tribal entity who has no
guarantee of obtaining the subsidy from the TELGP. Also, in many cases
misperceptions concerning the riskiness of lending to Native borrowers
hampers the ability of tribes and tribal entities to receive the rating
requirement. Again, this was the very problem this program was intended
to solve.

Potential Solution: Amend the legislation and/or call on DOE to
eliminate the need for a tribal credit rating and instead require that
DOE rely on the bank's loan review and monitoring process. A tribal
entity can demonstrate its ability to repay loans of this size through
its history of doing so and its forward cash flow projections. This has
worked with the Bureau of Indian (``BIA'') loan guarantee program and
Small Business Administration loan guarantee program.

2.  Expand the Number and Type of Qualified Financial Institutions.

DOE uses an approval process for financial institutions that is
overly restrictive, sidelining specialized lending institutions that
are seeking to support tribal energy projects. DOE's Financial
Institution Partnership Program works for large national banks and
projects with utilities and well-financed publicly traded energy
corporations, but it does not work for tribes and tribal entities.

Potential Solution: Amend the legislation and/or call on DOE to
allow specialized lenders and other types of lenders who issue credit
and finance projects as a regular course of business. DOE could achieve
this by modeling procedures developed and implemented by the BIA loan
guarantee program to monitor and approve loan guarantees.

3.  DOE Due Diligence Is Unnecessarily Burdensome and Redundant.

Rather than relying on and confirming the due diligence of the
lending institution, DOE has developed a separate internal process that
requires additional review and documentation unnecessary to the
program.

Potential Solution: Amend the legislation and/or call on DOE to
streamline the due diligence process so that the diligence effort falls
on the bank or lending institution. DOE and tribes will benefit by
simplifying the process and providing certainty: If the borrower can
meet payment obligations, then DOE issues the loan guarantee.

Elective Pay to Tribes Under the Inflation Reduction Act

The IRA added significant potential benefits for tribal entities to
the Internal Revenue Code. Specifically, qualifying tribal entities are
eligible for 12 years of elective (direct) pay on projects under IRC
Section 45Q (carbon capture), 45V (hydrogen) and 45X (renewable)
projects. I understand that the Department of the Treasury is working
to finalize the IRS rules to allow elective pay to tribal entities for
a ``Project'' if the tribal entity has an equity position in the
project. If the intention is for public and/or private entities to
include tribes in new energy projects on tribal lands, or for tribal
entities to invest in energy projects, the regulations need to allow
for lower tribal equity ownership in order to qualify for benefits.
As discussed above, tribes do not have easy access to the
significant amounts of capital that are necessary to plan, develop,
build and maintain medium or large-scale energy projects. Additionally,
tribes and tribal entities lack the experience and expertise to solely
develop energy projects of this magnitude. If the elective pay benefits
under IRC Section 45 are only available to entitles that have a
controlling (51% or greater) interest in a ``Project'', it is highly
unlikely that any tribal entity would have the financial wherewithal to
take advantage of the newly created elective pay benefits.

Potential Solution: Amend the legislation and/or call on Treasury
to promulgate regulations requiring either a threshold of a 10%
ownership interest or $100 million investment in a qualifying project
to qualify for elective pay. Investment at this level would ensure that
any project investment was above a nominal threshold, while
incentivizing private industry to invest in the advancement of tribes
and tribal entities, thus enabling a much-needed economic boost to
tribes.

As these rules are finalized, IRS must be very mindful of the
objective these incentives were created for and very thoughtful on what
the rules need to be to create these outcomes. Energy projects in the
tens of millions of dollars are nice, but they do not provide the
indirect benefits needed to help stimulate additional development.
Energy projects in the hundreds of millions of dollars and, even more
so, in the billions of dollars create significant long-term direct and
indirect benefits that have real, meaningful impact. The rules must be
finalized to incentivize private industry to include tribes and tribal
entities in projects of this magnitude. With respect to the amount of
financial benefit provided by the federal government, there is no
difference between a tax credit or direct payment. There is, however, a
massive difference in where that benefit lands. Direct payment provides
an opportunity for those benefits to incentivize private industry to
include tribes and tribal entities as well as ultimately providing
additional benefits to the underdeveloped communities on tribal lands;
whereas tax credits predominantly require the developer to monetize the
tax credits allowing a significant percentage of the financial benefit
to go, once again, to large corporations and financial institutions.
Office of Clean Energy Demonstration

In May 2023, the Navajo Transitional Energy Company (``NTEC'') was
one of eight projects awarded a funding opportunity by DOE's Office of
Clean Energy Demonstration (``OCED''). NTEC's project is for a carbon
capture front-end engineering design (``FEED'') study at the Four
Corners Power Plant (``FCPP'') on the Navajo Nation. The funding will
cover 50% of the cost of the study, or approximately $7.5 million. To
underscore the significance of this potential project to the Navajo
Nation, the FCPP and adjoining Navajo Mine provide over 40% of the
annual revenue into the Navajo Nation General Fund.
Upon announcement of being selected, OCED provided a list of the
initial required documents and a description of the negotiation
process. The negotiation process was stated to take up to three months
to complete and had a deadline of August 31, 2023. The only items
requested were responses to a Pre-Award questionnaire and an
Organization and Financial Management review; and a project kickoff
meeting was held where all parties were introduced, a high-level
roadmap was provided by OCED, and a weekly progress meeting was set
with OCED, NTEC, and Enchant Energy (``EE'').

NTEC and EE submitted the required documents on May 19, 2023. Over
the next five months, OCED failed to provide a schedule for
negotiations and instead demanded additional documentation without
guidance on what was required and provided additional limitations on
the grant. For example, OCED requested an updated Statement of Project
Objectives (``SOPO'') and then later informed NTEC and EE for the first
time that no grant money could be used for assessing Enhanced Oil
Recovery and that the SOPO would need to be revised.
With still no definitive schedule or detailed scope provided, a
joint meeting between OCED, including Acting Director Kelly Cummins,
and representatives from the Navajo Nation, EE, and NTEC was held on
November 2, 2023. During this meeting, NTEC informed OCED that they
must start the FEED Study by December 15, 2023, or risk losing
resources from their project partners. OCED agreed to have the FCPP
Carbon Capture Integrated FEED cooperative agreement fully executed by
December 15, 2023. As of February 1, 2024, NTEC is not under contract
and OCED is still requesting new and additional information.
NTEC started the FEED Study on December 15, 2023, but due to the
erratic and poor communications with OCED, NTEC is currently working at
its own financial risk to fund the entirety of the FEED Study.

Potential Solution: Call on DOE to simplify the approval process
for this grant and to honor the original schedule and conditions.

State Small Business Credit Initiative

The Navajo Nation's journey toward economic diversification and
stability has been fraught with challenges, historical setbacks, and
environmental impacts from industries that, while once lucrative, have
left damaging legacies. As we look to the future, it is imperative that
we support the entrepreneurial spirit of the Dine people and nurture
small businesses that can contribute to a robust, diversified economy.
SSBCI funding, made available for the first time ever to tribes
under the American Rescue Plan Act (``ARPA''), represents a critical
opportunity for the Navajo Nation to invest in its small business
ecosystem. Access to capital is a critical component to the growth of
every successful company. Small businesses are the backbone of the
American economy, and for the Navajo Nation, they do not only represent
income and jobs, but also the preservation and advancement of Navajo
culture, values, and community. By effectively utilizing the SSBCI
funds, the Navajo Nation can provide the needed financial support to
overcome this hurdle, enabling small businesses to thrive, innovate,
and create jobs for our people.
The anticipated receipt of our first payment from the SSBCI under
ARPA is a step in the right direction, but admittedly it will not be
enough. States have benefited from the SSBCI program for over a decade,
but it was only in the last few years that the opportunity to
participate has been extended to tribes, despite the fact that our
needs are so much greater. We have higher unemployment that the off-
reservation economy, currently at 57% in the Navajo Nation, and our
entrepreneurs have less access to capital as they are unable to
leverage resources like the equity in their homes, that is frequently a
source of start-up capital off the reservation. We hope this program
will prove to be a good start, but as has been true of so many federal
programs meant to empower tribal economies, we worry that the
bureaucratic complexities and red tape will hinder our ability to reap
the full benefits.

Potential Solution: As the SSBCI program continues to roll out for
tribal participants, the Navajo Nation urges the Subcommittee to be
vigilant and to keep an open mind. As challenges with the full
implementation of the SSBCI program are identified, we will need this
Subcommittee to work with tribal governments and other committees to
come up with solution in a timely manner. By doing so, Congress will be
playing a pivotal role in promoting the economic resilience and
prosperity of the Navajo Nation to empower our entrepreneurs and small
businesses with the resources they need to succeed.
Conclusion

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our unwavering commitment
to building a diverse and sustainable Navajo economy and creating
opportunities for all members of our community. While we are fully
dedicated to this endeavor, it is essential to acknowledge the
formidable barriers that obstruct our path at every turn. Despite these
challenges, we remain steadfast in our determination to overcome them
and forge ahead towards a future of economic resilience and prosperity
for all Navajo citizens. I would once again like to express my thanks
to this Subcommittee for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the
Navajo Nation. I look forward to working with you to continue to
improve the lives of the Navajo people and all of Indian Country, and
it is my sincere hope that through our efforts we will be able to
remove some of the barriers that stand in the way of the blossoming of
the Navajo economy.

Ahehee' and thank you.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Justin Ahasteen, Executive
Director, Navajo Nation Washington Office

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your written testimony, you noted that the Navajo
Nation recognized the need to diversify its economy approximately 50
years ago. Can you further expand on the need for economic
diversification and how Navajo Nation has overcome obstacles regarding
current and past diversification efforts?

Answer. For most of our history, we have had just two major
industries on the Nation: Agriculture and Mining. Agriculture struggles
during a drought, which happens frequently in our region, and demand
for our natural resources, especially coal, fluctuates widely and is no
longer a reliable source of long-term growth. So, we need to diversify
to ensure there are still jobs if one industry is struggling.
To help diversify our economy, we first set up our business office,
now housed in the Division of Economic Development, to help potential
entrepreneurs and investors navigate the administrative hurdles to
doing business on a reservation, including applying for a business site
lease. Unfortunately, the process is not straight forward, and it can
take a lot of time and money to get all the permissions to start a
business. Add to this some of our infrastructure challenges, and it's
hard to convince a lot of companies to open up shop in the Nation.
To help bring in outside capital and expertise, we will also
frequently partner with other companies. By operating as a partnership,
we are able to help companies navigate the complexities of operating on
tribal land, and they will also get some of the benefits available to
tribal businesses.
Finally, we invest directly in the economy through our tribal
enterprises. By setting up our tribal enterprises we can at least
guarantee some economic activity in the Nation that will hopefully act
as an anchor to the economy and spur secondary economic development.

Question 2. Your testimony mentioned the various jurisdictional
barriers the tribe has had to fight when pursuing economic growth, such
as the duplicative environmental reviews needed for paving roadways.
What other duplicative regulations or compliance concerns would you
highlight for the committee to look at?

Answer. Absolutely. Taking the environmental reviews as an example,
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) covers three areas:
Environmental Assessments (EA), Environmental Impact Statements (EIS)
and Categorical Exclusions (CatEx). Inter-federal departmental
deference is given by federal departments to each other but not to
Navajo Nation departments.
For example, the Navajo Department of Transportation (Navajo DOT)
is currently required to complete two environmental documents to
address the federal action of funding the project (as required by
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)) and the federal action of
granting a right-of-way (as required by the Bureau of Indian Affairs
(BIA)). The Bureau of Indian Affairs--Navajo Regional Office's Realty
Office will not accept the FHWA CatEx document because it is not
considered to be in a BIA format. However, the FHWA CatEx is an
acceptable document to complete the NEPA process. It would be helpful
if the BIA Regional Director would honor and accept Navajo DOT's
environmental documents that are approved by FHWA.
Now assume we got the Right of Way approved to build the road, we
then have to go through the same process to get a Right of Way to lay
power lines, water lines, internet, etc. Every project requires a
separate Right of Way, even though whatever processes were good enough
for the first Right of Way should be good enough for all of them.

Question 3. In previous hearings, restricted fee status land models
have been discussed, specifically whether that model could enable
tribal development of land and natural resources at a faster pace.
Would Navajo Nation be open to a process that would let the Nation
place some trust land into restricted fee status for economic
development purposes? Why or why not?

3a) What unintended consequences should Congress seek to avoid if
establishing more processes for tribes to move land into restricted fee
status?

Answer. I'm going to have to answer that question with a
``probably''. We have discussed the possibility internally, and there
are definitely members of our current administration and the Navajo
Nation Council who like the idea. But anyone familiar with tribal
politics knows how messy it can be. Liking something in theory doesn't
mean it gets full support in practice and I imagine there will be
debates in Council and in each local chapter community to determine
what, if any, land they would want to move to restricted fee status. I
will say though, that more options are better than fewer options. Even
if we don't take advantage of the program, I would rather we have the
option to take part than be stuck without any options.

Question 4. Entrepreneurship can help with creating job
opportunities, innovating, and diversifying local marketplaces, and
many other positive results. How specifically has the Navajo Nation
benefited from its interest in tribal entrepreneurship?

Answer. Every successful Navajo entrepreneur helps the Nation.
Obviously from an economic perspective it means we have more money
coming into Navajo hands, providing for our people. But it also
provides a sense of pride, knowing that our people built something, and
that we didn't just rely on outside investors to get things done. I
can't tell you how happy I am to go to a restaurant owned by a Navajo
businesswoman, or to buy a hat made by a Navajo artist. I know of one
Navajo entrepreneur who owns nine successful businesses.
When she was just starting it was a family affair with her children
and the occasional niece or nephew helping out. As one business grew,
others were hired, and new ventures were started until she built the
successful life that she now has. But what is perhaps more important is
that her success has inspired other in her family and her community to
get an education and to get experience and to start businesses of their
own.

Question 5. In your experience, what is the difficulty level for
tribes to identify and access federal economic developmental programs,
and how could Congress alleviate any issues?

Answer. For example, the Department of Energy's Tribal Energy Loan
Guarantee Program was established by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 to
help tribe's build a stronger energy sector. This is a great idea. A
strong energy sector can be a boon to a tribal economy. We should know.
Energy was our primary source of income for years and remains an
important part of our economy. So, the Tribal Energy Loan Guarantee
Program seems like exactly the type of program that should be able to
help us and many other tribes. The only problem is that, as far as we
can tell, not a single dollar has been used from this program to
guarantee a tribal loan for an energy-related project in the almost 20
years of operating the program.
This is not to say that there is no benefit from any of these
federal programs. Clearly that program is more the exception than the
rule. There are lots of programs that have provided immense benefit to
Indian Country, and we are grateful to Congress for the attention it
has given to Indian Country over the years. But sometimes a competitive
grant program expects tribes to be operating at a level of
sophistication that the states sometimes struggle with. How can we be
expected to compete for development grants when we literally don't have
reliable internet in half of our government buildings? Or cell calls
drop when you drive five minutes out of town?
If we want tribes to really benefit from these programs, I will say
formula grants are always preferred to competitive grants and technical
assistance is essential. But if these programs are really going to be
useful to us, they need to be made available to us on our level, in a
form that is truly accessible. And that is going to take some work, and
it might mean visiting tribes where they live to really understand how
things work.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony. And I don't
think I could have said it better.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Sherry Rupert for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHERRY RUPERT, CEO, AMERICAN INDIAN ALASKA NATIVE
TOURISM ASSOCIATION, ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO

Ms. Rupert. Madam Chair and honorable members of the
Committee. My name is Sherry Rupert, and I am a proud Paiute
and Washoe from Nevada.
I am honored to appear before you today as the CEO of
AIANTA, the American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association.
For over 25 years, AIANTA has been steadfast in its
commitment to advancing cultural tourism for American Indians,
Alaskan Natives, and Native Hawaiians.
Our mission is clear, to support economic development and
ensure cultural perpetuation through the growth of cultural
tourism.
Tourism holds immense potential for Native Nations and
communities, providing not only economic opportunities, but
also a means to preserve our cultural identity and share our
rich cultural heritage.
However, despite this potential, many Native enterprises
face significant challenges in developing their tourism
programming. From lack of access, to financing, to basic
infrastructure needs, the road to building sustainable tourism
enterprises can be arduous.
AIANTA has been at the forefront of addressing these
challenges, providing tailored training, marketing resources,
and outreach efforts to support cultural tourism development.
From Fiscal Year 2019 to 2022 alone, AIANTA directly
reached nearly 2,700 cultural tourism partners, providing them
with the necessary tools and resources for economic growth and
cultural perpetuation.
The economic impact of Indigenous tourism businesses in the
United States is substantial, as evidenced by data from the
U.S. Census Bureau.
In 2019, American Indian Alaskan Native and Native Hawaiian
hospitality businesses contributed nearly $15.7 billion to the
U.S. economy, a 13 percent increase from 2017, providing
188,524 jobs across the nation.
Despite the challenges posed by a COVID-19 pandemic,
recovery is underway, albeit slow, with overseas visitors to
American Indian communities increasing from 321,000 in 1921,
during COVID to just over a million in 2022, and in 2019, there
were over 2 million that were coming to our American Indian
communities, so it is slow.
Yet, despite the undeniable impact of Indigenous tourism in
the U.S. economy, Native Nations and communities remain largely
excluded from mainstream tourism support structures. This
exclusion has been particularly evident in the distribution of
relief funding during the COVID-19 pandemic, where Native
entities received disproportionately little support compared to
the other sectors of the industry.
The Native American Tourism and Improving Visitor
Experience Act, or NATIVE Act, was a crucial step forward in
recognizing the importance of Native tourism and improving
collaboration between Federal agencies and Native Nations and
communities.
However, its full potential has yet to be realized.
Clarifications and revisions are needed to ensure that the
Act's appropriations are utilized effectively and that Native
voices are truly heard and are leading the effort in tourism
initiatives.
AIANTA recommends a renewed commitment to equity and
inclusion in the tourism industry, with a focus on direct
investments in technical assistance and training specific to
cultural tourism.
We also advocate for greater support of the Department of
the Interior and the Department of Commerce in the
implementation of the NATIVE Act, ensuring that Native Nations
and communities have a seat at the table in one of the largest
industries in this country.
Tourism, when done well, has the power to uplift
communities, preserve cultural identity and traditions, and
drive economic growth. AIANTA stands ready to work alongside
you to build a brighter future for Native Nations and
communities through the full implementation of the NATIVE Act.
Thank you for your time today, and I am here to answer any
questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Rupert follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sherry L. Rupert, Chief Executive Officer,
American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association

Subcommittee Chair Hageman, Vice Chair Gonzalez-Coloon and members
of the committee, thank you for receiving testimony on behalf of the
American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association, Inc. (``AIANTA'').
We appreciate the opportunity to express our priorities to meet the
needs of tourism and economic development across Native Nations and
communities across the United States. We would particularly like to
address the Native American Tourism and Improving Visitor Experience
Act (``NATIVE Act'').
TOP LINES

Revision to the Native American Tourism and Improving Visitor
Experience (NATIVE) Act is being requested to support a permanent role
for cultural tourism to support economic diversification for American
Indian Tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations.
AMERICAN INDIAN ALASKA NATIVE TOURISM ASSOCIATION

AIANTA is the only national organization specifically dedicated to
advancing cultural tourism for American Indians, Alaska Natives and
Native Hawaiians. For over 25 years, AIANTA has provided technical
assistance and training to American Indians, Alaska Natives and Native
Hawaiians to support economic development and to ensure cultural
perpetuation through the development and growth of cultural tourism.
AIANTA works with American Indians, Alaska Natives and Native Hawaiians
to develop, grow and sustain cultural tourism enterprises, businesses
and organizations.
AIANTA, an all Native-led nonprofit, serves all 574 federally
recognized tribes, tribal organizations and Native Hawaiian
organizations to support cultural tourism development and growth
nationwide. We are the only organization specifically dedicated to
advancing Native cultural tourism as a tool to perpetuate and protect
our cultural identity while providing economic opportunities within
Native Nations and communities.
For many Native Nations and communities, tourism is a new and
emerging industry and Native Nations and communities do not have a
robust, fully trained workforce to meet the demand. Without inclusion
in the existing, layered tourism support structures, each sovereign
native nation, village and community is forced to develop tourism
plans, programming and infrastructure from scratch. This process is
happening in a world where tourism is already occurring with
ramifications both cultural, environmental and economic. Even for those
tribes with casinos, the infrastructure and planning are not always in
place to diversify funding and/or to fully develop tourism
opportunities that reflect, protect and perpetuate culture and Native
landscapes.
AIANTA's priorities are (1) to provide technical assistance and
training, research, and publications to American Indian, Alaska Native
and Native Hawaiian communities engaged in tourism and hospitality; 2)
to facilitate conversations with the Native communities, federal
agencies, non-profit associations, and elected officials on the
economic and cultural importance of a healthy hospitality industry; (3)
to highlight the importance of visiting authentic Native destinations,
including cultural, heritage, historic, and artistic sites; and (4) to
generate awareness, interest and demand for these destinations with
domestic and international travelers, the travel trade and the media.
BUILDING TOURISM IN NATIVE NATIONS AND COMMUNITIES

Native enterprises and businesses face layered challenges in
building out their cultural tourism programming ranging from lack of
access to financing to basic infrastructure needs. For the last 25
years, AIANTA has provided outreach, tailored trainings, marketing and
resources alongside elevating cultural tourism to the national level
and to the industry. This includes AIANTA's support and role as
facilitator (2019) of the Native American Tourism and Improving Visitor
Experience (NATIVE) Act (Section 4d). From FY 2019-2022, AIANTA
provided direct outreach and resources to 2,665 individual contacts,
electronic outreach with 2,095,252 sent and 3,677 participants in
training supporting economic development and cultural perpetuation.
(AIANTA's Report to Congress as provided to the Office of Indian
Economic Development).
Native Nations and communities also face inconsistent inclusion in
the tourism infrastructure designed to support tourism development.
Tourism marketing and support is funded in the United States through
taxes, fees and general fund allocations. Due to the unique status of
American Indians and Alaska Natives in the United States, tourism
systems are not fully and consistently in place to support cultural
tourism destinations and product. Specifically, Native Nations are not
supported by local, regional or national destination marketing
organizations and/or the tourism industry because they often do not
contribute to the fees and tax support systems that fund tourism
development and growth. This is despite the significant economic impact
of Native Nations and communities on the economy.

In 2021, AIANTA, in partnership with SMS Research, released a
report on the economic impact of Indigenous tourism businesses in the
United States based on analysis of 2017 Census Data. https://
www.aianta.org/research/economic-impact/. This data points to the
economic impact, with American Indian, Alaska Native and Native
Hawaiian hospitality businesses contributing nearly $14 billion to the
U.S. economy (2017 U.S. Census data) and based on preliminary review of
2019 Annual Business Survey, the economic impact grew:

In 2019, the 120,869 recorded AIANNH firms in the tourism
sector was three times more than in 2017.

Of the 120,869 AIANNH-owned tourism firms, most (94%) were
self-employed individuals (113,200 firms without paid
employees), while 7,669 (6%) were firms with paid
employees.

AIANNH-owned firms in the tourism sector directly provided
188,524 jobs across the U.S. in 2019.

In 2019, annual sales of AIANNH-owned tourism firms
contributed $15.7B to the U.S. economy, a 13% increase from
2017.

As demonstrated by the above data, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic,
tourism was a leading opportunity for jobs and economic development in
Native Nations and communities. In some rural and remote communities,
it is one of the only viable opportunities for household income.
Although Census data is not yet available specifically detailing
the impact of COVID-19, the international visitation data points to the
decline in visitation. According to U.S. Department of Commerce,
approximately 1.7 million overseas visitors (4.4% of total market
share) traveled to an American Indian Community in 2019. International
visitors are good for the Native Nations and communities they visit and
for the entire tourism economy because they stay longer in the U.S.
than the average overseas traveler and visit more destinations (2019
U.S. Travel and Tourism Statistics, National Travel and Tourism Office,
U.S. Dept of Commerce). In 2020, the impact of COVID-19 was felt
dramatically in Native Nations and communities with approximately
251,000 overseas visitors (3.3% of market share)--an 85% drop in
visitors.
Significantly, the ramifications of lack of inclusion in U.S.
Tourism systems became painfully clear when the EDA's 2021 non-
competitive Travel, Tourism and Outdoor Recreation Recovery Act
funding, designed to aid recovery from COVID-19 shutdowns, went to
States and territories to support tourism marketing, infrastructure,
workforce and projects to rejuvenate leisure, business and
international travel with none of the $510 million of the relief
funding being set aside for Native Nations and communities (TTOR_Fact
Sheet.pdf (eda.gov). While the rest of the tourism industry is in full
recovery mode with the pandemic fully in the rear-view mirror, Native
Nations and communities are left to rebuild on their own. Based on the
U.S. Department of Commerce Visitation to American Indian Community
data, recovery is slowly underway with 321,000 overseas visitors in
2021 (3.5% of market share) and 1,006,000 overseas visitors in 2022
(4.2% of market share).
By being consistently left out of the tourism support structures,
including relief funding, Native Nations and communities are not on an
even playing field with the entirety of the U.S. tourism
infrastructure. Through educational forums and outreach, AIANTA is
working to ensure the systems gap is addressed through industry access,
capacity building and marketing support for full participation in
tourism.
Tourism is not a go it alone endeavor--it is inherently reliant on
connected, collaborative systems. AIANTA is working to fundamentally
shift and improve the operating environment for underrepresented
entrepreneurs--specifically Native-owned and Native-led cultural
tourism operations and enterprises. AIANTA is the only organization
specifically dedicated to advancing Native cultural tourism as a tool
for cultural perpetuation. We work across the cultural tourism
continuum--from product development and partnership building to
marketing and promoting Native tourism destinations and product,
domestically and internationally.
NATIVE AMERICAN TOURISM AND IMPROVING VISITOR EXPERIENCE (NATIVE) ACT

This committee is critical to helping build Native tourism
economies.

Clarification on the intent of the NATIVE Act is needed to ensure
that the Appropriations designated by Congress are being utilized for
their intended purposes.
The purpose of the Native American Tourism and Improving Visitor
Experience (NATIVE) Act, Public Law 114-221, is ``To enhance and
integrate Native American tourism, empower Native American communities,
increase coordination and collaboration between Federal tourism assets,
and expand heritage and cultural tourism opportunities in the United
States.'' The NATIVE Act outlines how federal agencies engaged in
recreation and tourism shall include Indian Tribes, tribal
organizations and Native Hawaiian Organizations in management plans and
tourism initiatives in Section 2:

The purposes of the Native American Tourism and Improving Visitor
Experience (NATIVE) Act, Public Law 114-221, as listed in Section 2,
are as follows:

(1)  to enhance and integrate Native American tourism----

(A) to empower Native American communities; and

(B) to advance the National Travel and Tourism Strategy;

(2)  to increase coordination and collaboration between Federal
tourism assets to support Native American tourism and
bolster recreational travel and tourism;

(3)  to expand heritage and cultural tourism opportunities in the
United States to spur economic development, create jobs,
and increase tourism revenues;

(4)  to enhance and improve self-determination and self-governance
capabilities in the Native American community and to
promote greater self-sufficiency;

(5)  to encourage Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and Native
Hawaiian organizations to engage more fully in Native
American tourism activities to increase visitation to rural
and remote areas in the United States that are too
difficult to access or are unknown to domestic travelers
and international tourists;

(6)
> to provide grants, loans, and technical
assistance to Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and
Native Hawaiian organizations that will----

(A) spur important infrastructure development;

(B) increase tourism capacity; and

(C) elevate living standards in Native American communities;
and

(7)  to support the development of technologically innovative
projects that will incorporate recreational travel and
tourism information and data from Federal assets to improve
the visitor experience.

The NATIVE Act also identifies the role of ``an entity or
organization with a demonstrated record in tribal communities of
defining, introducing, developing and sustaining American Indian,
Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian tourism and related activities in a
manner that respects and honors native traditions and values'' to enter
into a memorandum of understanding or cooperative agreement with the
Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Commerce to identify
areas where technical assistance is needed and to provide a means of
delivery and coordinate delivery of the assistance. (130 STAT 849, Sec
4).

In September 2018, AIANTA signed a memorandum of understanding with
the Department of Interior and the Department of Commerce ``to
formalize a role for AIANTA, pursuant to section 4(d) of the [NATIVE]
Act, and strengthen collaboration and coordination related to travel
and tourism on Federal and Tribal Lands.'' (See MOU_final.pdf
(aianta.org))
In March 2019, AIANTA entered into a five-year Cooperative
Agreement A19AC00017 with the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). A
collaborative workplan was developed by the DOI, DOC and AIANTA in
August 2019 for implementation of the NATIVE Act specific to the
following goals:

Goal 1: Identify areas where technical assistance is needed

Goal 2: Coordination and delivery of technical assistance

To support implementation of the NATIVE Act, Congress has
appropriated $19,500,000 through the BIA/Office of Indian Economic
Development for the coordination of the identification and delivery of
technical assistance to Indian Tribes, Tribal Organizations and Native
Hawaiian Organizations and to provide grants (see NATIVE Act, Section
2(6) above).

Although listed as a grantee, AIANTA is the organization designated
to facilitate the NATIVE Act and is not a grantee, but rather a partner
in implementation efforts. AIANTA received FY2018 and FY2019
appropriation funding totaling $4,400,000 for implementation of the
goals set in support of the NATIVE Act and as outlined in the five-year
Cooperative Agreement for the identification and delivery of technical
assistance. From March 2019-July 2022, AIANTA has distributed over 2.45
million electronic messages/outreach and resources; provided direct
outreach and resources to 2,665 cultural tourism partners; and
developed and provided 139 tailored, responsive cultural tourism
trainings to 1,418 cultural tourism partners. (AIANTA's Report to
Congress provided to OIED).

The breakdown of how the appropriated funds were spent as detailed
in the Report to the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs and the
Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives FY 2020-
2022 provides insight on how the funds have gone beyond the intent of
the NATIVE Act. Including Administration Costs utilized internally by
the BIA/OIED totaling $4,624,000--more funding than was dedicated to
the non-profit agency identified by the Department of Interior and the
Department of Commerce to act to identify and provide technical
assistance and training as required in the NATIVE Act.

Additional BIA/OIED funding went to Pilot Projects totaling
$3,928,002 with $1,725,011 going to an academic institution for
projects in North Dakota, South Dakota and for an International Forum
for Indigenous tourism (North and South America); $818,022 went to an
additional academic institution for projects in Virginia and Montana;
$500,000 went to a tribal organization to provide technical assistance
(duplicating efforts of AIANTA); with the remaining $884,000 going to
other tribal entities. BIA/OIED also provided $7,088,553 for their
Tribal Tourism Grant Program.

AIANTA recommends a full and consistent commitment to equity and
inclusion of American Indians, Alaska Natives and Native Hawaiians in
the United States tourism system. AIANTA encourages equitable
distribution of tourism funding through direct investments in the
identification and delivery of technical assistance and training
specific to cultural tourism facilitated by ``an entity or organization
with a demonstrated record in tribal communities of defining,
introducing, developing, and sustaining American Indian, Alaska Native,
and Native Hawaiian tourism and related activities in a manner that
respects and honors native traditions and values'' (Public Law 114-221,
Sec. 4(d)(1)).

Revision/clarification to the NATIVE Act is being requested. AIANTA
is requesting that additional language be added to support the
implementation of the NATIVE Act to be added modeled after NAHASDA to
support consistent support of the growth of economic opportunities in
Native Nations and communities through engagement in the cultural
tourism/hospitality/ recreation sector. It is also critical that both
the Department of Interior and the Department of Commerce are actively
involved in implementation of the NATIVE Act.

Further, it was known that the federal government does not have
expertise in the tourism industry, but it does however have expertise
in giving out grants. The NATIVE Act was intended to ensure that a
Native non-profit with experience and the expertise in cultural tourism
collaborate with Tribes, Tribal Organizations and Native Hawaiian
Organizations across the country so they could determine themselves
what they would be willing to share. That non-profit would be better
positioned in the industry and within the Native communities to do this
work; adept at navigating the intricate and complex systems and
relationships that make up the tourism industry. This model was to play
a critical role in ensuring Native voices are included in the economic
opportunities created by one of the largest service sectors in the
world.
Replacement language for Section 4(d) as noted in Section (d)(3):

d) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.----

(1)  IN GENERAL.--The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with
the Secretary of Commerce, shall enter into a memorandum of
understanding or cooperative agreement with an entity or
organization with a demonstrated record in tribal
communities of defining, introducing, developing, and
sustaining American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native
Hawaiian tourism and related activities in a manner that
respects and honors native traditions and values.

(2)  COORDINATION.--The memorandum of understanding or cooperative
agreement described in paragraph (1) shall formalize a role
for the organization or entity to serve as a facilitator
between the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of
Commerce and the Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and
Native Hawaiian organizations----

(A)  to identify areas where technical assistance is needed
through consultations with Indian tribes, tribal organizations,
and Native Hawaiian organizations to empower the Indian tribes,
tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian organizations to
participate fully in the tourism Industry; and

(B)  to provide a means for the delivery of technical
assistance and coordinate the delivery of the assistance to
Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and Native Hawaiian
organizations in collaboration with the Secretary of the
Interior, the Secretary of Commerce, and other entities with
distinctive experience, as appropriate.

(3)  FUNDING.--There are authorized to be appropriated through each
of the named agencies, including but not limited to, the
Department of the Interior and the Department of Commerce,
for assistance for the organization or entity in paragraph
(1) such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal
years of allocation. In addition, subject to the
availability of appropriations, the head of each Federal
agency, including the Secretary of the Interior, the
Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Transportation, the
Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, and the Secretary of Labor shall obligate any
funds made available to the head of the agency to cover
implementation incurred by the organization or entity
described in paragraph (1) in carrying out programs or
activities of the agency.

CONCLUSION

When done well, tourism and related economic development provide
social and economic stability to the most remote rural communities and
mainstream city neighborhoods, complementing the effort of American
Indian, Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian enterprises, businesses,
organizations, and agencies working to build economies and contribute
to the growth of the U.S. tourism industry. Tourism, including
agritourism, outdoor recreation, eco-tourism, astro-tourism and more
brings revenue to Native Nations and communities providing jobs,
localized investments and the perpetuation of cultural practices; all
of which contributes to the resiliency of Native Nations and
communities. AIANTA stands ready to help rebuild Native Nations and
communities and supports full implementation of the NATIVE Act to build
a brighter future.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Sherry Rupert, CEO, American
Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Please list and describe the changes that need to be
made to any federal program to ensure that tribal-led tourism and the
larger U.S. tourism industry are working together to promote tourism in
the United States.

Answer. In response to your inquiry regarding changes needed in
federal programs to facilitate collaboration between tribal-led tourism
and the broader U.S. tourism industry, several key adjustments are
warranted.
Firstly, with regard to the Native American Tourism and Improving
Visitor Experience (NATIVE) Act, it is imperative that the designated
entity providing technical assistance and training to tribes in
Indigenous tourism be an expert in the field. This ensures that tribes
receive tailored support and guidance from knowledgeable professionals
who understand the unique challenges and opportunities within
Indigenous tourism.
Additionally, within the Department of the Interior, cultural
tourism should be recognized and treated as a partner rather than
solely as a grantee. This shift in perspective acknowledges the
valuable contributions of cultural tourism initiatives and fosters a
collaborative approach between tribes, cultural tourism entities, and
other stakeholders. By treating cultural tourism as a partner, federal
programs can better leverage tribal expertise and resources to promote
tourism in the United States effectively.
Furthermore, it is essential for federal programs to prioritize
meaningful engagement and collaboration with tribal communities
throughout the development and implementation of tourism initiatives.
This includes consulting tribes on decision-making processes,
incorporating traditional knowledge and cultural perspectives into
tourism strategies, and ensuring that tribal voices are heard and
respected.
Overall, by implementing these changes and fostering genuine
partnerships between tribal-led tourism and the larger U.S. tourism
industry, federal programs can enhance their effectiveness in promoting
tourism in the United States while respecting and honoring Indigenous
cultures and traditions.

Question 2. Can you expand on your written testimony where you
mentioned how you've seen the Department of Commerce and Department of
the Interior work together--or not work together--on Native tourism.
Are there any areas or programs where Congress should instruct them to
work together?

Answer. In response to your inquiry regarding the collaboration
between the Department of Commerce and the Department of the Interior
in native tourism initiatives, it is evident that both agencies play
pivotal roles in implementing the Native American Tourism and Improving
Visitor Experience (NATIVE) Act. However, we have observed challenges
in their collaboration, particularly concerning the allocation of
resources.
It has come to our attention that the Department of Commerce has
not received appropriations to facilitate the implementation of the
NATIVE Act, despite its designation as one of the primary agencies
responsible for this task. This deficiency in funding hampers the
effective execution of the Act and impedes the collaborative efforts
between the two departments.
To address this issue, we recommend that Congress instructs both
the Department of the Interior and the Department of Commerce to work
together more closely, particularly in securing appropriations for
native tourism initiatives. Specifically, we advocate for an amendment
to Section 4(d)(3) of the NATIVE Act, which pertains to funding, to
include appropriations for both agencies. By ensuring adequate funding
for both departments, Congress can foster stronger collaboration and
enhance the implementation of the NATIVE Act to benefit native tourism
initiatives.

Question 3. Your written testimony mentioned that further technical
assistance is needed for tribes that are working to establish tourism
businesses in their communities. Can you expand on that?

3a) What technical assistance does AIANTA currently provide and
what expertise does AIANTA want to provide for the future?

Answer. In alignment with our previous testimony, we emphasize that
the American Indian Alaska Native Tourism Association (AIANTA) stands
as the singular national Native organization exclusively devoted to
advancing cultural tourism for American Indians, Alaska Natives, and
Native Hawaiians. For a span exceeding 25 years, AIANTA has diligently
furnished technical aid and training to these communities, fostering
economic development, and safeguarding cultural heritage through the
fostering and expansion of cultural tourism initiatives.
Throughout this duration, AIANTA has cultivated partnerships,
forged relationships, and established an extensive network within the
United States tourism sector, traversing the realms of travel trade,
media, and now extending globally as a founding collaborator in the
establishment of Destination Original International Tourism, a Global
Indigenous Collective. Guided by international Indigenous tourism
leaders, this collective endeavors to assert leadership in the
cultivation and promotion of authentic Indigenous tourism destinations
via innovative partnerships.
Presently, AIANTA actively engages with the 574 Tribal Nations
nationwide, alongside tribal organizations and small Native-owned
enterprises operating within the Indigenous tourism sector. We provide
vital training, technical assistance, and resources, including both
training opportunities and funding avenues, through direct outreach,
webinars, training sessions, and an annual conference dedicated to
Indigenous Tourism. Additionally, AIANTA offers a professional
certificate in sustainability, empowering stakeholders to implement
sustainable practices within their tourism enterprises.
Our immediate focal point revolves around evaluating the readiness
of these enterprises for market and export endeavors. It is our earnest
desire to persist in offering training programs tailored to bridge the
existing gaps for those businesses not yet primed for the visitor
marketplace. Furthermore, upon achieving readiness for engagement with
the visitor marketplace, these enterprises necessitate robust promotion
both domestically and internationally, to apprise potential visitors of
their presence and the transformative experiences and destinations they
offer.
Thank you for your attention to our ongoing efforts in advancing
Indigenous tourism initiatives.

Question 4. In your written testimony, you touched on Native
nations and communities slowly recovering from the impact COVID-19
shutdowns had on tourism. How can Congress support Tribal Nations and
communities to ensure resiliency in the future?

Answer. In response to your inquiry regarding the recovery of
Native nations and communities from the adverse impacts of COVID-19
shutdowns on tourism, we appreciate the opportunity to provide insights
on how Congress can extend support to ensure resilience in the future.
Congress can further aid Native Nations and communities in their
post-COVID recovery by maintaining appropriations for tourism capacity
building. Such funding should be comprehensive, encompassing support
for program development and tourism projects to bolster tourism
infrastructure.
Moreover, a crucial aspect that warrants attention is the need for
robust promotion, both domestically and internationally, to raise
awareness among potential visitors of the rich cultural experiences
offered by Native Nations and communities. Therefore, we urge your
support for a legislative solution that integrates Indigenous Tourism
into federal funding mechanisms in the event of similar crises in the
future.
The travel and tourism sector demonstrated unprecedented
mobilization efforts to safeguard travel infrastructure and prevent
systemic collapse in the face of the profound disruptions caused by
COVID-19. Historically, this industry has shown adeptness in
acknowledging and addressing the inherent challenges of tourism,
exemplified by initiatives like the establishment of Brand USA.
Recognizing the imperative for the United States to maintain
competitiveness in the multi-billion-dollar visitor market, Brand USA
was developed to foster collaborative and cohesive branding and
marketing strategies on a global scale. Funded by Travel Promotion Fund
visitor fees, Brand USA has yielded a substantial annual economic
impact of $56 billion.
In line with these successful models, AIANTA proposes the enactment
of separate legislation, akin to Brand USA and the Travel Promotion Act
of 2009, to support a sustainable, centralized approach to marketing
and nurturing tourism businesses and employment opportunities within
Native Nations and communities. This legislation would address the
distinctive challenges faced by American Indians, Alaska Natives, and
Native Hawaiians in fostering and enhancing cultural tourism programs
and products.
The envisioned legislation would establish a native-led nonprofit
entity with the mission to define, introduce, grow, and sustain
American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian tourism, while also
providing direct funding for cultural tourism development. By
instituting a dedicated revenue source, such as the Travel Promotion
Fund visitor fee, Native Nations and communities will receive tailored
support for cultural tourism initiatives alongside marketing assistance
to promote their offerings domestically and globally.
Thank you for considering our recommendations to fortify the
resilience of Native nations and communities in the tourism sector.

Question 5. In your experience, what is the difficulty level for
tribes to identify and access federal economic developmental programs,
and how could Congress alleviate any issues?

Answer. In our experience, tribes often encounter significant
challenges in identifying and accessing federal economic development
programs. These difficulties stem from various factors, including
complex eligibility criteria, bureaucratic barriers, and limited
resources for navigating the application process. One notable obstacle
is the requirement for matching funds, which poses a significant
barrier for tribes with constrained financial capacities. As a result,
many tribes are unable to leverage federal economic development
programs to their full potential.
To alleviate these issues, Congress could implement measures such
as establishing set-aside funding specifically designated for tribal
economic development initiatives. This approach would provide tribes
with dedicated resources tailored to their unique needs, eliminating
the burden of matching funds and ensuring equitable access to economic
development opportunities. Additionally, streamlining application
procedures, enhancing technical assistance and outreach efforts, and
fostering partnerships between federal agencies and tribal entities
could further facilitate access to federal programs for tribes.
By implementing these measures, Congress can empower tribes to
overcome barriers and effectively utilize federal economic development
programs to promote sustainable economic growth and prosperity within
their communities.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for that very informative testimony.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Bacon for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND BACON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE YUROK
TRIBE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, KLAMATH, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Bacon. Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting
me to speak on behalf of the Yurok Tribe's Economic Development
Corporation.
My name is Raymond Bacon. I am an enrolled member of the
Yurok Tribe. I have served as Director of Economic Development
Corporation for 4 years and have worked in the tribal gaming
industry for approximately 30.
Economic diversification is critical for developing
prosperous tribal economies. Through strategic investments,
tribal communities can leverage our unique cultural heritage,
natural resources, and local expertise to explore new
industries.
This diversification not only reduces reliance on volatile
markets, but also creates employment opportunities, stimulates
local economic growth, and empowers tribal communities to
achieve greater self-sufficiency.
In utilizing public and private partnerships to access
technical assistance, funding, and market opportunities, we can
focus on creating long-term prosperity for generations to come.
As California's largest Native American tribe, we operate
13 businesses with four sister corporations, and the success of
earlier investments like our hotel has allowed the Tribe to
pivot to several other economic development projects. So, I
have firsthand knowledge of the benefits a diverse tribal
economy can bring.
Recently, we expanded our business operations to diversify
even further. These new initiatives include a golf course,
LiDAR mapping via Yurok Aviation, and our fuel mart division.
The fuel mart division is a prime example of how we can
successfully partner with other agencies and entities to
accomplish shared goals. Here, we leverage the EDA funding to
help the realization of an $8 million fuel mart travel center
in the heart of Yurok ancestral territory.
This significant investment both demonstrates our
commitment to economic growth and emphasizes our dedication to
preserving and revitalizing our ancestral lands.
Another exciting venture for the corporation is the
successful developing of our ecotourism infrastructure. In
Yurok country, our visitor center serves as a hub and a
platform to educate visitors on Yurok culture, affirming our
presence in our ancestral territory.
On average, thousands of travelers pass through our visitor
center each year. Through this, we have been able to establish
a business allowing visitors to take a journey back in time in
a traditional Yurok dugout canoe.
This immersive experience offers guests a firsthand look at
our cultural heritage and deep connection to the Klamath River
while also promoting ecotourism.
And again, our partnership with the Federal Government
played an important role in the success of this initiative. Our
center received direct funding from the Scenic Byways Program.
In addition to sharing our heritage and lands through
ecotourism, harnessing our natural resources into renewable
energy also plays a significant role in supporting our economic
diversification.
For example, the Yurok Tribe has recently partnered with
CalFresh to install solar energy systems for enhancing food
storage capacity in the upper region of our reservation.
And beyond renewable energy, tribes can also continue to
leverage their fish and wildlife. Salmon from the Klamath River
has long been a vital subsistence resource for our Tribe,
serving as a primary food source and holding significant
cultural importance.
Ensuring ongoing access to salmon and preserving the
Klamath River are central components of our Tribe's
diversification efforts.
We are proud of our Tribe's long history as experts in
river restoration. And due to the decline in salmon populations
in our waterways, we have directed great focus and resources to
the Yurok Construction Corporation to conduct vital restoration
work on the Klamath and the Sacramento Rivers and Redwood
Creek.
Tribes need economies that can quickly adapt to ever-
changing economic conditions, sustain and employ their
communities, and help preserve their people's cultural
identities.
In focusing on building diverse tribal economies, we can
create a resilient foundation that can weather the otherwise
turbulent impact of single market failures and foster
sustainable growth for the future of our Native communities.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Bacon follows:]
Prepared Statement of Raymond Bacon, Executive Director, Yurok Tribe
Economic Development Corporation

I. Introduction

Chairman Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak on behalf of the Yurok
Tribe's Economic Development Corporation.
My name is Raymond Bacon. I am an enrolled member of the Yurok
Tribe. I have served as Director of the Economic Development
Corporation for 4 years and have worked in the tribal gaming industry
for approximately 30 years.
Economic diversification is critical for developing prosperous
tribal economies. Through strategic investments, tribal communities can
leverage our unique cultural heritage, natural resources, and local
expertise to explore new industries such as eco-tourism, renewable
energy, and fisheries.
II. Prioritizing Economic Diversification Has Broad Positive Impacts On
Tribal Communities And Their Neighbors

By prioritizing infrastructure and entrepreneurial initiatives,
tribes can attract outside investment while simultaneously preserving
our cultural identity and environmental integrity. This diversification
not only reduces reliance on volatile industries but also creates
employment opportunities and stimulates local economic growth, thereby
empowering tribal communities to achieve greater self-sufficiency and
resilience against economic downturns.
Moreover, economic diversification in tribal economies stimulates
intergenerational wealth accumulation and promotes social cohesion
within communities. By developing a spirit of innovation and
entrepreneurship, tribes can empower our youth to explore new career
paths and contribute to the sustainable development of our ancestral
lands. Education and vocational training programs tailored to local
needs and opportunities can equip tribal members with the skills and
knowledge needed to thrive in emerging industries.
Partnerships with government agencies, private businesses, and
nonprofit organizations can help provide tribes with access to
technical assistance, funding, and market opportunities. Through these
collaborative efforts and strategic planning, our tribal economies can
focus on creating long-term prosperity and well-being for future
generations.
Additionally, the benefits resulting from diversification efforts
transcend the reservation and allows for positive economic impact to
snowball into local economies. For example, our Tribe's economic feats
have allowed for additional spending in the local communities of Del
Norte and Humboldt counties. So, not only is diversification a
financially prudent agenda for the tribe, but it also allows us to be
good neighbors to adjacent communities as well.
III. The Yurok Tribe Has Benefited Greatly From Diversification Efforts

I would like to offer a few examples of the benefits
diversification offers my own Tribe, to help demonstrate the
opportunities that are unlocked when tribes pursue diverse economic
strategies and initiatives. As California's largest Native American
Tribe, we have been diligent in creating and operating 13 businesses
with four sister corporations to provide our people with several
revenue sources. The success of earlier investments, such as with our
brewery, has allowed the tribe to pivot to other economic development
projects. So, I have first-hand knowledge of the benefits that a
diverse tribal economy can bring.
Recently, we have expanded our business operations to diversify
even further. These new initiatives include a golf course, LiDAR
mapping (Yurok Aviation), and, notably, our fuel mart division. The
fuel mart division is a prime example of how we successfully partner
with other agencies and entities to accomplish important shared goals.
Our fuel mart will enhance economic development with support from EDA
funding. The realization of an $8 million fuel mart travel center in
the heart of Yurok ancestral territory not only demonstrates our
commitment to economic growth but also emphasizes our dedication to
preserving and revitalizing our ancestral lands.
This venture provides essential services for our community and
travelers while also creating jobs and generating revenue. It sets the
stage for further economic development initiatives, showcasing the
potential for sustainable growth within Indigenous territories. The
success of this endeavor underscores the importance of strategic
partnerships and funding support from organizations like the EDA in
achieving our goals.
Additionally, I should highlight the ongoing efforts of the Yurok
Telecommunications Corporation in significantly expanding broadband
accessibility in the region. Through leveraging support from the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, we are
working to deploy 62 miles of middle-mile fiber optic cable from Orrick
to Crescent City. This represents one of the largest technological
advancements in the region, as we expect the project to bring high
speed broadband to nearly 1,000 homes, 110 businesses, and 18 anchor
institutions. This groundbreaking project is a testament to our tribe's
historical endeavor, made possible through strategic partnerships and
our tribe's economic stability and sophistication.
IV. The Tribe Continues To Leverage Eco-Tourism

Another exciting development for the Corporation has been the
success of our investments in developing our eco-tourism
infrastructure. Eco-tourism can be a way for Indigenous communities to
showcase their culture, traditions, and natural resources to visitors
while promoting conservation and sustainable practices.
In Yurok Country, our visitor center serves as a hub and platform
to educate visitors on Yurok culture, affirming our presence in our
ancestral territory. And again, our partnership with the federal
government played an important role in the success of that initiative:
our center received direct funding from the scenic byways program.
On average, thousands of travelers pass through our visitor center
each year, providing us with a unique opportunity to educate them about
Yurok Country. Additionally, we've established a business allowing
visitors to take a journey back in time in a traditional redwood dugout
canoe. This immersive experience offers guests a firsthand look at our
cultural heritage and deep connection to the Klamath River, while also
promoting eco-tourism.
V. Renewable Energy And The Environment Are Integral To The Tribe's
Economic Strategy And Cultural Identity

In addition to sharing our heritage and lands through eco-tourism,
harnessing our natural resources into renewable energy also plays a
significant role in supporting economic diversification for many
tribes. Effectively utilizing wind, solar, and hydropower is both
environmentally friendly and a source of positive economic development.
The Yurok Tribe has recently partnered with Cal Fresh to install solar
energy systems for enhancing food storage capacity in the upper region
of our reservation.
Beyond embracing renewable energy sources, tribes can also continue
to leverage their fish and wildlife to encourage sustainability and
self-sufficiency. For example, salmon from the Klamath River has long
been a vital subsistence resource for the Yurok Tribe, serving as a
primary food source and holding significant cultural importance.
Ensuring ongoing access to salmon and preserving the Klamath River are
essential components of our tribe's diversification efforts. We are
proud of our Tribe's long history as experts in river restoration, and
due to the decline in salmon populations in our waterways, we have
trained our focus and significant resources on the Yurok Construction
Corporation to conduct vital restoration work on the Sacramento and
Klamath rivers and Redwood Creek. For these reasons, maintaining access
to Klamath River salmon remains pivotal to our diversification
endeavors.
VI. Conclusion

Tribes need economies that can quickly adapt to ever-changing
economic conditions, sustain and employ their communities, and help
preserve their people's cultural identities. Reliance on one, or few,
industries can undermine tribal economic health and unnecessarily leave
tribes vulnerable to external market fluctuations and stressors. In
focusing on building diverse tribal economies, we can create a
resilient foundation that can weather the otherwise turbulent impact of
single market failures and foster sustainable growth for the future of
our native communities.

Thank you. I look forward to answering your questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Raymond Bacon, Executive
Director, Yurok Economic Development Corporation

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your written testimony, you mentioned the various
partnerships tribes can form with outside businesses, government
agencies and nonprofits. Could you please elaborate on the partnerships
that Yurok has?

Answer. The Yurok Tribe greatly values the external partnerships it
has developed over the years with governments and private
organizations. Some of our most recent partnerships have included
working with government agencies such as the Economic Development
Administration (EDA), the Treasury Department, and the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration. We have also
leveraged many private partnerships, such as with CalFresh and others.
Each partnership has benefited the tribe and tribal members in its own
way, and we continue looking for ways to engage and further develop
these external relationships and others.
Last fall, the tribal Economic Development Corporation collaborated
with the EDA to fund and create an $8 million fuel mart. The fuel mart
is located in Orick, California, right in the heart of Yurok ancestral
lands. We are proud of this project and its dual significance. That is,
the fuel mart will serve as a vital revenue-generating venture for the
tribe, and, by acquiring fee-to-trust status for the land upon which
the development sits, we can offer fuel to our community at a lower
cost, leveraging our exempt status and sovereignty to save our members
money.
The Yurok Tribe also secured State Small Business Credit Initiative
(SSBCI) funding through the Treasury Department for our Community
Development Financial Institution (CDFI) program. The CDFI was
initially created to help our government address tribal entities' and
members' historically low levels of access to financial services, and
the SSBCI funding has been helpful as the tribe works to realize this
goal. That said, while the program has proven successful, its impact
was limited by our fledgling lending capacity in the finance sector
coupled with the program's requirement for match funding.
Despite the evident need for expanded resources, acquiring matching
funds posed a formidable challenge due to the tribe's restricted
discretionary budget.
Additionally, as I mentioned in my written testimony, our tribe
worked with the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration through the Department of Commerce to deploy broadband
services to thousands of homes and has partnered with CalFresh to help
increase food storage and food security on our reservation.
These are just some of the partnerships the tribe has been
fortunate enough to successfully leverage in recent years to both grow
and develop the tribe as well as improve the quality of life for tribal
members. We are pleased with the results thus far and look forward to
continuing to leverage public and private partnerships.

Question 2. In your experience, what is the difficulty level for
tribes to identify and access federal economic developmental programs,
and how could Congress alleviate any issues?

Answer. We are aware of, and have been pleased to participate in,
several federally sponsored economic development programs. However, in
my experience, tribes generally encounter a high level of difficulty
with identifying and accessing available resources. On a scale of 1 to
10, I would rank the difficulty of navigating these federal economic
developmental programs as an 8.
Several factors contribute to these hardships. First, there is a
strong need for community development and knowledge of government
opportunities for Indian Country. At times, we lack experience on the
tribal side that unnecessarily prevents, or delays, access to economic
development programs and funding.
However, even when the tribe has the appropriate experience and
resources for navigating application processes, requirements for
certain programs often prove to be too cumbersome. For example, some
programs require matching funds similar to the SSBCI example mentioned
above. Match requirements overly burden the tribe's budget and limit
the positive economic impact that well-intentioned programs can make.
Most tribes are not casino tribes, and thus they lack plentiful
discretionary funding. Accordingly, in the majority of cases, it is
challenging for the tribe to provide the necessary match.
Congress can help address these issues by simplifying and excluding
harmful requirements and through offering additional training to native
tribes to assist with navigating federal government program
applications for accessing economic development dollars. The government
should also think of ways to work with tribes to address accessibility
to housing for the professionals and talent we wish to attract. While,
at times, our tribe may receive proper training or have trainers come
to our area to help develop our staff and community, we continue to
lack adequate housing for those professionals which we rely on for
identifying and navigating government opportunities.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for your testimony, and it
is wonderful to hear of the successes of your Tribe.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lance Morgan for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LANCE MORGAN, CEO, HO-CHUNK, INC., WINNEBAGO,
WISCONSIN

Mr. Morgan. It is a pleasure to be here. I represent the
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska's development corporation, Ho-
Chunk, Inc.
We are a small to mid-sized tribe, 5,000 members,
relatively modest reservation, not a lot of natural resources.
We are small, but we punch above our weight. We always have, so
if anyone's watching back home.
The Tribe had a casino in 1992, and the state of Iowa
authorized competition surrounding us, so we could see our
future being built to crush us. And during that 2-month period
of time, the Tribe organized a tribal corporation and set up an
investment fund. And Ho-Chunk, Inc. was formed in 1994. Our
first year, we didn't have any revenues. We were brand new. We
had $400,000 revenues. I was the only employee, so I made
myself CEO.
I am a strong believer in starting at the top. And last
year, we had revenues of $419 million, both on and off the
reservation, and we have 1,800 employees. And this is from a
small rural tribe.
We do agriculture, government contracting, construction,
and real estate development. More recently, ironically, we just
got into gaming. We are taking over gaming off reservation in
Nebraska, in the cities of Omaha, Lincoln and South Sioux City.
We changed the state's constitution to make it legal for
us. That is new, by the way.
That is going to grow us by another couple of hundred
million dollars and 1,500 employees. I think what is great,
though, is the numbers are fine, but you have to think about
what it does to the community.
My people don't care if we are an international company,
they only care if their lives are better. And we have grown the
median income on our reservation from around $30,000 to $59,000
over the last 20 years.
And the number of people who now live below the median
income has dropped by 6, the number of families. The number of
families above it have grown by 188. So, we created a middle
class out of nothing.
Another statistic we are proud of is the number of college
graduates has quadrupled. We also built an entire town from
scratch called the Ho-Chunk village and we built 200 some
housing units, which is really hard to do in a rural community
on our reservation.
Ironically, we did it by creating a town that was not in
trust land status. If you look at the roles that tribes have to
play, we have really been dealt the worst hand possible. We
don't have control; our governments are imposed on us.
The legal precedents really are designed to take from us
and the trust land economic system. I wrote a paper called, The
Curse of Trust Land, if you are curious what I think about it.
It really limits the tribe's ability to tax and fund its own
revenue.
It also greatly limits individual entrepreneurs and their
ability to access capital. So, the only entity with any money
is the tribe itself. And the tribe itself is a social service
delivery entity, not a development corporation.
So, the role tribal corporations play is pretty critical in
developing tribal economies. We have to gather capital and put
it out there. I once joked that I can't believe we are Karl
Marx's last hope, but the government itself has to develop
these things.
The primary impact, because time is short, is it gives
tribes a flexible source of capital. Every time we get money
from you guys, which we are thankful for and we will take it,
but there are some sort of parameters around it, some sort of
limitation, or it is focused on low income only.
Where we are really trying to develop an economic middle
class, it doesn't help us. So, we need the Federal dollars, but
it is not very flexible. If you look at what tribes have done,
we have gotten super sophisticated.
We are getting smarter, in terms of how we invest the money
and how we structure ourselves, how we use tribal advantages.
We have really gotten sophisticated.
We are an international company because we do SBA 8(a)
contracting for you guys. So, we appreciate that. There are a
lot of financial investments being made, banks, credit lines,
credit unions, and community development institutions. Tribes
are using corporations to move up the value chain on natural
resource development, which is pretty critical.
Trust land sort of forces you to just be the lessor and get
the royalties. But if you can move up to the driller of the
pipeline, and some tribes have used the tribal structure to do
that, it has been very helpful in terms of developing these
things.
A couple of suggestions. The BIA Loan Guaranty Program has
to stay in place. That is really the only way to access capital
on trust land on the reservation.
Please allow rule on the IRS failure to rule on the tax
status of tribal corporations. I wrote a letter in 1997 on this
issue, and they were going to do it before COVID, then they are
going to do it after.
Creating uncertainty in the taxation of our entities is
really a problem. The 8(a) program is the best way for a rural
tribe to go from zero to 60. You can speed it up. You can get
development, you can get sophisticated quickly. That is very
important.
Another pet peeve of mine. Well, I think Ms. Fernandez
solved one of my pet peeves. I hated that we couldn't really
monetize tax credits, but I would like tribes to make an S-Corp
election. We can't just because it is not on the list.
If we can make an S-Corp election, then a lot of businesses
that we bought off reservation or we bought on reservation that
have to stay as state corporations because of regulatory
reasons, could be solved.
The last thing I want to mention is new market tax credits.
Give us a direct allocation. For 3 years, the feds did not
allocate anything. After much complaining, three tribal
entities got one, including an entity we partly own, the Native
American Bank.
And if you have to understand the new market tax credits,
it is a cash grab by these big entities, and they sell them off
as fast as possible. And there is nobody who is lined up to do
deals on Indian reservations because they are the hardest
possible deals.
So, you have to allocate money directly to entities that
are focused on tribal, or it will never happen.
All right. Thank you very much, I look forward to
questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Morgan as follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lance Morgan, CEO, Ho-Chunk, Inc.

Good morning, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Lance Morgan, and I am the
Chief Executive Officer of Ho-Chunk, Inc., a tribal economic
development corporation owned by the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska
(``Winnebago Tribe'' or ``Tribe''). Thank you for the opportunity to
testify at today's hearing on ``Economic Diversification to Create
Prosperous Tribal Economies.''
I. DEVELOPMENT OF HO-CHUNK, INC.

Throughout the 20th century, times were hard on the Winnebago
Reservation in northeast Nebraska. After Congress enacted the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act, the Tribe opened a casino on tribal land near
the town of Sloan, Iowa in 1992. The casino was an immediate success,
but in 1994 Iowa expanded gaming in the Tribe's primary markets. The
Tribe then realized that gaming revenues would not be a long-term
solution to the Tribe's overall goal of prosperity.
The Tribe started Ho-Chunk, Inc. in 1994 to help its people by
creating jobs and diversifying the Tribe's revenue. The name derives
from the traditional name for the Winnebago people, ``Hochungra,''
which is often shortened to Ho-Chunk. The translation of Ho-Chunk, Inc.
is ``The People, Incorporated.'' The Tribe and Ho-Chunk, Inc. set out
with the intention of transforming our community from one of extreme
poverty, to one with an emerging middle class with a variety of
employment options.
Ho-Chunk, Inc. has grown tremendously since its inception and has
made a significant economic and social impact on the Tribe. We started
with no revenues and one employee. Now, Ho-Chunk, Inc. has 1,800
employees and reached a record $419 million in revenue in 2023. We
anticipate adding another 1,500 employees and adding another $200
million in revenue in the next 18 months.
Ho-Chunk, Inc. has measurably improved the lives of tribal citizens
in less than a generation. We recently completed a community-wide
economic impact study which showed several remarkable results. In the
last 20 years, the median household income has risen 78% to $58,240 per
household. The number of families below the median household income has
dropped by 6, and the number of families above the median household
income has grown by 188 families. Additionally, the number of tribal
members with a college degree has quadrupled.
The Winnebago Tribe has also committed significant corporate
resources to building an entirely new community, called Ho-Chunk
Village. Ho-Chunk Village is an 80-acre, new urban style, walkable,
healthy community with a wide variety of housing, cultural and
entrepreneurial activities. The Tribe has also added over 220 housing
units to our small rural community in the last 7 years.
II. TRIBAL ECONOMICS AND THE ROLE OF TRIBAL CORPORATIONS

The successes of Ho-Chunk, Inc. and the Winnebago Tribe are despite
the challenging economic development environment we must navigate.
Government systems were often imposed on tribes, and the federal Indian
law system is built on precedents that were designed to limit or
outright take tribal legal and economic rights away from tribes.
Most tribal land is held in federal trust which limits a tribe's
ability to develop or use it to create traditional tax revenues. The
limited ability to create a viable taxation system forces tribes to be
dependent upon the federal government for funding basic services that
would typically be funded by locally generated tax revenues. Federal
trust land has also made homeownership, wealth creation, and
entrepreneurship very difficult for individual tribal members.
Federal funding alone is not enough to tackle the typical tribes'
social and economic issues, so tribes are compelled to create
additional revenue sources. The economic limitations created by legal
restrictions and the side effects of trust land limits tribes to just a
few economic development options--primary gaming and natural resource-
based development. The trust land system also greatly limits the
ability of individuals to access capital.
Given all the legal and economic restrictions in Indian Country,
tribes are often the only entity with any ability to raise significant
capital and are forced to try and directly develop their economies.
However, tribes are governments, not development companies, and are far
more comfortable delivering social services than managing complex
corporations.
Over the last 30 years, tribes have increasingly established quasi-
independent tribal corporate entities that allow them to bypass some of
the limitations of being a government-owned entity to evolve into
highly reactive and efficient tribal corporations.
III. IMPACT OF TRIBAL CORPORATIONS

Tribal corporate entities do have some economic, tax, and legal
advantages, but it takes time to accumulate the capital and knowledge
to maximize those advantages. Once a tribal corporation reaches a
certain level of success, it impacts the community in several ways: it
will create jobs; it will generate a flexible source of income to the
tribe that does not carry the restrictions of federal funding; and it
will also serve as a primary driver of community and social
development.
The tribal corporations are increasingly using complex business
structures to develop opportunities both on and off tribal
reservations. This combination of developing economic and legal skill
sets is increasingly setting tribes on the path of being able to
dictate how to invest in their own communities and has the potential to
create a virtuous cycle of expectation and opportunity for success for
tribal members.

Some examples of tribal corporate growth include the following:

1.  Creation of complex tribal and federally chartered holding
company structures to consolidate corporate management
functions over a broad base of businesses.

2.  Complex real estate development both on and off tribal
reservations.

3.  Creating sophisticated holding companies to perform high level
government contracting under the SBA 8(a) program.

4.  Expansion of gaming off reservation and state regulated gaming
opportunities.

5.  Ownership of several banks, credit unions and Community
Development Financial Institutions.

6.  Moving up the more profitable economic value chain of natural
resource development and not limiting themselves to just
royalties.

7.  Increasingly sophisticated financial investments.

IV. SUGGESTIONS TO HELP TRIBAL CORPORATE GROWTH

Tribal corporations are key sources of flexible capital, job
creation and social and community development. Anything that helps
tribal corporations helps tribes become more economically independent
and self-determined. Therefore, we make the following recommendations:

1.  Federal trust land greatly impacts the ability for tribal
entities to access capital, especially for reservation-
based development. The B.I.A. Loan Guaranty Program is one
of the only ways that a tribe or tribal corporation can
access capital for difficult on reservation development and
it needs to be fully funded and expanded.

2.  The IRS has not formally ruled on the taxation status of wholly-
owned tribal corporations. This issue has been on-going for
over 25 years. This ambiguity has created long term
uncertainty and has resulted in tribes being forced to form
federal corporations or tribally own limited liability
entities instead. However, this long-term uncertainty could
carry over to any tribally chartered entity and is not
helpful for long term tribal development and planning.

3.  Protect and promote the SBA 8(a) program. Government contracting
has grown remarkably over the last 20 years and is one of
the best ways for tribes without natural resources or
significant gaming revenues to expand their economies. Most
tribes create tribally chartered holding companies to
conduct their government contracting activities which makes
the lack of certainty for tax treatment even more of a
long-term problem.

4.  Tribes are currently not allowed to make an S-Corp election in
the tax code. Tribal corporations will often acquire a
company that must maintain its current status for
regulatory or licensing reasons. The inability for a tribal
corporation to make a S-Corp election takes away one of the
primary tools a tribal company utilizes to impact its
community.

5.  The New Markets Tax Credit Program is an excellent source for
tribal communities and corporate development. Indian
Country projects are complex and harder to do because of
trust land capital restrictions, so most entities who have
an allocation do not want to take the time to invest in
them. The program went three years without allocating any
tax credits to Indian Country. Recently three tribal
affiliated entities received an allocation, however, it
would be good if a small percentage of the allocation were
set aside for Indian Country.

Thank you again for the opportunity to discuss the importance of
diversifying tribal economies. I would be happy to answer any
questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Lance Morgan, CEO, Ho-Chunk, Inc.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Can you further expand on the impact of trust land on
economic development plans and whether transitioning to restricted fee
status, or another alternative would alleviate economic concerns?

Answer. Trust land is a major impediment to Indian Country's
economic growth as it cannot be sold, taxed, mortgaged, or used as
collateral. Trust land status severely restricts a tribe's ability to
use our largest asset, our land and its natural resources. Ultimately,
it leaves tribes more dependent upon the federal government.
If title to trust land were returned to tribes and individuals in
fee under a new tribal status, it could help liberate Indian Country
economically. This new tribal status must confer permanent
jurisdiction, complete with full taxation powers, to the tribe. This
would ensure that the land will always be subject to tribal
jurisdiction, regardless of the race or political classification of the
landowner.

1a) What unintended consequences should Congress seek to avoid if
establishing more processes for tribes to move land into restricted fee
status?

Answer. The federal government must uphold its general trust and
treaty obligations to Indian Country that encompasses health,
education, and housing. However, this obligation does not need to
include controlling all of our land. Tribes often chose to have their
lands held in trust because of concerns about losing jurisdiction over
those lands. As Congress seeks to assist tribes with expanding economic
development opportunities through increasing the flexibility of tribal
lands, it must ensure that this is not a prelude to some kind of back-
door termination.

Question 2. Your written testimony mentioned that it takes time for
tribal corporate entities to gain capital and knowledge to provide an
impact on their communities as well as others. Can you expand on the
path Ho-Chunk Inc. has taken to develop that expertise and instances
where Ho-Chunk Inc. may have assisted other tribal corporations in
developing that capacity?

Answer. Ho-Chunk, Inc. started small and with a simple mission to
use the Tribe's various economic and legal advantages to develop and
operate successful tribally owned businesses and to provide jobs and
opportunities for tribal members. We have utilized a ``learn by doing''
approach that has resulted in creating long-serving, effective business
managers with vast institutional knowledge. Ho-Chunk, Inc. has shared
that knowledge and expertise with over 100 tribes who have visited our
headquarters. We have also made investments in the future generation of
leaders through a multitude of internship, apprentice, scholarship,
Ambassador, and other education programs.

Question 3. In your written testimony, you brought up the
difficulties surrounding the taxation status for tribal corporations
solely owned by the tribe, mainly their ambiguous nature. Could you
elaborate further on those difficulties and how Congress could end that
uncertainty?

Answer. Uncertainty regarding tax treatment is a major impediment
to tribal growth across Indian Country. We urge the IRS to clarify the
taxation status of wholly owned tribal corporations.

Question 4. In your written testimony, you mentioned the BIA Loan
Guarantee Program and how it needs to be expanded. Please elaborate
further, especially with any policy changes the program may need from a
tribal perspective.

Answer. Considering the difficulty obtaining a loan on trust land,
the BIA's Loan Guarantee Program (``Program'') has proven to be a
reliable resource for tribes. However, the Program could be made more
efficient as it often takes a lot longer than it should to obtain a
loan. We have found that some regions are far more efficient than
others. Streamlining the Program and expanding the loans available
would have far-reaching impacts for Indian Country.

Question 5. In your experience, what is the difficulty level for
tribes to identify and access federal economic developmental programs,
and how could Congress alleviate any issues?

Answer. Over the years, Ho-Chunk, Inc. has learned of and taken
advantage of many federal economic developmental programs. However, we
acknowledge that not all tribal nations have the capacity to identify
and access these programs. Congress and the Administration should work
to ensure that tribes are aware of existing economic developmental
programs, allow for flexible capital, and give tribes the opportunity
to manage those programs.

______

Ms. Hageman. Again, your successes are impressive, and the
ideas that you have provided us with today are very helpful.
So, I thank you for your testimony.
The Chair will now recognize Members for 5 minutes for
questioning. And I am going to begin with myself.
I would like to ask Mr. Ahasteen, Ms. Rupert, and Mr.
Bacon, because I think, Mr. Morgan, you have given us some good
ideas in terms of this next question I am going to ask.
I am going to ask each of you to respond to this question.
What have you found is particularly helpful for rural
communities to expand tribal economic diversification, and what
challenges and opportunities particularly exist in the more
rural areas?
Mr. Ahasteen?
Mr. Ahasteen. I think what you really have to understand is
that in rural areas, the cost of anything is about doubled. And
without taking that into consideration, I will give you an
example.
In order for us to pave 1 mile of road, it is $3 million.
And that is insane because we have to literally purchase
materials that are off the Nation. We don't have access to our
own resources because it has just become a bureaucratic
nightmare in trying to request, even for technical assistance
from the Department of the Interior at times to develop the
mineral and leasing regulations that it requires.
And as we have stated in a previous testimony, one of the
other challenges involved is if we start going the route to
exercise our self-determination, then we lose all access to
some of the Federal resources, including the data sets.
And that is really concerning to us. Because Navajo Nation,
when we requested to start implementing some of our leasing
regulations for minerals, we wanted to start off with one or
two minerals.
We don't want to adopt the entire thing, but it just seems
that the position of the Federal Government is you have to
adopt all of it.
And that causes problems for us because there are different
minerals that require us to really think about how we are going
to develop a comprehensive, essentially an environmental policy
within our own Nation.
So, if we could figure out a way to reduce some of those
bureaucratic red tapes to access some of our resources, to help
reduce construction costs for infrastructure, that would really
help out.
Ms. Hageman. Wonderful, good ideas. And, Ms. Rupert, what
are some of the challenges and what are some of the things that
you have found particularly helpful?
Ms. Rupert. So, challenges, this is all connected, right?
Economic development, and we talked about roads. You have to
have roads in order for visitors to come out and experience
your attraction or your destination.
So, that is always a huge barrier as well. But I look at
cultural tourism as an opportunity for our rural communities,
for our rural tribes.
There is not too much infrastructure that is needed for
cultural tourism. It is all about our people, our stories, and
our places. And that is what I always tell tribes that are
struggling.
Well, who would want to come see us? And it is the
international market that is very interested in coming and
experiencing our culture. So, it is us, it is our people that
people want to come and see.
Ms. Hageman. I like that story. I don't think anyone else
has ever said it the way that you have, and I appreciate the
way that you have put that. And maybe there are ways that we
can help from the tourism standpoint.
Very quickly, Mr. Bacon, if you have some ideas on this,
and then I am going to give a challenge to all four of you
before we leave today.
So, Mr. Bacon, some of the challenges and some of the
things that have worked.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you for that question. With Yurok Economic
Development, particularly helpful for us is developing our own
workforce. And that is the main focus, is developing our staff.
As we describe it, it is grow your own because no one
really wants to live in the rural areas or move to the rural
areas.
The challenge that we have in the rural area is the lack of
adequate housing that is not HUD funded. In order to attract
these individuals that are highly qualified, we need adequate
housing within our area.
Development would be a beneficial factor.
Mr. Morgan. And, Mr. Morgan, you have also given us some
ideas of both the challenges and the things that have actually
worked.
So, here is my challenge to all four of you. Have you
identified the top five things that we could do as Congress
within your particular areas?
I know that every one of your reservations and the areas
that you represent are very different from each other. But what
I would like to do is find a way to legislatively address the
barriers that you them.
When we develop in Wyoming, whether it is oil and gas on
the reservation, it is oil and gas off the reservation, on BLM
lands, we have challenges with those barriers as well.
What I would like to do is every one of you have brought a
very interesting story today about what your needs are and what
has worked for your individual members.
What I would like you to do is bring to us the legislative
solutions you think that we could do to help you to address the
fact that you have an enormous reservation, the fact that you
might have more of an urban area, the fact that you have the
challenges with the tourism and not being able to access some
of the resources that other people can. Help us to help you.
Help us to come up with ideas for legislation. Because I am
all ears if you want to come to my office and sit down and talk
about ways that we can draft bills that will work for you, I
want to talk about it.
With that, I am going to call on the Ranking Member, Ms.
Leger Fernandez, for her 5 minutes of questioning. Thank you.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much for bringing the
distinct stories, successes, and challenges on each of your
reservations.
Mr. Bacon, your testimony and what your Tribe is doing is
just amazing. The range of activities that you are engaged in,
which I think really is key. And each of you have described the
importance of the diversification.
One thing I want to touch on, because it is something that
is looming is the Affordable Connectivity Program and funding
for that which we know is essential, especially in Indian
Country, where there is such a gap with regards to access.
That is set to expire at the end of April. There are those,
the entire Democratic Caucus wants to renew it. We know we have
some Republicans who want to see it renewed.
But tell us, what would it mean if that were to expire?
Since you are in that business.
Mr. Bacon. Yes. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member.
Currently, we are still in the development phase of our
telecommunications corporation. We are looking to provide
access to approximately 1,000 households within our service
area.
One thing that we have seen and we acknowledge is the
service area is a checkerboard of classified as low income. It
is kind of mixed in between. I do see that there would be a
negative effect on tribal communities if that were to expire.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you.
And Mr. Ahasteen, thank you as always, for coming and
sharing the stories of your very large reservation, your very
large and wonderful, diverse Dine experiences.
You pointed out that, I liked this interrupted progress
that you described. And that some of the policies and resource
development has left a bad legacy.
I will continue to fight for the RICO amendments. We are
not giving that up because the uranium mining needs, we need to
address that. You pointed out that oil and gas has been a mixed
bag, has maybe left more bad than good.
But we are looking forward, what do we do next? Even as we
try to address some of what is left behind. The forward
looking. I really appreciated that you gave us very specific
examples of a solution right in each of yours of what do we do
with DOE.
You had that in your written testimony. But can you sort of
share with us a little bit of what you would like us to focus
on? You had, I think, maybe five different proposals, but what
do you want us to hear this morning?
Mr. Ahasteen. Thank you, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez.
Really, what we want to address are the jurisdictional
barriers that limit our progress in being able to exercise our
full self-determination. And that is, again, focusing on giving
tribes the exclusive jurisdiction to manage their affairs.
It seems a little redundant that we have to obtain three
different environmental clearances for the same project and
that the Federal agencies are not talking or working with one
another.
And one of those specific examples is with a lot of our
road projects with the Navajo Department of Transportation. The
Federal Highways Administration will go through their clearance
processes, but then the BIA will require processes on their own
and will not accept Federal Highways as environmental clearance
documents.
So, that is just a barrier. And on top of that, we have
tribal law. The Navajo Nation does its own environmental
clearance review as well.
So, having to go through three different environmental
clearance processes, three different right-of-ways, is
sometimes challenging, depending on a lot of the jurisdictional
barriers.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. And some of the potential
solutions that each of you actually set and gave us in your
written testimony, I think, are things that we can work on from
the why don't they include the entire Navajo Nation in the MLS,
right?
There are certain ways in which we can address issues. You
also point out the importance of credit. And Mr. Morgan, I did
about a billion dollars' worth of financing, which doesn't
sound like a lot, but New Mexico is very small, and access to
credit is so essential.
And you pointed that out as well. If we don't get credit
into Indian Country, you can't build the businesses. And the
concept of the new markets tax credit set aside, I think, is
something we have all thought a lot about and would like to
push.
And the fact that we don't have the IRS actually telling us
what to do with tribal corporations when we have been begging
them for it, and they have been promising that to us.
So, there are both legislative changes that we will
definitely take on. These are things we are very interested in
doing, but also pushing for those clarifications that we should
be getting out of Treasury that they have promised us for
decades.
We will join in on pushing them at that, and we will follow
up with you because we ran out of time. And thank you so very
much, and I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Carl
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you to all the
folks that took time from their lives to come in to speak
today. Your words are not falling on deaf ears.
Mr. Ahasteen, I said it better, didn't I? Tell Madam
Chairwoman that I said it better.
Mr. Ahasteen. All I say is that you just fake laugh and add
Steen at the end.
Mr. Carl. OK. I have been a county commissioner for 8 years
prior to this job. I have built many a mile of road, and I am
telling you, $3 million for a mile of road is outrageous.
And if nothing else comes out of this meeting, I understand
your frustrations with that. So, I am open to help you in any
way I can.
With that said, thank you for joining us today. It is
really great to have someone who understands, I am still
talking to you, sir, understands the challenges facing the
tribal communities firsthand.
As I often say, only those who live it truly understand it.
And I think everyone in this room understands what I am saying
there. For decades, the Federal Government has been working
towards self-determination of the tribes, allowing them to
manage their own services and economic plans.
Tribes have been trying different ways to diversify their
economy to benefit their members, create a substantial system,
but you know that there is a lot of red tape and unclear rules
that make it tough for them to start businesses and to grow.
Mr. Ahasteen, how can Congress do more to support tribes in
making their own development, especially when it comes to
broadening their economics and dealing with all the
regulations? What can we do to help that?
Mr. Ahasteen. One of the priorities of President Nygren has
been to really identify and address what specific
jurisdictional barriers are preventing us.
I think one of the main issues is, again, the exclusive
authority to actually conduct our businesses free of
restrictions by the Federal Government and at times state
governments, depending on, again, which project that you are
working on.
But even a lot of the funding that has come out that is
supposed to benefit tribes, we find it based off of policies
that haven't been updated in 20 plus years that really restrict
the tribes' abilities to access those dollars.
And one of the examples is the tax credits that were made
available under the Inflation Reduction Act and the Navajo
Nation not being able to utilize that because of a non-
metropolitan statistical area or a metropolitan statistical
area definition that actually includes counties with tribal
data.
And some of the border towns are doing well. Flagstaff,
Coconino County has probably the highest income for the Arizona
region, but yet that is grouped in with some of the reservation
territories like Loop, who is significantly economically
disadvantaged.
So, being disqualified from the tax credits that were meant
to actually benefit tribal communities is something that I
think is an unintended consequence.
I think really just taking a look back at all of the
regulations and having appropriate consultation with the
Federal agencies to updating a lot of those statistical area
mappings, I think would very well benefit tribes in helping us
move forward in securing our future, especially in the energy
sector.
Mr. Carl. Thank you.
Mr. Bacon, real quick. Yesterday, I had one of the tribes
come in my office and talk to me about the small business loans
and the fear of where this is going on the small business side.
They basically were rating a particular tribe as no longer
as a small business. Can you give me some idea what the impact
is going to be from that?
Mr. Bacon. Congressman, you are referring to the SSBCI?
Mr. Carl. Yes.
Mr. Bacon. Absolutely. We were one of the tribes that
received the SSBCI. Actually, we were one of the first to
receive that funding source.
One of the challenges in receiving that funding source was
there was a requirement of match funds, and most tribes are new
to the lending capacity side of things. So, you are subject to
what your lending capacity is from previous. With the Yurok
Tribe, our lending capacity was at $1.2 million, which is not
much.
But part of that is we had to have discretionary funds to
match that $1.2 million. So, really, we didn't build a big
giant fund, but we are trying to leverage that to be successful
in funding other tribal initiatives.
There is a bit of a challenge with it. If the matching
funds didn't exist, it would be quite successful.
Mr. Carl. Would you reach out to my office and see what we
can do to work together and see if we can get that addressed?
Mr. Bacon. Absolutely.
Mr. Carl. Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Carl.
And the Chair will now recognize Mr. Huffman for 5 minutes
of questioning.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am really impressed with this panel of witnesses. I
appreciate the testimony and the ideas from all of you.
I want to go back to Mr. Bacon from my district, of course,
because I have a special interest in tribal economic
development that also embraces sustainability that is good for
the environment and our natural resources.
And the Yurok Tribe has been a real leader in this space,
of course. We want to see, as we move forward with things like
offshore wind and renewable energy transition, not just
consultation with tribes, but a seat at the table for tribes.
And you have become leaders in broadband, construction, and
so many other things. I would love to see tribal expertise and
inclusion in this energy transition as we go forward.
And I am definitely committed to working with the Yurok
Tribe to make sure that that happens. But I want to bring it
back to climate change and its impact on fisheries. Something
that is not only culturally significant for the Yurok and other
tribes, but very economically significant.
And I want to just ask you if you could speak to how
funding from programs like the Scenic Byways Program has
actually helped facilitate some of your work at this
intersection of economic development and natural resource
protection?
Mr. Bacon. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
The Scenic Byways Program has been a real benefit to the
Yurok Tribe. We are fortunate enough to have a strong
relationship with Federal and state agencies.
We are able to acquire the funds through the Scenic Byways
Program, which we used to develop a visitor center.
The center provides an opportunity to tell our story for
the Yurok people and our members to express their artistic
talents and sell goods within that visitor center.
This also is a platform for ecotourism. We are fortunate
enough to be able to run a business of redwood Yurok canoe
tours. And this is a scenic ecotourist business that takes you
on a journey down the Klamath River and connects you with what
really the Yurok people are about, which is the Klamath River.
So, we like that relationship with the Federal and state
agencies, and we continue to maintain that relationship.
Mr. Huffman. And I have seen some of the great work that
the Yurok Construction Company is doing. And I have also seen
young people who have come up through your workforce
development efforts and are operating heavy equipment,
restoring Redwood Creek and other areas in ways that will
enhance that fishery. Build on the ecotourism.
Could you speak a little bit about how that construction
enterprise is contributing to your economic development and
also the issue of food sovereignty?
I know that we haven't talked a lot about that yet, but you
have a unique partnership with CalFresh that is doing some
interesting and innovative things that are helping address food
sovereignty.
Mr. Bacon. Absolutely. We know the Klamath salmon is a
vital source of subsistence for the Yurok Tribe. As we say, the
Yurok Tribe doesn't exist without salmon. It is who we are as a
people.
With the decline of the salmon population, we have made a
strong pivot towards the restoration efforts in the
preservation of salmon. It has always been a priority of our
Tribe.
The restoration effort is spearheaded by the Yurok
Construction Corporation and our fisheries division for the
Tribe.
Currently, they are working on replanting and reseeding as
the waters come down from the dams and the reservoirs are
exposed.
So, there is a massive effort going on right now to plant
traditional plants, native plants within that area, trees, oak
trees, the shrubbery that takes place and holds the banks
stable for the river to ebb and flow.
The benefits of this is we hope to see that the salmon
return immediately, and the long-term benefit is our effort to
restore an entire ecosystem to thrive as it once did in the
beginning.
You had mentioned the relationship with CalFresh. Since
COVID had come into play here, we recognized that there was a
shortage of food storage in the upper part of our reservation.
So, we were fortunate enough to partner with CalFresh to
install a small solar grid that supported refrigeration. In
that effort, the refrigeration units allowed us to partner with
our Food Sovereignty Program.
Our Food Sovereignty Program grows fresh vegetables that
are seasonal. In return, that allows us to distribute those
healthy foods back to our tribal membership. So, we were really
appreciative to have that relationship.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
I want to thank the witnesses for your valuable testimony
and the Members for your questioning. I also want to reiterate
what I said, which is that I really encourage you to contact
us, contact the staff, contact my office, and talk to us, help
us to draft the types of legislation that you are talking
about.
I think if there has been one primary issue that I have
focused on as Chairman of this Subcommittee, it is autonomy and
sovereignty.
I think it is absolutely critical that our tribes take
responsibility for their circumstances, and that we also make
sure that they have the freedom, the ability, and the resources
to do what you need to do in terms of taking care of your
members.
I truly believe that that is where the success for our
tribes and our tribal members are going to come from, it is
going to come from you, not the Department of the Interior or
the bureaucracy back here.
I love the idea of giving you more autonomy to make the
decisions that you need to make for your members so that you
can succeed.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing if they are submitted.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit such questions to the Committee Clerk by 5 p.m., on
Wednesday, February 21, 2024, and the hearing record will be
held open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned. Thank you.

[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

Statement for the Record
United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund

The United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund
(USET SPF) is pleased to provide the House Subcommittee on Indian and
Insular Affairs (SIIA, or Subcommittee) with the following testimony
for the record of the February 15, 2024 oversight hearing, ``Economic
Diversification to Create Prosperous Tribal Economies.'' This hearing
focused on the diversification of Tribal economies to expand services
to Tribal citizens and build sustainable economic systems to benefit
current and future generations. It also focused on how Tribal Nations
have sought to develop our natural resources, unique Tribal-centric
tourism opportunities, and establish Tribally chartered corporations to
increase economic opportunities. USET SPF supports the efforts of
Tribal Nations to exercise our sovereignty and self-determination to
create viable and sustainable economic opportunities and job creation
for our communities. However, many federal programs' management and
funding systems operate under an archaic model of paternalism that does
not support Tribal Nation sovereignty and self-determination.
In addition to the focus of SIIA's February 15, 2024 hearing, USET
SPF offers several additional priorities that must also receive the
same consideration from Congress and the Subcommittee to empower Tribal
Nations to pursue efforts in Nation rebuilding. These include the
removal of bureaucratic and legal barriers to Tribal Nations pursuing
economic development, tax parity, support for the restoration of Tribal
homelands, and the expansion of self-governance contracting and
compacting across the federal government. These areas must be addressed
to ensure that we have economic parity and equitable opportunities to
pursue initiatives that support our economic growth and create jobs for
our Tribal citizens. We also anticipate, and support, forthcoming
guidance from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to clarify the tax
status of Tribally chartered corporations (TCCs), which has been an
issue that has long stifled the economic progress of our Tribal Nations
and our further pursuits and priorities of Nation rebuilding. In
addition to Treasury's clarification of the tax status of TCCs we
strongly recommend that Congress and SIIA explore other legal
clarifications of the Internal Revenue Service's (IRS) tax code to
ensure legal permanency of the tax status of our TCCs. This issue is
critically important and timely so that Tribal Nations can fully take
advantage of the numerous tax credits authorized under the Inflation
Reduction Act.
USET Sovereignty Protection Fund (USET SPF) is a non-profit, inter-
tribal organization advocating on behalf of thirty-three (33) federally
recognized Tribal Nations from the Northeastern Woodlands to the
Everglades and across the Gulf of Mexico.\1\ USET SPF is dedicated to
promoting, protecting, and advancing the inherent sovereign rights and
authorities of Tribal Nations and in assisting its membership in
dealing effectively with public policy issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ USET SPF member Tribal Nations include: Alabama-Coushatta Tribe
of Texas (TX), Catawba Indian Nation (SC), Cayuga Nation (NY),
Chickahominy Indian Tribe (VA), Chickahominy Indian Tribe-Eastern
Division (VA), Chitimacha Tribe of Louisiana (LA), Coushatta Tribe of
Louisiana (LA), Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians (NC), Houlton Band of
Maliseet Indians (ME), Jena Band of Choctaw Indians (LA), Mashantucket
Pequot Indian Tribe (CT), Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe (MA), Miccosukee
Tribe of Indians of Florida (FL), ), Mi'kmaq Nation (ME), Mississippi
Band of Choctaw Indians (MS), Mohegan Tribe of Indians of Connecticut
(CT), Monacan Indian Nation (VA), Nansemond Indian Nation (VA),
Narragansett Indian Tribe (RI), Oneida Indian Nation (NY), Pamunkey
Indian Tribe (VA), Passamaquoddy Tribe at Indian Township (ME),
Passamaquoddy Tribe at Pleasant Point (ME), Penobscot Indian Nation
(ME), Poarch Band of Creek Indians (AL), Rappahannock Tribe (VA), Saint
Regis Mohawk Tribe (NY), Seminole Tribe of Florida (FL), Seneca Nation
of Indians (NY), Shinnecock Indian Nation (NY), Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of
Louisiana (LA), Upper Mattaponi Indian Tribe (VA) and the Wampanoag
Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) (MA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Economic Development in Indian Country and the USET SPF Region

Prior to European contact, Tribal Nations, including USET SPF
members, had a long history of dynamic economies and governance
structures. Robust trade networks connected Tribal Nations and the
goods we produced. As with other aspects of Tribal governance and
infrastructure, the removal, termination, and assimilation policies of
the United States government negatively impacted our traditional
economic trade. Over the course of centuries, Tribal Nations ceded
millions of acres of land and extensive resources to the U.S.--
oftentimes by force--in exchange for which it is legally and morally
obligated to provide benefits and services in perpetuity. Because of
this historic and ongoing diplomatic relationship, the federal
government has trust and treaty obligations to support Tribal self-
governance and self-determination, along with rebuilding Tribal Nations
and economies. Unfortunately, at no point has the federal government
fully delivered upon and upheld these obligations.
In addition to being relegated to fractions of our original
homelands, which can be in remote areas, Tribal Nations lack
governmental parity in economic development opportunities and treatment
under the U.S. tax code. All Tribal Nations, especially USET SPF member
Tribal Nations, vary in levels of economic activity, capacity, and
development. Some Tribal Nations have decades of experience and
familiarity with economic development initiatives, while some are just
starting to pursue these initiatives. This diversity demands that
federal policy not adopt a one-size-fits all approach in supporting
Tribal Nations and businesses to pursue economic development
initiatives to support our communities and engage in Nation rebuilding.
With nearly every aspect of economic development regulated by the
federal government, economic progress in Indian Country is often
stymied by burdens on Tribal Nations and businesses. These burdens have
contributed to a perpetual cycle of social and economic hardship in our
communities and are a remnant of paternalism that continues to exist
today, despite an evolution away from past policies of termination and
assimilation toward greater Tribal self-determination and self-
governance.

In 2012, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors issued a report on,
Growing Economies in Indian Country, that outlined eight issues as
fundamental challenges to realizing economic growth in Indian Country.
USET SPF's member Tribal Nations, with few exceptions, still
disproportionately contend with these same challenges, such as:

1. Insufficient access to capital;

2. Capacity and capital constraints of small business;

3.  Insufficient workforce development, financial management
training, and business education;

4. Tribal governance constraints;

5.  Regulatory constraints on land held in trust and land designated
as restricted use;

6. Underdeveloped physical infrastructure;

7. Insufficient research and data; and

8. Lack of regional collaboration.

Though this report is over a decade old, its relevancy today on the
current state of economic challenges in Indian Country highlights the
failures of the federal government in upholding its trust and treaty
obligations to Tribal Nations. Congress and the Administration must
work to free Tribal Nations from over-burdensome laws and regulations
that impede our social and economic success. This is especially
important in an environment of the federal government's failures to
uphold trust and treaty obligations to fully fund programs and services
for Indian Country. Similar to other governments, Tribal Nations
provide vital economic, social, health, and public safety services to
our people. As it is for any other sovereign, economic sovereignty is
essential to our ability to be self-determining and self-sufficient.
While our economic success in no way diminishes or eliminates the
United States' moral and legal trust and treaty obligations to Tribal
Nations, it remains critical to our continued Nation rebuilding.
Building strong, vibrant, and mature economies is more than just
business development. It requires comprehensive planning to ensure that
our economies have the necessary infrastructure, services, and
opportunities for our citizens to thrive. And when Tribal Nations and
our citizens have economic success, surrounding communities and their
citizens share in the benefits. This results in stronger Tribal Nations
and a stronger America.
Ensure Tribal Nation Economic Parity

The federal government has a responsibility to ensure that federal
tax law treats Tribal Nations in a manner consistent with our sovereign
governmental status, as reflected under the U.S. Constitution and
numerous federal laws, treaties, and federal court decisions. With this
in mind, we remain focused on the advancement of tax reform that would
address inequities in the tax code and eliminate state dual taxation.
Revenue generated within Indian Country continues to be taken outside
our borders or otherwise falls victim to a lack of parity. Similarly,
Tribal governments continue to lack many of the same benefits and
flexibility offered to other units of government under the tax code.
This largely prevents Tribal Nations from achieving an economic
multiplier effect, allowing for each dollar to turn over multiple times
within a given Tribal economy. The failure of the federal government to
recognize Tribal Nations in a manner consistent with our sovereign
governmental status has hindered our efforts to rebuild and grow our
economies.
USET SPF continues to press Congress for changes to the U.S. tax
code that would provide governmental parity and economic development to
Tribal Nations. These efforts included support in previous Congresses
for the Tribal Tax and Investment Reform Act. This bill specified the
treatment of Tribal Nations as states with respect to bond issuance and
modified the treatment of pension and employee benefit plans maintained
by a Tribal Government. It also aimed to modify the treatment of Tribal
foundations and charities, improve the effectiveness of Tribal child
support enforcement agencies, and recognize Tribal governments for
purposes of determining whether a child has special needs eligible for
the adoption tax credit. USET SPF continues to urge the Subcommittee to
support similar legislative efforts in the 118th Congress to increase
Tribal Nation economic parity.
Address Dual Taxation in Indian Country

Dual taxation hinders Tribal Nations from achieving our own revenue
generating potential. Although Tribal Nations have authority to tax
non-citizens doing business in Indian Country, when other jurisdictions
can tax those same non-citizens for the same transactions, Tribal
Nations must lower their taxes to keep overall pricing at rates the
market can bear or forgo levying a tax at all. The application of an
outside government's tax often makes the Tribal tax economically
unfeasible. Dual taxation undercuts the ability of Tribal Nations to
offer tax incentives to encourage non-Indian business entities onto our
lands to create jobs and stimulate Tribal economies. As long as outside
governments tax non-Indian businesses on our lands--even if a Tribal
government offers complete Tribal tax immunity to attract a new non-
Indian business--that business is subject to the same state tax rate
that is applicable outside our jurisdictional boundaries. As a matter
of economic fairness, we ask SIIA to work with us to support and
advance initiatives that would bring certainty in tax jurisdiction to
Tribal Lands by confirming the exclusive, sovereign authority of Tribal
governments to assess taxes on all economic activities occurring within
our jurisdictional boundaries.
Support Responsible Development in the Energy Sector

USET SPF member Tribal Nations, and our respective Tribal Lands and
energy resources, are located within a large region that presents
diverse geographical environments and opportunities for both
conventional and renewable energy development. Our member Tribal
Nations could benefit from the unlocked potential of those energy
resources and realize energy development goals, through appropriate
Congressional action and investment in Indian Country; and further
actions by the Administration, particularly to promote balanced
geographical representation and inclusion of USET SPF member Tribal
Nations in energy programs.

USET SPF has established its energy priorities, as follows:

Tribal self-determination and control of natural resources
and energy assets, to make conservation and development
decisions to preserve Tribal sovereignty, protect Tribal
assets, and to achieve economic independence, creation of
jobs, and improvement of Tribal citizens' standard of
living.

Tribal capacity building effort involving multiple federal
agencies, universities, and the private sector.

Reform core federal programs, expertise, and funding to
support Tribal energy resource development and market
access.

Remove barriers to the deployment of Tribal energy
resources, such as bureaucratic processes, insufficient
access to financial incentives, and interconnection and
transmission on power grid.

We remain concerned, however, with ongoing efforts to streamline
energy development by bypassing requirements under the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). We do not oppose conventional or
renewable energy development, and many of USET SPF's member Tribal
Nations pursue these activities. However, such development occurring
outside of Tribal Nation jurisdictional boundaries must not come at the
expense of our cultural resources and natural environments or Tribal
consultation. Tribal Nations have already experienced immense land
loss, theft, and the destruction and desecration of our cultural and
environmental resources and aboriginal homelands. We should not be
subjected to such actions again in order to further a domestic energy
policy agenda.
In addition to our concerns with scaling back NEPA provisions,
several USET SPF member Tribal Nations have had to contend with federal
agencies failing to properly consult with Tribal Nations on proposed
energy projects. This includes wind energy development projects under
the oversight of the Bureau of Ocean Management that have been proposed
for construction, and some of which are currently undergoing
construction, on the Outer Continental Shelf. Several of our member
Tribal Nations were not properly consulted about the permitting of
these wind energy project sites and have not received the resources and
technical assistance required to properly and adequately review
environmental, geological, and other assessments related to these
projects. Furthermore, funding remains stagnate and inadequate for
Tribal Historic Preservation Officers (THPOs) to conduct reviews of
proposed projects in order to appropriately ascertain the potential
cultural and environmental impacts. We continue to urge the
Subcommittee to support increased funding for THPOs and ensure that
efforts to streamline environmental review process are not implemented
at the expense of the destruction of our cultural resources, sites, and
natural environments.
Clarify the Tax Status of TCCs and Recognize that the Tax Exempt Status
of Sec. 17 Corporations Cannot be the Sole Alternative or
Solution for Tribal Nations

As mentioned by the witnesses testifying before SIIA during the
February 15, 2024 hearing, the uncertainty regarding the tax status of
TCCs is a major federal policy barrier faced by Tribal Nations as we
seek to rebuild our economies and generate our own governmental
revenues. As we stated in our 2022 USET SPF publication, ``Marshall
Plan for Tribal Nations: A Restorative Justice and Domestic Investment
Plan'':

``Historic and modern federal policies have created barriers
and inequities for Tribal Nations' attempts to rebuild and grow
our own economies, as well as generate our own government
revenues. Today's federal economic policies continue to fail to
support Tribal Nations' modern efforts to revitalize our
economies. The hampering of Tribal Nations' abilities to
generate Tribal government revenues has compounded the harms
done by the United States' failure to fully fund its trust and
treaty obligations . . .'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund,
Marshall Plan for Tribal Nations: A Restorative Justice and Domestic
Investment Plan, 2022. https://www.usetinc.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/
11/USET-SPF-Marshall-Plan-for-Tribal-Nations.pdf.

Most Tribal Nations in the United States continue to endure a long
history of asset deprivation, colonization, forced removal, war, loss
of our homelands, and restricted access to traditional lands and
resources, which has pushed Tribal Nations ``into a near-assetless
state for at least a century.'' \3\ The many consequences of this
sustained economic deprivation persist to this day. They manifest
themselves in the form of obstacles to economic development that
include, but are not limited to, insufficient access to capital; lack
of small business capacity; insufficient workforce development,
financial management training, and business education; regulatory
constraints on land held in trust and land designated as restricted use
(prohibiting such land from being used as collateral or as property
subject to Tribal taxes); and underdeveloped physical
infrastructure.\4\ Some Tribal Nations have succeeded in producing
economic growth and improved per capita incomes in the past few decades
by employing self-determined economic development approaches. Even so,
estimates indicate that at current rates of growth the per capita
income of Tribal citizens will not achieve parity with the rest of the
United States for at least four more decades.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Id., quoting Native Nations Inst., Access to Capital and Credit
in Native Communities 5 (2016), https://nni.arizona.edu/application/
files/8914/6386/8578/Accessing_Capital_and_Credit_
in_Native_Communities.pdf.
\4\ BD. of Governors., Fed. Rsrv., Growing Economies in Indian
Country: Taking Stock of Progress and Partnerships 3 (2012), https://
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/conferences/GEIC-white-paper-
20120501.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The result of depressed economies has a circular effect. Without
the ability to stimulate economic growth, diversify economic
activities, and generate revenues to fund governmental programs and
services, Tribal Nations lack the resources to invest in building the
essential physical and human infrastructure necessary to attract the
capital investment needed for Tribal economies to compete in the
regional, national, and global marketplace. By clarifying the tax
status of TCCs, the federal government would take a critical step in
reversing some of the harms caused by its failure to adopt economic
growth policies that enable Tribal Nations to create conditions to
build our economies on a broader scale. Clarification of the tax status
of TCCs is also critically important and timely so that we can fully
take advantage of the recent tax credits authorized by the Inflation
Reduction Act.
Tribal governments are different than other governments in the
federal system in that we do not have a significant tax base. Given the
United States' failure to fully fund its trust and treaty obligations,
and reflecting Tribal Nations' commitment to self-determination, it is
essential that Tribal governments generate revenues for programs and
services by establishing corporations, limited liability companies, and
other business structures to engage in economic development. Although
these Tribally owned entities function like commercial enterprises in
the marketplace, their purpose is to generate revenues to enable
program and service delivery to Tribal citizens.
Tribal Nations require new and authoritative tax guidance that
supports and promotes our sovereign authority, assists us in providing
for our Tribal citizens, and helps us restore our economies. Tribal
Nations should no longer be treated differently than state and local
governments that regularly engage in business activities to fund their
citizen programs and services (such as golf facilities, convention
facilities, tourism, etc.), which the IRS deems exempt. Indeed, the
unique government-to-government and trust relationship that Tribal
Nations have with the federal government demands that the solution not
limit, in any way, but rather expand the tax exemption for Tribal
economic activity.
IRS guidance, to date, as it relates to Tribal government
businesses has recognized exempt status only in limited and confining
circumstances. In Revenue Ruling 81-295, the IRS ruled that Section 17
corporations shared the immunity from federal income tax enjoyed by
Indian tribes themselves. That ruling was reiterated in Revenue Ruling
94-16, though in the ruling, the IRS also determined that a Tribally
owned corporation chartered under state law was not exempt from federal
corporate income tax. For Section 17 corporations, both rulings
essentially applied the reasoning set out in the 1996 Treasury
Regulation Sec. 301.7701-1(a)(3), which provides that ``[a]n entity
formed under local law is not always recognized as a separate entity
for federal tax purposes . . . tribes incorporated under Section 17 of
the Indian Reorganization Act . . . are not recognized as separate
entities for federal tax purposes.'' This reasoning is sound, and it
should apply to TCCs that serve Tribal purposes; TCCs should not be
treated as separate entities from the Tribal government for tax
purposes.
The IRS appeared to recognize this logic when, after the 1994
revenue ruling, it issued several private letter rulings concerning
Tribally owned and chartered corporations, concluding, in each case,
based on several factors, that they were ``integral parts'' of the
Tribal governments that created them, notwithstanding their separate
corporate status, and were thus entitled to share in each Tribal
government's tax immunity. For example, in IRS. Priv. Ltr. Rul.
200148020 (November 30, 2001), the IRS concluded that a Tribally
chartered college was an integral part of the Indian tribe that created
it. The ruling looked to ``the Indian tribe's . . . degree of control
over the enterprise and the Indian tribe's . . . financial commitment
to the enterprise.'' It identified eight factors that it viewed as
pertinent to its determination: (1) the Indian tribe's power to appoint
and remove directors; (2) Tribal representation on the board; (3)
Tribal action to establish the entity to conduct business on Tribal
land, and Tribal control over its activities; (4) Tribal power to
terminate the entity; (5) the Indian tribe having the sole proprietary
interest in the entity; (6) the entity's obligation to remit profits to
the Indian tribe; (7) the entity's obligation to submit financial
reports to the Indian tribe; and (8) Tribal control over audits of the
entity.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See also I.R.S. Priv. Ltr. Rul. 200112013 (March 23, 2001);
I.R.S. Priv. Ltr. Rul. 200409033 (February 27, 2004); I.R.S. Priv. Ltr.
Rul. 199909013 (March 5, 1999) (in which the IRS upheld the ``integral
part'' status of an enterprise created by a Tribal government for the
purpose of managing Tribal property and acting as the Tribal
government's business arm, on the grounds of the Tribal government's
power to remove directors and terminate the existence of the
enterprise, the Tribal government's substantial financial stake in the
enterprise, and the substantial rights to its profits, and the absence
of any private ownership of the enterprise).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The IRS, however, declared a moratorium on private letter rulings
raising the ``integral part'' test in 2007. This moratorium has
prevented Tribal governments from ensuring that a TCC is not considered
a separate taxable entity. That said, USET SPF does not advocate for
the resurrection of the integral part test for evaluating the tax
status of TCCs. The integral part test is cumbersome and results in
disparate and uneven results, and it does not go far enough to provide
the certainty that Tribal governments require to secure revenue for the
benefit of our citizenry. Tribal Nations require a categorical rule as
to the tax status of TCCs, and not a case-by-case determination.
Without a categorical rule, there will be continuing uncertainty over
the tax status of TCCs, which negatively impacts the ability of Tribal
Nations to plan for and realize economic development opportunities.
In addition, the tax-exempt status of Section 17 corporations does
not provide Tribal governments with a productive vehicle for economic
development. Although Revenue Rulings 81-295 and 94-16 and Treasury
Regulations Sec. 301.7701-1(a)(1)(3) provide clarity on the tax
consequences for Section 17 corporations, these federally chartered
entities lack the flexibility and agility needed when Tribal Nations
seek to seize economic opportunities. The process of adopting and
amending the charters of federally chartered Section 17 corporations is
cumbersome, time consuming and often precludes Tribal Nations from
nimbly capturing economic opportunities. Further, the structural
limitations of Section 17 corporations are a barrier to economic
development in many instances. For example, under the terms of 25
U.S.C. Sec. 5124, a Section 17 corporation may not lease Tribal Land
(to a third party) for a period longer than 25 years. That limitation
frequently prevents Section 17 corporations from being able to
profitably develop Tribal Lands for commercial purposes, as sublessees
often insist on much longer lease terms to justify substantial
investments in improvements.
We submit there is sound and sufficient legal authority and
reasoning to align the tax treatment of TCCs with that of Section 17
corporations. The legal and policy underpinnings for exempting economic
development corporations from tax under 26 U.S.C. Sec. 501(c)(3) may
also provide a rationale for exempting TCCs from tax. Further, there is
constitutional and treaty support for exempting Tribal government
economic development activity from taxation. More to the point, the
sovereign authority of Tribal Nations to engage in whatever business
necessary to provide for our citizens should not be undermined by
either the lack of Treasury guidance or issuance of restrictive
guidance. Further, outside of the context of Tribally chartered
entities, the IRS has long recognized that sole proprietorships,
partnerships, S-corporations, and limited liability companies are not
to be taxed at the business entity level. Instead, these businesses
possess ``pass through'' tax treatment and are taxed at the ownership
level. The same principle should apply to Tribally chartered entities
and Congress and SIIA should direct the IRS to adopt and implement this
principle.
Tribal governments have become increasingly sophisticated in the
structuring of business operations and transactions. Some Tribal
governments have created not just corporations and limited liability
companies, but general codes allowing the general public to obtain such
a corporate entity for purchase.\6\ Other Tribal governments have
utilized Section 17 corporations in conjunction with TCCs, with Tribal
entities as subsidiaries, and others have utilized Tribally chartered
entities as pooled investment instruments with non-Indians to share
equity participation and corresponding economic benefit. Policy must
favor maximum flexibility and support for Tribal Nations through the
utilization of Tribally chartered entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See e.g., MILLE LACS BAND STATUTES ANNOTATED, Title 16
Corporations, Sec. 1102 (``One or more natural persons of full age may
act as incorporators of a corporation by filing with the Commissioner
articles of incorporation for the corporation.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We strongly urge that Congress and SIIA direct Treasury and IRS to
uphold its trust and treaty obligations and align the tax treatment of
our TCCs in a manner that empowers and supports the advancement of our
economic development priorities. Tribal Nations have established TCCs
for the sole purpose of rebuilding our Tribal economies and advancing
our economic priorities for Nation rebuilding to support the economic
and social well-being of our citizens and communities. Although USET
SPF anticipates the issuance of forthcoming guidance from Treasury on
the tax status of TCCs, we encourage Congress and SIIA to explore
additional legal opportunities to establish permanence in clarifying
the tax status of TCCs.
Support the Restoration of Tribal Homelands and Enact a `Carcieri Fix'

Possession of a land base is a core aspect of sovereignty, cultural
identity, and represents the foundation of a government's economy. This
is no different for Tribal Nations. USET SPF Tribal Nations continue to
work to reacquire our homelands, which are fundamental to our existence
as sovereign governments and our ability to thrive as vibrant, healthy,
self-sufficient communities. The federal government's objective in the
trust responsibility and obligations to our Nations must be to support
healthy and sustainable self-determining Tribal governments, which
fundamentally includes the restoration of lands to all federally
recognized Tribal Nations, as well as the legal defense of these land
acquisitions.
No Tribal Nation should remain landless. All Tribal Nations,
whatever their historical circumstances, need and deserve a stable,
sufficient land base--a homeland--to support robust Tribal self-
government, cultural preservation, and economic development. The
federal government must ensure that every Tribal Nation has the ability
to restore its homelands, regardless of the concerns of other units of
government, private citizens, or other interests. This is a necessary
function of the U.S. government in delivering upon its trust and treaty
obligations to Tribal Nations and regaining a land base is essential to
the exercise of Tribal self-governance. Jurisdiction over territory is
a bedrock principle of sovereignty, and Tribal Nations must exercise
such jurisdiction in order to fully implement the inherent sovereignty
we possess. While USET SPF member Tribal Nations ultimately seek full
jurisdiction and management over our homelands without federal
government interference and oversight, we recognize the critical
importance of the restoration of our land bases through the land-into-
trust process. We further recognize that the federal government has a
trust responsibility and obligation to Tribal Nations in the
restoration and management of trust lands. With this in mind, it is
vital that the land-into-trust process be available to and applied
equally to all federally recognized Tribal Nations. This parity is
central to the federal government's legal and moral obligations to all
of Indian Country.
As Congress (and other branches of the federal government)
approaches the restoration of Tribal homelands, USET SPF continues to
repeat that this basic correction is simply that. It returns us to the
status quo prior to 2009--a rigorous process for the acquisition of
trust land for ALL federally recognized Tribal Nations. This long
overdue fix does not confer any additional benefits or supersede any
existing law, nor is it about anything other than the rightful
restoration of Tribal homelands. USET SPF continues to call upon
Congress to enact a fix to the 2009 Supreme Court decision in Carcieri
v. Salazar. For too long, this decision has impeded our ability to
rightfully restore our land bases and pursue Nation rebuilding efforts.
Congress must enact legislation that: (1) reaffirms the status of
current trust lands; and (2) confirms that the Secretary of the
Interior has authority to take land into trust for all federally
recognized Tribal Nations.
Support the Expansion of ISDEAA Contracting and Compacting Across the
Federal Government for Tribal Nations

Tribal Nations are political, sovereign entities whose status stems
from the inherent sovereignty we have as self-governing peoples that
pre-dates the founding of the United States. The U.S. Constitution,
treaties, statutes, Executive Orders, and judicial decisions all
recognize that the federal government has a fundamental trust
relationship to Tribal Nations, including the obligation uphold the
right to self-government. Our federal partners must fully recognize the
inherent right of Tribal Nations to fully engage in self-governance, so
we may exercise full decision-making in the management of our own
affairs and governmental services.
Despite the success of Tribal Nations in exercising authority under
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA),
the goals of self-governance have not been fully realized. Many
opportunities still remain to improve and expand upon the principles of
self-governance and self-determination. An expansion of ISDEAA
authorities to all programs across the federal government would be the
next evolutionary step in the federal government's recognition of
Tribal sovereignty and reflect its full commitment to Tribal Nation
sovereignty and self-determination. The expansion of self-governance
contracting and compacting will not only empower us to better serve our
citizens and communities, but it will enhance our abilities to manage
our lands. It would empower Tribal Nations to administer federal
programs in co-management, stewardship, agriculture, deployment and
maintenance of critical infrastructures, and pursue economic
development on our lands. It is time for Congress to enact legislation
that expands our self-governance capabilities across the federal
government so that we may fully exercise our inherent sovereign rights
to manage our affairs and resources.
Invest in and Rebuild Tribal Infrastructure--A Marshall Plan for Tribal
Nations

For generations, the federal government--despite abiding trust and
treaty obligations--has substantially under-invested in Indian
Country's infrastructure and engaged in hostile actions against Tribal
Nations to destroy our Tribal economies and undermine our efforts to
pursue Nation rebuilding. While the United States faces crumbling
infrastructure nationally, there are many in Indian Country who lack
even basic infrastructure access. Much like the U.S. investment in the
rebuilding of European nations following World War II via the Marshall
Plan, the legislative and executive branches should commit to the same
level of responsibility to assisting in the rebuilding of Tribal
Nations, as our current circumstances are, in large part, directly
attributable to the shameful acts and policies of the U.S. In the same
way the Marshall Plan acknowledged America's debt to European
sovereigns and was utilized to strengthen our relationships and
security abroad, the U.S. should make this strategic investment
domestically. We strongly encourage and recommend that SIIA, and
Congress as a whole, review USET SPF's 2022 publication, ``Marshall
Plan for Tribal Nations: A Restorative Justice and Domestic Investment
Plan'', and enact legislation that upholds the federal government's
trust and treaty obligations, advances Tribal self-determination, and
supports our Nation rebuilding efforts.
Congress and SIIA Must Incorporate the Directives of E.O. 14112 into
Legislation

USET SPF stresses to Congress and the Subcommittee that legislative
efforts must be pursued to incorporate the directives of Executive
Order 14112, ``Reforming Federal Funding and Support for Tribal Nations
to Better Embrace our Trust Responsibilities and Promote the Next Era
of Tribal Self-Determination.'' This will support our inherent
sovereignty and self-determination to advance economic growth, pursue
Nation rebuilding, and directly address the specific economic, social,
and public health priorities of our citizens. The current service model
of federal funding allocation, administration, and oversight remains a
paternalistic, pre-self-determination era mechanism that stifles the
proper management and use of federal resources in Indian affairs. In
order to usher in a new era of Tribal self-determination, federal laws
and regulations must be rescinded or revised to truly advance our
sovereign efforts to pursue economic development and Nation rebuilding
for the improved economic, social, and public health of our
communities. We remind Congress and the Subcommittee, however, that no
level of economic success attained by Tribal Nations diminishes or
eliminates the United States' moral and legal trust and treaty
obligations to fully fund Tribal programs and services.

Conclusion

The diversification of Tribal economies to create increased
economic opportunities for Indian Country must take into consideration
several issues and priorities to support Tribal Nation rebuilding
efforts. The historic and ongoing injustices that have contributed to
economic insecurity in Indian Country are symptomatic of the larger
issues we face as Tribal Nations. Development and implementation of
policies and programs that recognize and uphold our inherent
sovereignty and fulfill trust and treaty obligations are necessary to
alleviate economic hardship, rebuild Tribal Nations, and improve the
quality of life for our citizens and communities. Congress and the
Subcommittee must continue to support and fully fund federal programs
and services that encourage economic sovereignty through tax parity,
responsible energy development, clarification of the tax status of
TCCs, the restoration of Tribal homelands, expansion of self-governance
contracting and compacting across all federal programs, and enactment
of a Marshall Plan for Tribal Nations. Further, we strongly urge
Congress and the Subcommittee to incorporate into legislation the
directives of Executive Order 14112, ``Reforming Federal Funding and
Support for Tribal Nations to Better Embrace our Trust Responsibilities
and Promote the Next Era of Tribal Self-Determination.'' This will
ensure that all federal economic development dollars available to
Tribal Nations have the greatest degree of flexibility in uses and
reduced administrative burdens to support our self-determined efforts
to advance economic growth, pursue Nation rebuilding, and address the
specific economic, social, and public health priorities of our
citizens. We welcome the opportunity to collaborate with the
Subcommittee on economic policies that better honor federal trust and
treaty obligations and uphold our inherent sovereignty to pursue our
Nation rebuilding priorities to support economic opportunities for our
Tribal Nations and citizens. Should you have any questions or require
further information, please contact Ms. Liz Malerba, USET SPF Director
of Policy and Legislative Affairs, at
[emailprotected]
.

Sincerely,

Chief Kirk Francis,           Kitcki A. Carroll,
President                     Executive Director

[all]
