- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 6062, TO RESTORE THE ABILITY OF THE PEOPLE OF AMERICAN SAMOA TO APPROVE AMENDMENTS TO THE TERRITORIAL CONSTITUTION BASED ON MAJORITY RULE IN A DEMOCRATIC ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION, AS AUTHORIZED PURSUANT TO AN ACT OF CONGRESS DELEGATING ADMINISTRATION OF FEDERAL TERRITORIAL LAW IN THE TERRITORY TO THE PRESIDENT, AND TO THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER 10264, DATED JUNE 29, 1951, UNDER WHICH THE CONSTITUTION OF AMERICAN SAMOA WAS APPROVED AND MAY BE AMENDED WITHOUT REQUIREMENT FOR FURTHER CONGRESSIONAL ACTION, SUBJECT TO THE AUTHORITY OF CONGRESS UNDER THE TERRITORIAL CLAUSE IN ARTICLE IV, SECTION 3, CLAUSE 2 OF THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION; AND H.R. 6273, TO EXTEND THE AUTHORIZATION OF CERTAIN GRANTS TO THE GOVERNMENTS OF GUAM, THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS, AND AMERICAN SAMOA, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "GUAM HOST COMMUNITY COMPENSATION ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 6062 AND H.R. 6273

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Thursday, January 18, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-89

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-612 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

oug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

-----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, January 18, 2024.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     2
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas, prepared statement of...................    72

Panel I:

Radewagen, Hon. Aumua Amata Coleman, a Delegate in Congress
from the Territory of American Samoa.......................     5

Moylan, Hon. James, a Delegate in Congress from the Territory
of Guam....................................................     9

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Nakoa, Keone, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Insular
and International Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior,
Washington, DC.............................................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    15
Ale, Hon. Talauega Eleasalo Vaalele, Lieutenant Governor,
American Samoa, Pago Pago, American Samoa..................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    26
Jennings, Hon. Alexander Eli, Swains Island Delegate,
American Samoa House of Representatives, Pago Pago,
American Samoa.............................................    33
Prepared statement of....................................    35
Questions submitted for the record.......................    45

Guerrero, Hon. Lordes Aflague ``Lou'' Leon, Governor,
Hagatna, Guam..............................................    48
Prepared statement of....................................    49
Questions submitted for the record.......................    52

Alig, Hon. Jesse, Mayor, Piti, Guam..........................    58
Prepared statement of....................................    60
Questions submitted for the record.......................    62

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Radewagen

Fono Senate President and House Speaker Joint Statement..     7

Submissions for the Record by Representative Moylan

GovGuam Impacts of COFA FY04-20..........................    10
GAO Compact Impact Numbers 1986-2018.....................    73
Judiciary of Guam Testimony on H.R. 6273.................    74

Submissions for the Record by Lt. Governor Ale

2022 American Samoa Election Results Certification Letter    76
2022 American Samoa Referendum Ballot....................    77
2022 American Samoa Referendum Results...................    78
Supplemental Documentation Supporting Testimony..........    79
Submissions for the Record by Delegate Jennings

SR 38-28 (English and Samoan)............................    80
2021 Unanswered Letter to Local Leadership regarding
Request for Assistance.................................    89
2014 Letter to DOI Assist. Sec. Interior Kiaaina
regarding Swains' non-voting status....................    91
2014 Letter to AS Fono Ways and Means and Resolution
regarding Swains Island Vote...........................    94

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 6062, TO RESTORE THE ABILITY OF THE PEOPLE
OF AMERICAN SAMOA TO APPROVE AMENDMENTS TO THE TERRITORIAL CONSTITUTION
BASED ON MAJORITY RULE IN A DEMOCRATIC ACT OF SELF-DETERMINATION, AS
AUTHORIZED PURSUANT TO AN ACT OF CONGRESS DELEGATING ADMINISTRATION OF
FEDERAL TERRITORIAL LAW IN THE TERRITORY TO THE PRESIDENT, AND TO THE
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER 10264, DATED JUNE 29,
1951, UNDER WHICH THE CONSTITUTION OF AMERICAN SAMOA WAS APPROVED AND
MAY BE AMENDED WITHOUT REQUIREMENT FOR FURTHER CONGRESSIONAL ACTION,
SUBJECT TO THE AUTHORITY OF CONGRESS UNDER THE TERRITORIAL CLAUSE IN
ARTICLE IV, SECTION 3, CLAUSE 2 OF THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION; AND
H.R. 6273, TO EXTEND THE AUTHORIZATION OF CERTAIN GRANTS TO THE
GOVERNMENTS OF GUAM, THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS,
AND AMERICAN SAMOA, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``GUAM HOST COMMUNITY
COMPENSATION ACT''

----------

Thursday, January 18, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, Radewagen, LaMalfa, Carl,
Moylan, Westerman; and Leger Fernandez.
Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on two
bills, H.R. 6062 and H.R. 6273.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. Today, the Subcommittee is meeting to consider
two bills, H.R. 6062 and H.R. 6273. They are the vehicles for
issues of importance to two of our territories in the Pacific:
American Samoa and Guam.
I would like to thank you for traveling as far as you have
to be with us. I would assume that the weather is a little bit
different than what you are used to. It is a little different
than a lot of us are used to. So, thank you for being here.
H.R. 6062, sponsored by my colleague, Mrs. Radewagen, would
give the Secretary of the Interior the sole authority to
approve amendments to the American Samoa Constitution. Prior to
1983, American Samoa was under the realm of the executive
branch, specifically the Secretary of the Interior, when it
came to constitutional changes and other changes to the
governing authority of the territory. In 1983, following
ongoing tensions between then-Secretary of the Interior and the
American Samoan Government, then-American Samoa delegate Fofo
Iosefa Fiti Sunia urged Congress to amend the standing law. As
a result, Congress amended Federal Law, section 12 of Public
Law 98-213, to prevent the American Samoan Constitution from
being changed without an Act of Congress.
While there have been multiple attempts to revert back to
the pre-1983 statute, the change still remains in place today.
H.R. 6062 would reverse course and grant the President of the
United States, and subsequently the Secretary of the Interior,
the sole right to approve any amendments to the American Samoan
Constitution without the need for congressional approval.
Our second bill on today's agenda, H.R. 6273, sponsored by
the gentleman from Guam, Mr. Moylan, the Guam Host Community
Compensation Act would extend annual Compact Impact Grant
funding, require the Secretary of the Interior to enter into a
Memorandum of Understanding regarding incarcerating certain
felons, and establish residential requirements for migrants of
the Freely Associated States, or FAS.
Under the First Compacts of Free Association, or COFA,
citizens of FAS who legally work and reside in the United
States were eligible to receive U.S. Federal benefits available
to any legal permanent resident. This eligibility was lost
under the 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity
Reconciliation Act, or PRWOR. As a result, U.S. states and
territories have had to shoulder the financial costs of hosting
legal permanent residents from the FAS.
The 2003 COFAs provided Guam, American Samoa, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and Hawaii with
$30 million in annual grant funding, otherwise known as Compact
Impact Grants. These grants were authorized through Fiscal Year
2023, and were used to address increased demands placed on
health, educational, social, or public safety services as a
result of COFA. H.R. 6273 would extend and authorize this
authority through Fiscal Year 2043, while removing Hawaii's
eligibility in this program.
This authority was not extended under the recent iteration
of the COFA. Instead, the language introduced a new provision
known as Compact Impact Fairness. The Compact Impact Fairness
provisions would return Federal benefit eligibility for FAS
migrants to pre-1996 social benefit levels.
H.R. 6273 would also require the Secretary of the Interior,
in coordination with the Attorney General, to enter into
Memorandums of Understanding with each state, territory, and
the District of Columbia to require any FAS migrant in the
United States who is convicted of a felony to be housed in a
Federal correctional facility.
Finally, H.R. 6273 would bar any FAS migrant from obtaining
non-immigrant residency status in Guam unless they can provide
proof of employment or academic eligibility and show proof of a
residential address.
I look forward to a robust conversation on these two bills,
and I want to again thank both sponsors for their dedication to
those they represent.
I also want to take the time to thank our witnesses for
being here today, most of which have traveled halfway around
the world to be here. We appreciate you being with us in person
and look forward to your statements.
Before I yield back, I do want to express my disappointment
that, despite receiving an invitation to testify here today,
the U.S. Department of Justice declined to be here. I hope that
they will, however, engage on these important issues moving
forward.
With that, I yield back. The Chair now recognizes the
Ranking Minority Member for any statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Hafa adai, talofa lava, and my
apologies if I don't pronounce it correctly, but I did have the
wonderful opportunity to be greeted with those wonderful words
so often when we traveled to the Blue Continent. And because I
know what that travel now feels like, I am very appreciative of
the fact that you have traveled. In fact, you have traveled
backward in time to be with us here today, since our day begins
in Guam, as we have all learned. So, thank you for being here
to have your voices heard.
And I am very pleased that we are here today to hear our
first bill sponsored by our colleague from American Samoa, Mrs.
Radewagen, who showed us great hospitality and shared her deep
knowledge of the issues facing her district and the fact that
it would eliminate the requirement for Congress to approve
changes to the American Samoa Constitution so that we can make
it more effective for you so that self-determination can truly
be recognized.
And as noted, when American Samoa drafted and ratified the
Constitution in the 1960s, only the Secretary of the Interior
was empowered to ratify changes. However, because of problems
with a particular Secretary, I understand that American Samoa
said no, we would prefer that these be ratified by Congress.
But clearly, Congress is unable to act quick enough and be
responsive enough. And we see that today, even as we are facing
the fact that we have not yet passed our funding for this year.
So, there is wisdom, I see, in your desire to move it back
to the Secretary, and I think it is really important to be
respectful of the wishes of the people themselves on how
decisions they make will be implemented. I look forward to
hearing your testimony regarding that.
The second bill is sponsored by our wonderful colleague,
Mr. Moylan from Guam, and it attempts to address the
shortcomings with the Compact Impact Fairness Act, CIFA, which
I understand that Guamanian leaders believe it fails to address
the public safety and societal concerns caused by migration
from the Freely Associated States. Your testimony reflects the
fact that you receive them with warm embrace, but you do not
want to suffer the economic impacts without the assistance of
the United States.
I want to recognize and thank Mr. Moylan for allowing the
COFA agreements to move forward, and for bringing us this bill,
and for us having this hearing which were part of the
discussions of how do we move this conversation forward.
The Compact of Free Association Act of 1985 requires the
President to report annually to Congress on the impact of the
compact on U.S. territories and commonwealths in the Pacific,
and to cover the costs of resulting increased demands placed on
education and social services by migrants from the Marshall
Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia. The Compact
Amendments Act of 2003 mandated $30 million in compact impact
funds to be allocated annually for 20 years, up until 2023.
So, when the first and second compacts were enacted, the
majority of compact citizens migrated almost equally to either
Guam or Hawaii. We do know that, looking at the census, that
COFA citizens can now be found residing in many of the states
on the mainland.
I need to say there aren't any in New Mexico. I am very sad
about that, having been and seen the wonderful, warm people of
the islands.
But you do have the issues of the fact that the $30
million, is this enough?
And I want to also point out that the Biden administration
has chosen to include the Compact Impact Fairness Act, which
was sponsored by Representative Case and Senator Hirono of
Hawaii. So, CIFA is considered by its proponents to be an
effective way to comprehensively address COFA migrant costs
borne throughout the nation by those jurisdictions.
I do support the Biden administration's priority that our
territories, all of our territories, receive the same benefits
that citizens living in New Mexico, or Arkansas, or Montana
receive with regards to SNAP and Social Security income. The
President's budget included this last year. And I know this is
part of the problem, as well, that you are facing, that there
are layers of issues of inequality with regards to how the
citizens of Guam are treated and the citizens of American
Samoa.
But I look forward to hearing today about the issues with
regards to the ineffectiveness of CIFA in dealing with the
concerns raised by Guam. I have some questions about how it
would work, and whether there are issues that need to be
addressed in the bill, and I look forward to a good discussion
about that.
Thank you for yielding to me, Madam Chair, and I yield back
the balance of my time and look forward to our witness
testimony.

Ms. Hageman. The Chair now will recognize Mrs. Radewagen
for 5 minutes to speak on her legislation.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, A DELEGATE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE TERRITORY OF AMERICAN SAMOA

Mrs. Radewagen. Talofa lava. Let me begin by thanking Chair
Hageman and Ranking Member Leger Fernandez and the rest of the
Committee leadership for holding this hearing so early in this
new session of Congress. I sincerely appreciate the Natural
Resources Committee's commitment to resolving issues faced by
the territories.
I also want to thank the Honorable Talauega Eleasalo
Vaalele Ale, the Lieutenant Governor of American Samoa, for
being here on behalf of our Governor, the Honorable Lemanu
Peleti Mauga, to speak for our people on a matter of the utmost
urgency.
A special thank you, as well, to Deputy Assistant Secretary
of the Department of the Interior, Keone Nakoa, for his
leadership on behalf of Secretary Haaland and Assistant
Secretary Cantor on both bills before us today, and for their
successful negotiations last year on the Compact of Free
Association.
And talofa and welcome also to Swains Island Delegate,
Alexander Jennings. I don't see him, but he must be there.
H.R. 6062 would roll back what was changed in 1983 by
efforts that, while well-intentioned, attempted to fix
something that was not broken. In 1983, a one-sentence
provision was inserted with little notice into a territorial
spending bill. This was done without a hearing, and outside of
regular order, and if ever implemented that technical amendment
would take back rights of self-governance that Congress and the
President had delegated to American Samoa between 1929 and
1983.
The explanation given by the sponsors of section 12 of P.L.
98-213 in 1983, was that it was needed to prevent abuse of
broad powers delegated by Congress to the President in 1929,
and then re-delegated by the President to the Secretary of the
Interior in 1951. That 1983 provision imposed the mandate that
no amendment approved by the Secretary could take effect until
Congress enacted it as Federal law. This was itself an
amendment to the local constitution imposed without regular
order or deliberation.
The main problem with this unexpected congressional mandate
is that it would apply to amendments proposed under the local
constitution by the people, and ratified by majority vote in a
referendum. This effectively allows Congress to nullify
amendments approved by the people and the Secretary simply by
doing nothing.
The authority is also redundant. Under the territorial
clause, the Congress can approve or disapprove amendments made
by the people and/or the Secretary. What that really
demonstrates is that Federal power is supreme, and the people
of American Samoa, as a territory, have powers of local self-
determination only to the extent consistent with applicable
Federal law.
It is technically true that under Executive Order 10264 the
Secretary has powers over territorial law that could be abused.
But over the years, in multiple referendums, including the 2022
vote, the voters in American Samoa have rejected proposals to
reduce the powers of the Secretary under local constitution.
Additionally, congressional oversight of the Interior and
the rest of the Administration has developed significantly
since the early 1980s, further limiting the potential for any
perceived overreach by current or future secretaries. Congress
has well established power over all the territories, and
repealing the 1983 statute does not and cannot affect that
jurisdiction.
Instead, it is section 12 of P.L. 98-213 which takes away
the local power to amend the local constitution, and presents
the most potent and present risk of abuse not by the Secretary,
but by Congress, including power to nullify any amendment the
people may want, and do so by act or omission, either declaring
its reasons or in silence.
With the Committee's permission, I would like to enter for
the record a letter from the Senate President and Speaker of
the House of the American Samoan Legislature in support of H.R.
6062, in which they outline the long history our territory has
had with the United States and the Secretary of the Interior,
and their desire to continue that relationship in a way that
respects local determination.
Ms. Hageman. So ordered.

[The information follows:]
PREPARED JOINT STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD OF
THE HONORABLE TUAOLO M. FRUEAN
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE
AMERICAN SAMOA LEGISLATURE
AND
THE HONORABLE SAVALI TALAVOU ALE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AMERICAN SAMOA LEGISLATURE
ON H.R. 6062

Madam Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Fernandez, and members of the
Subcommittee on Indian Affairs and Insular Affairs, thank you for the
opportunity to provide a prepared statement for the record on behalf of
the Legislature of American Samoa. It is an honor to address the
committee and promote for continued self-governance and self-
determination of our territory. We join Governor Lemanu Peleti Mauga
and the people of American Samoa in supporting the efforts of
Congresswoman Uifaatali Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen to pass R.R.
6062.
For over 150 years, American Samoa has had a formal relationship
with the U.S. government. This was first recorded in 1872 when Navy
Commander Richard Meade of the USS Narragansett visited the harbor
village of Pago Pago and entered into an agreement with then-High Chief
Mauga for the use of the bay area as a ship coaling station and
provision restocking. This started a long-lasting relationship and
friendship between the Samoan islands and the U.S. which culminated in
the signing of a deed of cession between the high chiefs of Tutuila and
the U.S. in 1900. Tutuila agreed to ``cede, transfer and yield up'' the
islands of Tutuila and Aunu'u to be a district annexed to the U.S. In
return, the U.S. agreed to respect and protect the individual rights of
all people dwelling in Tutuila to their lands and other property. The
islands of Manu'a then were ceded to the U.S. in 1904.
From 1900 to 1951, American Samoa was administered by the U.S.
Department of the Navy. On July 1, 1951, the administration was
transferred to the U.S. Department of the Interior by Executive Order
where it remains to this day. After the handover, the Department worked
with the territory to foster greater self-determination and governance
through the creation of a constitution. The goal was to prepare a
document that would not only shape the territorial government but
ensure that the agreements in the Deeds of Cessions were advanced.
Our people convened to adopt its first constitution in 1960 and
revised the document several times in 1967, 1977, and 1978. Pursuant to
Article V, Section 3, of the Revised Constitution of American Samoa,
final approval or disapproval of amendments is made by the Secretary of
the Department of the Interior. In 1983, P.L. 98-213, codified in 48
USC 1662a, added a layer of approval to our constitution's amendment
process to include an act of Congress. While the underlying reasons for
the change continue to be unclear, it is with a great degree of
certainty that 1662a does not align with the Territory's ultimate goal
of self-governance.
American Samoa continues to be the only territory to require an act
of Congress to approve amendments to their constitution. For decades
before the enactment of 1662a, the process set in place by our people
remained ideal to maintain our relationship with the federal
government. It remained ideal to uphold the promises by the signatories
of the Deeds of Cession that welcomed American Samoa to the U.S.
family. A relationship that has seen the U.S. live up to its promise to
protect its Pacific nationals with Samoans contributing to the U.S.
culture and way of life. This also includes our involvement in every
U.S. conflict since it became a U.S. territory, sacrificing many of our
men and women. We are very proud and loyal Americans.
In 2022, the Territory convened a Constitutional Convention whereby
several amendments were voted on by delegates from each district.
Several amendments were passed and forwarded to the Secretary to
include changes in the selection process for the judiciary, veto
override process for the legislature, redistricting, and an impeachment
process for government officials. The list of amendments also included
housekeeping items such as misspellings of district names and the
proper names for districts. The process was followed and the civic
involvement of the territory was front and center with the island
consumed with the meetings. However, one of the most historic times in
the Territory's history must now await an uncertain fate where we must
find time in Congress's busy calendar to hear issues that many may find
trivial.
We wish to return to the pre-1662a process where our relationship
with the federal government remains with the Department of the
Interior. The Insular areas have a long history with the Interior who
have representatives specifically assigned to collaborate with each
territory and monitor each daily. Congress will continue to have
plenary authority over the territories pursuant to the Territories
Clause of the U.S. Constitution. We, like all states and territories,
will always rely on Congress for its wisdom and the direction of our
nation. However, Congress should not be burdened with the management of
the daily affairs of the American Samoa people, particularly approval
of amendments to its constitution. These matters should ultimately be
left to the will of the Territory through an open and democratic
process as seen in the Constitutional Convention of2022 and future
meetings for like amendments.
As we navigate these rapidly changing and often trying times, we
must meet these challenges with a constitution that is both fluid and
conforming. Allowing American Samoa to determine its own fate without
congressional permission is a step towards what was envisioned by
forefathers of both the U.S. and Samoa when we agreed to our union in
1900.
We strongly support H.R. 6062 and urge markup by the committee and
approval by Congress. Thank you again for the opportunity to address
the committee through this statement.

______

Mrs. Radewagen. American Samoa has over 70 years of
experience being able to work out problems and sustain a
productive relationship with the Office of the Secretary, and
the people of American Samoa know where we would go if the
Secretary abused power. We would go to Congress, and ask for
intervention to help us protect our way of life if we ever need
it.
But who will protect us if Congress abuses its power under
the 1983 Act? Who do we call if Congress decides to nullify
local self-determination amendments by doing nothing, and
letting our acts of determination, self-determination, die on
the vine? We currently have power to oppose abuse by the
Secretary under Executive Order 10264 by turning to Congress.
But we have no power to compel or even influence Congress to
act affirmatively under the 1983 Act.
So, that one sentence add-on buried in the 1983 territorial
spending bill takes back the fruits of limited self-
determination we have achieved under the 1929 ratification of
the Deeds of Cession, Executive Order 10264, and the local
constitution adopted thereunder. Yet, the local constitution
itself has never been enacted by Federal law, so the 1983
technical amendment prohibits the local constitution from being
amended locally by the people in the same manner it was adopted
locally by the people.
That is why, in 1984, just one year after the Act in
question was passed outside regular, the U.S. Senate Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources held an oversight meeting on
the matter. And at that hearing, the U.S. Department of Justice
witness expressed concern that the 1983 Act was federalization
of an internal local constitutional act, self-determination,
and could alter the special status of American Samoa under the
1900 and 1904 Deeds of Cession.
And now, here we are in 2024, five proposed amendments
ratified by the people are pending with the Secretary, who has
paused in taking action to give Congress a chance to avoid
setting any unwanted precedents and to consider restoring the
greater degree of self-determination we had before the 1983
bill.
Thus, H.R. 6062 is a long-overdue, one-sentence technical
amendment correcting the 1983 Territorial Spending Act. But
this time we are in regular order. And unlike 1983, the people
of American Samoa are represented and have a seat at the table.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I yield
back, Madam Chairwoman.

Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The gentlewoman yields back. I will
now recognize Representative Moylan for 5 minutes to speak on
his legislation.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMES MOYLAN, A DELEGATE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE TERRITORY OF GUAM

Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Chairwoman Hageman, and I am so
grateful for you and the Committee staff for working with me
and holding this historic hearing on my bill following the
passage of the COFA Act late last year.
What makes this even more important is that our panel is
here today, and took a long trip to come all the way this far
for this historic hearing. I want to thank Governor Lou Leon
Guerrero for her presence, and also Mayor Jesse Alig, President
of the Mayors Council.
In addition, I would like to recognize our former
Congresswoman Madeleine Bordallo for all the hard work you
continue to do for the people of Guam.
Also, we have here the Chief of Police, Mr. Ignacio, for
the protection you are doing for our island of Guam, as well.
We have Director Mr. Ed Byrne, thank you, from the
Department of Administration, and making sure things are
handled.
And also, Governor Leon Guerrero, for all your staff that
are present here with us today.
The three sections of this bill represent three potential
solutions to issues plaguing Guam resulting from free migration
allowed under the Compacts of Free Association.
Before I get into the details of H.R. 6273, I want to
emphasize support for Compacts of Free Association, otherwise
known as COFAs, as well as the support of our Governor and Guam
citizens.
These agreements are critical to maintaining a free and
open Indo-Pacific. They also represent America's commitment to
close relations with the descendants of the former Trust
Territory of the Pacific.
COFA migrants are our neighbors, our co-workers, and our
leaders on Guam, we do not seek to end the agreements or
relationships with the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau,
or the Marshall Islands. Instead, I hope this bill will be the
first step in redefining our inter-island relations and helping
to build stable, prosperous economies for all island nations in
the Pacific.
My bill, H.R. 6273, would seek to alleviate the stresses of
this migration in three ways.
First, by reauthorizing compact impact aid to host
jurisdictions and changing the recipients to only insular
areas. This is done with the understanding that CIFA will solve
the issues states are facing, but will not fully solve the
concerns of the insular areas.
To illustrate this point, I would ask unanimous consent to
enter into the record Guam's calculated costs of hosting
migrants.
Ms. Hageman. So ordered.

[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II24/20240118/116694/HHRG-
118-II24-20240118-SD004.pdf

------

Mr. Moylan. These numbers are regularly over $100 million
annually. Meanwhile, compact impact, even when it existed, only
sent $15 million to Guam. This disparity will only be more
prevalent when compact impact ceases altogether.
The second section of this bill will mandate a Memorandum
of Understanding between the Federal Bureau of Prisons and
Guam's local Department of Corrections. Our local jails are
overcrowded, and with 17 percent of its inhabitants being COFA
migrants, an already tight squeeze will quickly devolve into
crisis without preventive action. Given that the COFA migrants
are still given the right to free migration by the Congress, it
does not make sense that the locality would be forced to foot
the bill to pay for their incarceration.
And finally, section 3 of this bill will require that any
migrant seeking residency in Guam must prove of employment or
education that they will be undertaking upon their arrival.
Guam is a small island. One-third of the island is owned by the
Department of Defense. For those of us who live on the other
two-thirds, it is critical that we all are productive citizens
contributing to our local economy.
Now, 500 migrants coming to Hagatna, our capital in Guam,
will have a larger impact than 500 migrants showing up in the
Lower 48. Guam will always welcome migrants looking to work
hard and make a good living.
And in closing, Madam Chair, I thank my colleagues for
their consideration of this bill. And if any of you would like
to speak to me personally or bring any questions or concerns
about these issues, my door is always open.
On Guam right now it is way early in the morning, and there
are hundreds of constituents that woke up early to view this
hearing and see us, the Governor and the Mayor, talk about
their concerns, and I know they are proud to see their voices
being heard, and they look forward to our discussion on this
bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I yield back.

Ms. Hageman. The gentleman yields back. I will now
introduce our witnesses for our panel.
Mr. Keone Nakoa, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of
Insular and International Affairs, U.S. Department of the
Interior, Washington, DC; the Honorable Talauega Eleasalo
Vaalele Ale, Lieutenant Governor, American Samoa, Pago Pago,
American Samoa; the Honorable Alexander Eli Jennings, Swains
Island Delegate, American Samoa House of Representatives, Pago
Pago, American Samoa; the Honorable Lou Leon Guerrero, Governor
of Guam; and finally, the Honorable Jesse Alig, Mayor, Piti,
Guam.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will turn yellow.
At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I will
ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify
before Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Keone Nakoa for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEONE NAKOA, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, OFFICE OF
INSULAR AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Nakoa. Thank you, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger
Fernandez, and other distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
Talofa, hafa adai, and aloha from Hawaii.
I am Keone Nakoa, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the
Interior for Insular and International Affairs. It is an honor
to be before this Committee on Indian and Insular Affairs as
the representative of Assistant Secretary Carmen Cantor and the
Department of the Interior.
The Committee has my full written testimony, but I would
like to highlight some of the most important issues related to
H.R. 6062, introduced by Representative Radewagen and H.R.
6273, introduced by Representative Moylan.
On H.R. 6062, the Department of the Interior supports this
measure which would repeal a statutory requirement that
amendments or modifications to the Constitution of American
Samoa may be made only by Act of Congress. Enactment of H.R.
6062 would affirm the people of American Samoa's determination
to amend their territorial constitution without further
congressional action.
In 2022, American Samoa held a constitutional convention
that consisted of members selected from each county in the
territory and Swains Island. The convention recommended 11
amendments to the revised Constitution of 1967, and on November
8, 2022, a majority of voters approved 5 of the 11 proposed
constitutional amendments. It was the first time since
enactment of 48 U.S.C. 1662(a) that a majority of voters in
American Samoa approved proposed amendments to the revised
constitution.
In his letter transmitting the five approved amendments to
Secretary Haaland, Governor Lemanu stated, ``The people of
American Samoa have spoken.'' Since receiving the letter, we at
the Department have had several discussions with Governor
Lemanu, Representative Radewagen, and members of their
respective staffs about the process and next steps for adoption
of the amendments to the revised Constitution of 1967. It has
been their determination and our consensus decision that
passage of H.R. 6062 is the best next step in the process to
formally adopt the constitutional amendments and to honor the
will of the people.
The people of American Samoa indeed have spoken, and we
encourage this Committee to take swift action to approve H.R.
6062, and for Congress to pass the legislation.
We also acknowledge the honorable representative from
American Samoa in her consistent efforts to protect, enhance,
and advance American Samoan political development.
Related to H.R. 6273, the Guam Host Community Compensation
Act, which would reauthorize the 2003 Compact Impact Grants to
specify jurisdictions excluding Hawaii and provide other
reimbursement to affected states and territories.
The proposed bill would also impose new requirements on
individuals seeking to live in Guam under the compacts.
We acknowledge the unintended but significant costs to Guam
and other territories and states related to the Compacts of
Free Association, COFAs. According to a 2018 GAO report, after
over 70 years of close social, political, economic, and
cultural ties with the Freely Associated States, or FAS, an
estimated 94,000 FAS individuals have properly exercised their
ability to travel under the compacts, and now call the United
States their home. This includes communities in virtually every
state and territory in the country.
However, we cannot support H.R. 6273. This bill would
impose additional requirements for non-immigrant residency in
Guam which would place at risk our close relationships with the
FAS, a cornerstone of U.S. national interest in the Pacific.
Further, the intended effect of the proposed legislation on
the compacts and the Immigration and Nationality Act is
somewhat unclear, given that under the compacts eligible FAS
citizens do not require visas to travel to the United States,
including Guam.
We agree with Representative Moylan that more Federal
resources must be dedicated to support host territorial and
state governments and FAS individuals residing in Guam and the
other territories and states, and we again encourage Congress
to pass the Compact of Free Association Amendments Act of 2023,
which includes the Compact Impact Fairness Act, a bipartisan
legislation co-sponsored by Representatives Moylan, Radewagen,
and Case, among others.
This proposal includes language that would restore
eligibility for key Federal public benefit programs for FAS
individuals while they are lawfully present in the United
States: an important long-term solution to the financial
impacts of these communities on the United States, state, and
territorial governments. This allows the Federal Government to
rightfully share in covering a significant portion of the
financial burden currently placed on state and territorial
governments. Restored access to Federal public benefit means
Guam and other host jurisdictions will have additional Federal
resources to better support FAS citizens in their communities.
Thank you again for this opportunity to provide testimony, and
I am happy to take any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Nakoa follows:]

Prepared Statement of Keone Nakoa, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Insular
and International Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. 6062 and H.R. 6273

Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and distinguished
members of the Subcommittee, I am Keone Nakoa, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of the Interior for Insular and International Affairs. It is
an honor for me to appear before the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular
Affairs as the representative of Assistant Secretary of the Interior
for Insular and International Affairs to provide testimony on H.R.
6062, a bill relating to Congressional approval of amendments to the
American Samoa Constitution, introduced by Representative Radewagen,
and H.R. 6273, the Guam Host Community Compensation Act, introduced by
Representative Moylan.
H.R. 6062, Amendments to the America Samoa Constitution

The Department of the Interior supports H.R. 6062, which would
repeal a statutory requirement that amendments or modifications to the
Constitution of American Samoa may be made only by Act of Congress.
Enactment of H.R. 6062 would restore the ability of the people of
American Samoa to approve amendments to the territorial constitution
without further Congressional action.
In 2022, American Samoa held a Constitutional Convention that
consisted of members selected from each county in the Territory and
Swains Island. The Convention recommended 11 amendments to the Revised
Constitution of 1967, and on November 8, 2022, a majority of voters
approved five of the eleven proposed constitutional amendments. It was
the first time since enactment of 48 U.S.C. 1662a that that a majority
of voters in American Samoa approved proposed amendments to the Revised
Constitution of 1967.
In his December 14, 2022, letter transmitting the five approved
amendments to Secretary of the Interior Deb Haaland, Governor of
American Samoa Lemanu P.S. Mauga's first sentence was simply, ``The
people of American Samoa have spoken.'' Since receiving the letter, we
at the Department have had several discussions with Governor Lemanu,
Representative Radewagen, and members of their respective staffs about
the process and the next steps for adoption of the amendments to the
revised constitution of 1967. It has been their determination and our
consensus decision that passage of H.R. 6062 is the best next step in
the process to formally adopt the constitutional amendments and to
honor the people's vote on November 8, 2022.
The people of American Samoa have spoken, and we encourage this
Committee to take swift action to approve H.R. 6062 and Congress to
pass the legislation. We also acknowledge the honorable representative
from American Samoa in her consistent efforts to protect, enhance, and
advance American Samoa's political development.
H.R. 6273, The Guam Host Community Compensation Act

H.R. 6273, the ``Guam Host Community Compensation Act,'' would in
part amend a portion of the Compact of Free Association Amendments Act
of 2003 relating to the impact of the Compacts on specified
jurisdictions within the United States to reauthorize and amend the
compact impact grants to those specified jurisdictions and would
additionally provide other compensation to affected territories. The
proposed bill would also impose new requirements on individuals relying
on the immigration provisions of the Compacts to live in Guam.
We acknowledge the unintended but significant costs to Guam and
other territories and states related to the Compacts of Free
Association (COFAs) over the years. According to the U.S. Government
Accountability Office, in 2018, after over 70 years of close social,
political, economic, and cultural ties with the Freely Associated
States (FAS), there were an estimated 94,000 FAS individuals who have
properly exercised their ability to travel in the United States under
the COFAs and now call the United States their home--this includes
communities in virtually every state and territory in the country.
We cannot, however, support H.R. 6273 because the bill would impose
additional requirements for non-immigrant residency in Guam, which
would place at risk our close relationships with the FAS, a cornerstone
of U.S. national interests in the Pacific. Further, the intended effect
of the proposed legislation on the Compacts and the INA is somewhat
unclear, given that under the Compacts, eligible FAS citizens do not
require visas to travel to the United States, including Guam.
We agree with Representative Moylan that more federal resources
must be dedicated to support host territorial and state governments and
FAS individuals residing in Guam and the other territories and states,
and we again encourage Congress to pass the Compact of Free Association
Amendments Act of 2023, which includes the Compact Impact Fairness Act,
legislation which was co-sponsored by Representatives Moylan,
Radewagen, and Case, among others. The proposal includes language that
would restore eligibility for key federal public benefit programs for
FAS individuals while they are lawfully present in the United States--
an important long-term solution to the financial impacts of these
communities on U.S. state and territorial governments.
Restoring access to federal public benefits would have a
significant positive impact on these FAS individuals; it also would
allow the federal government to rightfully share in covering a
significant portion of the financial burden currently placed on state
and territorial governments for hosting these small, but unique,
communities without an additional costly administrative burden.
Further, the benefits from the federal government would follow the FAS
individuals in whichever state or territory they choose to live.
With restored access to federal public benefits, Guam and other
jurisdictions will have the resources that their government agencies
need to better support FAS citizens in their communities.
I thank you again for the opportunity to provide this testimony and
am happy to take any questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Keone Nakoa, Deputy Assistant
Secretary, Office of Insular and International Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Nakoa did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman
Question 1. How would H.R. 6062 affect the Department of the
Interior's process in approving amendments to American Samoa's
constitution?

Question 2. Section 12 of Public Law 98-213 that H.R. 6062 would
repeal, was enacted in 1983 because of fears of unilateral decision
making in American Samoa by the Secretary of the Interior.

2a) How will the DOI assure the residents of American Samoa that
the DOI will not act unilaterally and will work with the American
Samoan local government on amendments to American Samoa's constitution?

Question 3. H.R. 6062 is designed to remove barriers and
subsequently expedite the approval process for changes to the American
Samoa Constitution. Yet, it is not Congress who has held up the process
since 2022.

3a) How can we ensure that without Congressional approval DOI will
continue to evaluate amendments to the American Samoan Constitution
when there has been no answer regarding the 2022 amendments?

Question 4. Would the Compact Impact Fairness provisions provide
the individual territories and state governments the same level of
funding provided under the Compact Impact grants?

4a) Does the Administration believe the Compact Impact Fairness
provisions alleviate the issues raised by officials from Guam regarding
the impacts of the Compacts has had on Guam?

Question 5. In 2020, the Government Accountability Office published
a report titled, ``Compacts of Free Association: Populations in U.S.
Areas Have Grown, with Varying Reported Effects.'' This report
highlighted the issue of a misallocation of Compact Impact grant funds
from FY 2015 through 2020 because of an enumeration error by the U.S.
Census Bureau on the numbers of migrants from the FAS within each U.S.
state and territory. As a result, Hawaii was underfunded while the
Pacific territories were provided more grant funds than what they would
have received without the error.

5a) Is there a risk that this type of error could happen again if
Compact Impact grants were extended?

Question 6. Under the 2003 Compacts of Free Association, Hawaii and
the Pacific territories were eligible to receive the Compact Impact
grants. Under H.R. 6273, Hawaii would no longer be eligible to receive
Compact Impact grants.

6a) With $30 million for the annual Compact Impact grants under the
2003 Compacts, should there be an adjustment to the annual grant amount
if Hawaii is excluded under H.R. 6273?

Question 7. The witnesses from Guam have testified that the biggest
impacts of hosting COFA migrants in Guam are on public safety and
education.

7a) Does the Department agree with this assessment? What is the
Department doing to help address these concerns?

Questions Submitted by Representative Radewagen

Question 1. Deputy Assistant Secretary Nakoa, I want to thank
Secretary Haaland as well as Assistant Secretary Cantor for supporting
H.R. 6062, and I want to thank you for your leadership in consultations
with American Samoa's government to develop an approach the
Administration is supporting. Do you agree that the ability of Congress
to direct the policies and actions of the Secretary and the American
Samoa government in local constitutional affairs as determined by
Congress is vested by the Territorial Clause, so that we do not need a
statute to give that power to Congress?

Question 2. At the hearing on H.R. 6062 on January 18, 2024,
several statements were made to the effect that 48 U.S.C. 1662a is a
source of Congressional authority to participate in or determine the
outcome of the American Samoa constitutional amendment process. Rather,
is it correct that:

2a) The source of the authority of the President delegated to the
Secretary of the Interior to approve amendments to the American Samoa
constitution is, in order of priority, Congressional enactment of 48
U.S.C. 1661, Executive Order 10264 signed pursuant thereto, and the
1967 Revised Constitutional of America Samoa approved the Secretary
acting thereunder;

2b) 48 U.S.C. 1662a is not the source of and adds nothing to the
power of Congress under the Territorial Clause to determine disposition
of proposed amendments to the local constitution before, during and
after any local constitutional amendment process or approval by the
Secretary of the Interior under Executive Order 10264;

2c) Repeal of 48 U.S.C. 1662a will not reduce or restrain the power
of Congress to determine disposition of any constitutional amendment
proposed or approved for American Samoa under Executive Order 10264;

2d) The only actual effect 48 U.S.C. 1662a is to bar and prohibit
entry into force or implementation of constitutional amendments
approved by the Secretary under Executive Order 10264, for an
indefinite period with no defined standard or process of review, unless
and until Congress approves or disapprove any such amendment proposed
and approved by the people and the Secretary thereunder?

Question 3. Is it correct the provisions of 49 U.S.C. 1662
recognize that Swain's Island and persons of U.S. nationality residing
there have the same political status and rights as all other persons of
American nationality residing anywhere in American Samoa as provided
under 48 U.S.C. 1661?

Question 4. Although the U.S. Department of Justice did not attend
the hearing of this Committee on January 18, can you confirm that it is
the legal position of the U.S. Government, including the U.S.
Department of Justice, that 48 U.S.C. 1662a does not increase decrease
or increase the power of Congress under the Territorial Clause to
determine the disposition of amendments concerning proposed by the
local government under the local constitution?

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for their testimony. The
Chair now recognizes Lieutenant Governor Ale for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TALAUEGA ELEASALO VAALELE ALE, LIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR, AMERICAN SAMOA, PAGO PAGO, AMERICAN SAMOA

Mr. Ale. Madam Chair and members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify.
I respectfully request that my oral and written statement,
with all attachments thereto, be included as part of the
record.
As Lieutenant Governor of American Samoa, I am honored to
be here to represent Governor Lemanu Mauga to express the
American Samoa Government's support for H.R. 6062.
American Samoa is the only U.S. territory that has to come
to Congress and ask permission whenever our people want to
amend our constitution. This is because of 48 U.S.C. 1662,
enacted in 1983. H.R. 6062 seeks to remove this unnecessary and
unique burden on the American Samoa local right of self-
determination.
American Samoa joined the United States not because we were
conquered or purchased, but because of an agreement we
voluntarily entered into. We were induced to cede our islands
to the United States by promise made to our forefathers
embodied in the Deeds of Cession. That ability to preserve our
culture would always be respected and protected.
The promise made to our forefathers has largely been kept,
and we have more than held up our end of the bargain by
demonstrating extraordinary loyalty to this country. American
Samoa has the highest rate of military enlistment of any U.S.
state or territory, and we have sacrificed much more than our
fair share of our best men and women in America's conflicts.
Governor Lemanu himself exemplifies this ethic of military
service. He retired as a major in the U.S. Army after serving
for over two decades, including the Gulf War and the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan.
As stated earlier, our people have spoken in 2022. We
followed the constitutional procedures and amended our
constitution. I was honored to be chosen by Governor Lemanu to
chair the Constitutional Review Committee. The Constitutional
Convention reviewed these provisions, and it was put to vote by
the people of American Samoa.
One amendment approved by the voters would establish an
impeachment procedure for the Governor and Lieutenant Governor.
Another would give the Delegate from Swains Island, an atoll in
a remote part of our territory, the right to vote in our House
of Representatives. Other amendments would change the names or
spellings of some of our counties. These amendments are all
matters of local issues that our people are quite capable of
deciding for ourselves, without being micromanaged by Congress.
The congressional approval requirement that currently exists
under 1662(a) makes it infinitely more difficult for the people
of American Samoa to exercise self-determination and amend
their constitution.
We stand behind this legislation, and we fully support the
submission of this law to repeal section 1662.
Congress will always have the ultimate authority over
American Samoa under the territorial clause, and will continue
to be a partner of American Samoa as we move forward in the
future and determine how and where we will end up as a
community and as a government.
I am reminded today of an ancient Samoan expression,
[speaking Native language], meaning, ``May both sides be
unified in equal strength.'' H.R. 6062 represents the
inestimable value we place on our unity with the United States,
but also the equal importance we place on our constitution and
the protection of the Samoan way of life.
Let me close by again expressing my gratitude and thanks to
this Committee for allowing us to testify; to our Member of
Congress, Amata, for introducing this important legislation and
for allowing my brother, Delegate Su'a, to appear before this
Committee and to provide a perspective of how American Samoa
exists today. I think it is important for Congress to hear from
him and how the people in Swains have fared during this
partnership with American Samoa.
At the end of the day, however, it will be shown that we
stand together with Swains, and we all support this legislation
because it is important for the future and the self-
determination of all American Samoa, which includes Swains,
Manu'a, and the islands of Tutuila and Aunu'u.
With that I close. Thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Ale follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Talauega Eleasalo Vaalele Ale,
Lt. Governor of American Samoa
on behalf of
Hon. Lemanu Palepoi Sialega Mauga, Governor of American Samoa
on H.R. 6062

Madam Chair and members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify.

As the Lt. Governor of American Samoa, I am here representing
Governor Lemanu Palepoi Sialega Mauga to express the American Samoa
Government's support for H.R. 6062. And in supporting H.R. 6062 I speak
not only for Governor Lemanu, but also for the people and government of
American Samoa. Governor Lemanu and I, our Senate, and our House of
Representatives are all united in support of this legislation authored
by our Congresswoman, Uifa'atali Aumua Amata Coleman Radewagen.
Current law, as codified in 48 United States Code Section 1662a,
provides that amendments or modifications to the constitution of
American Samoa, as approved by the Secretary of the Interior under
Executive Order 10264, may be made only by Act of Congress. Prior to
enactment of Section 1662a in 1983, the only federal approval required
to amend or modify our constitution was that of the Secretary of the
Interior.
American Samoa is the only U.S. territory that has to come to
Congress and ask permission whenever our people want to amend our
constitution. We recognize that each territory's legal relationship
with the U.S. is unique, but American Samoa's right of self-
determination should not be uniquely burdened with this requirement for
Congressional approval.
This is particularly true because American Samoa has a very special
relationship with the United States. We joined the U.S. not because we
were conquered or purchased, but because of an agreement we voluntarily
entered into. We were induced to cede our islands to the U.S. by the
promise made to our forefathers, embodied in the Deeds of Cession, that
our ability to preserve our culture would always be respected and
protected. We have always cherished our right to self-determination
within the American system.
For well over a century, we have been a proud part of the American
family while still practicing the culture that defines us as a people.
The promise made to our forefathers has largely been kept, and we have
more than held up our end of the bargain by demonstrating extraordinary
loyalty to this country. American Samoa has the highest rate of
military enlistment of any state or territory in the U.S., and we have
sacrificed much more than our share of our best men and women in
America's conflicts. Governor Lemanu himself exemplifies our ethic of
military service: He retired as a major after serving for over two
decades, including in the Gulf War and the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan.
The people of American Samoa have always been first in line to
fight for America's freedom, and we hope Congress will support us in
our quest for greater self-determination.
Our people demonstrated their commitment to self-determination and
participatory democracy in 2022. Governor Lemanu, consistent with the
applicable provisions of the American Samoa Constitution and local law,
called a Constitutional Convention. The Governor appointed me to chair
the Constitutional Review Committee, which recommended proposed
amendments to be considered at the convention. Local councils from each
county selected a total of 129 delegates to the convention to discuss
various proposed constitutional amendments. The result of the
convention was that 11 proposed amendments were put on the ballot for
the entire electorate to vote on. In November 2022, five of those
amendments were approved by our people.
The amendments that were ultimately approved are an assortment of
measures to enhance our self-governance. One measure would establish an
impeachment procedure for the Governor and Lieutenant Governor. Another
would give the delegate from Swains Island, an atoll in a remote part
of our territory, the right to vote in our House of Representatives.
Other amendments might appear less significant, such as changing the
names or spellings of some of our counties.
These amendments may vary in their perceived significance, but what
they have in common is that they are all matters that our people are
quite capable of deciding for ourselves without being micromanaged by
Congress. Do we really need to take up Congress's valuable time to
decide whether ``Ma'oputasi,'' a county in our Eastern District, should
be spelled with an ``o'' or a ``u''?
H.R. 6062 would restore a status quo that worked very well for
decades prior to 1983: Amendments and modifications to the American
Samoa Constitution would have to be approved by the Secretary of the
Interior but not by Congress. That procedure was much more efficient,
because the Department of the Interior is the federal government's
repository of institutional knowledge on American Samoa and its
relationship with the United States. Interior has the experts who can
engage with our issues without having to get up to speed.
Under the old arrangement, where Congressional approval was not
required, American Samoa was able to make significant, steady progress
along the path of self-governance. With the approval of the Secretary
of the Interior, American Samoa adopted its first constitution in 1960.
Working with the Department of the Interior, we adopted a revised
constitution after a Constitutional Convention in 1967. In 1977,
pursuant to a Secretary's order, our constitution was amended again to
empower our people to elect our Governor and Lieutenant Governor. Later
that year, the Secretary granted our Senate's request to amend our
constitution so that, among other things, the Attorney General of
American Samoa would be appointed by the Secretary and confirmed by our
local legislature. The following year, the Secretary approved our
Senate's request to have the Governor rather than the Secretary appoint
the Attorney General.
The old system served us well. The relationship between American
Samoa and the United States was characterized by cooperation and mutual
respect. We were allowed to develop politically at our own pace,
progressing steadily along the path of self-determination and self-
governance. The promise of the Deeds of Cession was being fulfilled.
H.R. 6062 would restore the arrangement that worked so well for
American Samoa and the federal government alike.
The Congressional approval requirement makes it infinitely more
difficult for the people of American Samoa to amend their constitution
when they see fit. Congress's calendar is subject to partisan
machinations that can make it difficult to pass even essential
legislation in a timely fashion. The ability to pass legislation, even
seemingly noncontroversial legislation, is always subject to external
factors that have nothing to do with us and are beyond our control. We
are a small, remote territory. It is hard for us to compete for
attention with powerful interests when so many important things are
going on. Congress already has so much on its plate, and we don't want
to add to it every time our people want to amend our constitution.
If we submit constitutional amendments to Congress under current
law, Congress has no obligation to act within a reasonable time. In
fact, it has no obligation to act at all, or to even respond to us. I'm
not suggesting that Congress would ignore us. But it's easier for us to
inadvertently get lost in the shuffle with Congress than with the
Interior Department, which has to deal with us every day.
Under the Territorial Clause, Congress will of course still retain
full authority over American Samoa. While H.R. 6062 would eliminate the
need for us to get Congress's prior approval before amending our
constitution, Congress would still have full authority to take any
appropriate action if American Samoa were ever to do anything that
Congress deemed improper. Passing H.R. 6062 would thus not diminish
Congress's oversight authority over American Samoa; it would simply
excuse Congress from the obligation to micromanage American Samoa in a
way that it micromanages no other territory--and in a way that
inappropriately impedes our ability to exercise self-determination.
I respectfully request that the attached memorandum prepared for
the Governor on 48 U.S.C. 1662a be included in the record. Additional
supporting material will be submitted after this hearing pursuant to
Committee rules. The memorandum provides detailed historical
perspective on how Section 1662a inadvertently upset a very well
calibrated mechanism for allowing American Samoa to progress toward
self-determination under Congress's ultimate supervision. That well
calibrated mechanism would be restored with H.R. 6062.
I am reminded today of an ancient Samoan proverbial expression:
``Ia o gatasi le futia ma le umele,'' meaning ``May both sides be
unified in equal strength.'' H.R. 6062 represents the inestimable value
we place on our unity with the United States but also the equal
importance we place on our Constitution and the protection of the
Samoan way of life.
For American Samoa, self-determination is an ongoing journey.
Congress has of course been an essential part of that journey. We
appreciate that and will continue to call on Congress to request what
we need to keep making progress. What we need from Congress now is the
same flexibility that Congress allows to all of the other territories
to shape their own future.
Thank you.

*****

ATTACHMENT

MEMO: Political and Legal History of 48 U.S.C. 1662a

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:

1.  48 U.S.C. 1662a does not in any respect or by any degree define,
implement or enhance the Territorial Clause power of
Congress to approve or disapprove, modify, or declare null
and void any amendment to the local constitution approved
by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to Executive
Order 10264, as authorized by Congress under 48 U.S.C.
1661. Accordingly, Congressional power would not be
diminished, restrained or relinquished by repeal of 48
U.S.C., 1662a.

2.  The sole effect of 48 U.S.C. 1662a is to make approval by an act
of Congress a condition precedent for any amendment
approved by the Secretary under Executive Order 10264 to
enter into force, including amendments ratified by a
majority vote in a referendum conducted by the American
Samoan Government in accordance with local laws.

3.  The historical role of the Congress, President, Secretary of the
Interior and American Samoan Government in lawful
governance of American Samoa, including adoption of the
local constitution and amendments thereto pursuant to local
law sustains self-government in a manner compatible with
the 1900 and 1904 Deeds of Cession, 48 U.S.C. 1661,
Executive Order 10264, the 1967 Revised Constitution of
American Samoa and local law promulgated thereunder,
subject to and consistent with federal law made applicable
to American Samoa by Congress.

4.  Because Congress has the absolute power to act any time it
chooses before, during or after amendment of the local
constitution, and determine disposition of any proposed or
approved amendment, there is no compelling juridical
justification or prudential reason to make amendments
contingent on action by Congress before amendments are
promulgated and take effect as otherwise authorized by
federal and local law.

5.  Accordingly, in the interests of local democratic self-
determination and preservation of the American Samoa way of
life consistent with 48 U.S.C. 1661, the extraneous mandate
of 48 U.S.C. 1662a should be repealed.

Part One: Framework for self-determination to preserve or change
current status

The framework for local self-government that preserves American
Samoa's cultural, political and legal order, but allows for change
through local self-determination, begins with the 1900 and 1904 Deeds
of Cession. The 1929 Ratification Act (48 U.S.C. 1661) confirmed the
Deeds of Cession, including U.S. obligation to respect local self-
determination in local cultural affairs. That 1929 act of Congress
delegated to the President of the United States responsibility for
conducting federal affairs in the territory consistent with U.S.
obligations under the Deeds of Cession.
Pursuant to 48 U.S.C. 1661, in 1951 the President signed Executive
Order 10264, which delegated to the Secretary of the Interior
responsibility to conduct federal affairs in American Samoa on behalf
of the President consistent with the Deeds of Cession. Finally, acting
under Executive Order 10264, the Secretary approved the 1967 Revised
Constitution of American Samoa, after its approval by the voters of the
territory in 1966.
Those instruments provide the framework for self-determination in
all local affairs not otherwise governed by applicable federal law. The
local constitution provides for local self-government under the current
status, and it can be amended by local initiative under the
constitution, or otherwise proposed and approved under local law, with
approval of the Secretary under Executive order 10264.
That framework remains unchanged since adoption of the local
constitution in 1967, except that in 1983 a statute that has never been
implemented or applied would require Congress to approve amendments
after approval by the voters and the Secretary.
Now for the first time since 1983 amendments have been approved by
the voters, and the Secretary as well as Congress are considering
whether seeking approval of Congress under the 1983 statute is
consistent with purposes of the framework for self-determination
already previously established by Congress.
As explained in detail below, in 1983 the Member of Congress from
American Samoa proposed and Congress adopted a one sentence statutory
provision requiring Congress to approve any amendment to the local
constitution adopted under E.O. 10264 (See, U.S. Public Law 98-213,
Sec. 12; 48 U.S.C. 1662a).
That provision applies to any amendment approved by the Secretary,
including amendments proposed through the amendment process prescribed
in the 1967 local constitution at Article V, Section 3 and Section 4,
or otherwise lawfully conducted under local authorities within the
framework of self-government in all matters not otherwise governed by
applicable federal law.
48 U.S.C. 1662a lay dormant from 1983 to 2022, simply because no
amendment to the local constitution was ratified by voters in a local
referendum or otherwise approved by the Secretary of the Interior
during that period. There were multiple constitutional conventions
called by past Governors under the local constitution and/or local law,
and referendums were conducted on proposed amendments, but none were
approved until five of 11 amendments were approved by voters in 2022.
Accordingly, the efficacy and operation of 48 U.S.C. 1662a was
never put to the test until the 2022-2023 period American Samoa
transmitted the approved amendments to the Department of the Interior,
which has had the question of approval under advisement while
consulting with the American Samoa Government and Congress about the
proposal by the Member of Congress from American Samoa and local
leaders that 48 U.S.C. 1662a be repealed before a precedent for its
application is created.
The role of the Secretary was approved by the voters in ratifying
the local constitution in 1967, and derives in turn from the
authorities and responsibilities of the Secretary Executive Order
10264. Accordingly, that role for the Secretary is not in itself a
reason much less justification for 48. U.S.C. 1662a.
As noted, on November 8, 2022, the voters of American Samoa
approved 5 of 11 amendments to the 1967 Revised Constitution of
American Samoa. Three of the voter-approved amendments were technical
changes conforming terms used in constitution to local language per
custom, one enabled impeachment and removal of the Governor by the
Legislature, and one gave the non-voting member of the Legislature from
Swain's Island a vote in that body.
The amendments were proposed in 2022 by a convention called under
the authority of the Governor, under local authorities and measures
consistent with procedures for proposing and approving amendments
pursuant to Article V, Section 4 of the 1967 Revised Constitution. The
Department of the Interior provided a $150,000 grant for the convention
and referendum as called by the Governor.
Amendments proposed and ratified by voters, including under Article
V, Section 3 or Section 4 of the constitution, must be approved by the
Secretary of the Interior in the same manner as the constitution was
adopted in 1967. Accordingly, the Secretary has the authority under
Executive Order 10264 to approve amendments proposed by a convention
called under authority of the Governor and approved by majority vote in
a referendum conducted under local law.
After the 2022 vote in American Samoa, back in Washington it was
determined by Interior Department legal and policy staff that the U.S.
need not determine the local protocols for proposing and approving
local amendments. Since the local process was determined lawful under
both federal and local law, it was confirmed by the Department of the
Interior that the Secretary had the authority and responsibility to
either approve or disapprove any amendments proposed and approved
locally.
In addition, it was determined by the American Samoa Government and
the Department of the Interior that unless 48 U.S.C. 1662a were
repealed, the amendments approved in 2022 could not take effect without
the act of Congress in 1983.
In the past, multiple constitutional conventions have been called
in the same manner as the 2022 convention, but voters have rejected all
proposed amendments. In 2022, as noted, one of 6 amendments rejected by
voters would have reduced the Secretary of the Interior's role in
governance of the territory, including approval of constitutional
amendments.
In all previous constitutional amendment votes the vast majority of
Americans in American Samoa rejected all amendments that would change
the role of the Secretary of the Interior under Executive Order 10264.
In 2022, the amendment that would have reduced the DOI Secretary's role
under the local constitution was also rejected.
The record of majority rule in past votes expressing trust in and
reliance on the governing arrangements under 48 U.S.C. 1661 and
Executive Order 10264 are understood in American Samoa as a record of
self-determination in favor of the current status defined by the Deeds
of Cession and the local constitution.
Part Two: Why repeal is best option

The 1967 Revised Constitution of American Samoa adopted by majority
rule in the 1966 ratification vote, including its amendment process,
was approved by the Secretary and thereby entered into force in 1967.
However, approval of the Secretary at least for now is no longer the
last step in the constitutional amendment process.
That is because in 1983 staff acting on behalf of the Congress
member from American Samoa, Fofo Sunia, requested House managers of a
territorial spending bill to insert a one sentence amendment in that
legislation that became 48 U.S.C. 1662a.
Whatever the purposes and intentions for that 1983 bill at the
time, the long-term effect that became apparent was that a local
democratic act of self-determination to amend the local constitution
approved by the Secretary can no longer be given effect in the same
manner by which the territorial constitution was itself approved by the
Secretary and given effect in 1967.
Specifically, 48 U.S.C. 1662a makes Congressional action necessary,
but does not require Congress to act. The result is Congress in effect
can knowingly or unknowingly nullify the vote of the people and
Secretarial approval of an amendment under Executive Order 10264 by
simply doing nothing. By act or omission of either the Senate or the
House the vote of the people can be ignored, nullified and vitiated.

Congress already has plenary power under the Territorial Clause of
the U.S. Constitution to approve or disapprove of any amendment to the
constitution before or after it is approved by the voters, the local
government or the Secretary. The 1983 amendment is in that sense a
hollow act by mere statute that does not and cannot give Congress power
it has under the Constitution.

What the 1983 statutory requirement of Congressional approval does
is empower either chamber of Congress to suspend operation of the local
constitution and democratic self-determination on a local self-
government and home rule issue by taking no action. It allows
nullification of democratic process by Congress acting passively,
without exercising its constitutional power over territories
authoritatively and affirmatively.
Subsequently, after 48 U.S.C. 1662a became law, Congress was
advised in 1984 testimony by the Department of Justice that the 1983
amendment might have unintended consequences relating to the
territory's status and federal relations as described below. See, U.S.
Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, Hearing Report,
``Revised Constitution of American Samoa,'' May 8, 1984.
Thereafter, recognition increased that the 1983 amendment was not
warranted or needed. Accordingly, Congressman Sunia's successor, Eni
Faleomavaega, proposed legislation in 2005 to repeal 48 U.S.C. 1662a.
However, there was confusion in Congress about whether repeal of
the act would relinquish powers of Congress, which is not the case
given the plenary powers of Congress over all matters of territorial
governance, including amendments to the local constitution.
Now, decades later, it might seem like a logical solution to this
anomaly going forward to amend the 1983 statute by requiring Congress
to act on a proposed amendment within a specified period time. That, of
course, would not be binding or enforceable, unless perhaps the statute
provided the amendment would take effect if Congress does not act by a
specified date.
That option of Congressional approval by default if Congress does
not act by a date certain is consistent with the automaticity of an
effective date for locally ratified constitutions submitted to Congress
by Guam or the U.S. Virgin Islands territory under a 1978 federal
statute (P.L. 94-584). But that 60 rule does not apply to amendments
(and no constitution has ever been adopted by those two territories).
Another option might be to limit the application of 48 U.S.C. 1662a
to amendments proposed and initiated by the Secretary under Executive
Order 10264 but not jointly with the Government of American Samoa, and/
or proposed and ratified according to local law. That would change and
limit the role of the Secretary in a way rejected by voters in every
referendum since 1967, including the 2022 vote.
That latter option also would not fully democratize the process (if
that were the goal), as long as the Secretary can control what
amendments would ever reach Congress after approval by the voters,
through the power to approve or disapprove. So, unless the role of the
Secretary is either radically altered or ended, the current law will
remain.
Part Three: Political risk of clouding American Samoa's status

In the 1984 hearing before the Senate Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources cited above, a Deputy Assistant Attorney General from
the Office of Legal Counsel in the U.S. Department of Justice suggested
implementation of 48 U.S.C. 1662a could raise questions and concerns
about whether that might alter political status, rights or equities of
American Samoa in the federal-territorial relationship.
While the ultimate effect or impact of those questions and concerns
may be more speculative than determinative, the fact that DOJ would
give such testimony is extraordinary and cannot be dismissed by
countervailing legal or political speculation. Indeed, even if only
seen as an expression in 1984 of DOJ disapproval of the adoption of 48
U.S.C. 1662a without regular order and DOJ review, the 1984 DOJ
testimony demands attention and consideration.
Alone the DOJ position in 1983 about the 1983 one sentence add-on
to P.L. 98-213 may not be legally dispositive, but it augments and
provides a political risk context for the preceding discussion of the
legal anomalies emanating from 48 U.S.C. 1662a.
Specifically, DOJ indicated ``federalization'' of the local
constitution under 48 U.S.C. 1662a could open not only the constitution
but even the Deeds of Cession to amendment or revision the same as a
generic territorial organic act, rather than a historical legacy of
stable relations under 48 U.S.C. 1661.
The result predicted by DOJ was risk that American Samoa's unique
status could be modified. If so, the territory as well as its people
who are U.S. nationals could be reclassified for the first time since
1900, as a territory and population indistinguishable from other four
unincorporated by statutorily organized territories.
Once articulated by DOJ in 1984, even if temporized with the
passage of time this concern cannot simply or lightly be explained away
or ignored. DOJ cannot ``take it back'' or give reassurances that
mitigate the effects of the questions DOJ raised.
Those concerns are now part of the political culture of American
Samoa, and contribute to the steadfastness of its people to preserve a
unique tradition of patriotism and allegiance combined with autonomy
and customary way of life, which the U.S. promised to help preserve in
the 1900 and 1904 Deeds of Cession. That is what self-determination
means to American Samoa.
In this regard, it must be recalled and understood emphatically
that American Samoa is not an ``organized'' territory, that is, not
subject to an organic act of Congress establishing local self-
government and defining federal-territorial relations under federal law
on the basis of conquest or purchase of the islands by the U.S. federal
government.
Rather, American Samoa was not taken as a prize of war or purchased
by the highest bidder. Instead, the high chiefs ceded their sovereignty
and islands to the U.S. by deeds in 1900 and 1904. In accepting and
enacting the terms of those deeds Congress affirmed that American Samoa
was recognizing the U.S. as sovereign and that the people now owed
allegiance to the United States.
At the same time, as noted, the U.S. accepted the obligation to
protect and preserve the customs and traditions of American Samoa and
its way of life, including the traditional landownership system. As a
result, the federal footprint in American Samoa is very small compared
to other territories.
Given this degree of both legal and de facto autonomy, far fewer
federal statutes apply, and American Samoa proudly and patriotically
has statutory U.S. nationality but not statutory citizenship unless
individually acquired. There is no federal court in American Samoa and
its High Court has been appointed by the Secretary of the Interior.
If the status of American Samoa and its U.S. national population is
to change, its leaders reportedly believe that best would be initiated
in the people before being proposed to Congress or imposed by a court.
That is the position local government leaders successfully argued in
the federal courts during Fitisemanu case, seeking to federalize
constitutionally imposed birthright citizenship in the territory by
court ruling without democratic consent of the governed.
And that is why the Governor, both Houses of the local Legislature
and senior local and federal officials directly responsible for
leadership on this matter have proposed that the 1983 amendment taking
away home rule under the people's constitution be repealed. That is
because in its historical context the 1983 amendment requiring Congress
to approve any amendments to the constitution is not consistent with
self-determination.
As noted above, in the 2022 vote, the amendment conferring voting
rights on the representative from Swain's Island is the only amendment
passed that ushers in a change in local political affairs. That and the
other approved amendments need to undergo Interior Department legal
review. Frustration over delay in federal approval of the 2022 vote on
several amendments to the local constitution is understandable.
However, there is now valid concern and hesitation about action by
the Secretary of the interior that could trigger Congressional
inaction, on one hand, and Congressional hearings in which approval or
disapproval of an amendment such as the Swain's Island vote decided by
the voters back home could become the focus of a debate over election
law in Congress.
Thus, the decision in Washington not to act without further
deliberation is prudent given flaws in the hastily adopted 1983 federal
law creating a local constitutional political conundrum under 48 U.S.C.
1662a that now only Congress can correct.
To understand the legislation introduced to repeal that errant 1983
statute requiring Congressional ratification-action on amendments, and
to define the real options for resolution of this dilemma, it is
important understand American Samoa's political ethos.
Part Five: America's Most Self-Governing Overseas Territorial
Possession

American Samoa is the only U.S. territory that is not seeking
changes to its political status and relations with the federal
government. The traditional and elected leaders of American Samoa and
the voters consistently demonstrate a preference to remain America's
outpost in the South Pacific under current law.
Although grateful for the federal programs, services and benefits
of U.S. territorial status, the American Samoa body politic
consistently has affirmed through local self-government that any change
in political status or federal-territorial relations preferably should
be initiated locally not in distant Washington.
American Samoa is home to deeply patriotic Americans whose
allegiance and loyalty to America is confirmed by the highest per
capita rate of U.S. military service of any state or territory. Yet,
when a territorial policy advocate from Guam filed a lawsuit asking a
federal court in Washington DC to end the current statutory ``national
but not citizen'' status of Americans born in the territory, and
replace it not by statutory citizenship applicable on the other
territories,--but by federal judicial order with the same citizenship
status conferred in states, the local government opposed that lawsuit.
American Samoa's Congresswoman, Governor and Legislature intervened
as parties in the case and opposed any change to the historical
American nationality and autonomous political status that has served
the people of the territory and our nation so well for over 120 years.
The U.S. Supreme Court rejected petition to review federal appellate
court ruling in favor of the current status of American Samoa and
persons born there.
That local initiative to preserve the autonomous status of the
territory confirmed that U.S. nationality in American Samoa confers
rights to Americans equal to that of nationals residing in the four
other unincorporated territories who are classified as ``citizens'' by
federal territorial statutes.
To understand this political culture, it is important to note that
America Samoa was never disposed to European colonial or American
imperial initiatives. Instead, the powerful Chiefs of the Eastern
islands of Samoa requested and voluntarily agreed in 1900 and 1904 to
Deeds of Cession conferring U.S. sovereignty over the islands of the
territory, in exchange for the U.S. promise to preserve the local
traditional landownership system and way of life.
It is because the U.S. has kept its promises that American Samoa
prefers its current political status to any other relationship with the
U.S. federal government or model of self-government. The U.N. may
classify American Samoa as non-self-governing territory for its own
purposes, but most locals believe the current status is the result of
and consistent with local self-determination.
It is recommended to support repeal of 48 U.S.C. 1662a. If that
statute is not repealed, approval of the amendments ratified by the
people in 2022 will trigger the perverse and anomalous 1983 law
suspending the amendment process to which the people have consented,
unless and until Congress acts. In turn, action by Congress under that
1983 statute could have consequences for self-determination for
American Samoa to which its people have not consented.
In that context, it is important to note that the Secretary's role
not only in the amendment process but more broadly under Executive
Order 10264 derives from a consent based mutually beneficial federal-
territorial relationship created by Congress in 1929 under 48 U.S.C.
1661. In that historic Act, Congress authorized the President to adopt
measures to establish local government in the territory, and since 1951
that has included authorization of the Secretary of the Interior to
execute and implement responsibilities for federal relations with the
territory pursuant to Executive Order 10264.
The legal meaning, political implications and intergovernmental
viability of Section 1662a is being fully revealed and understood for
the first time since it was adopted. Obviously, that is due to approval
of five constitutional amendments in the referendum of Nov. 8, 2022,
now awaiting final review and action by the Secretary of the Interior
under Executive Order 10264, pending Congressional review at this time
of H.R. 6062.
In that context, while not seeking uniformity or ``one size fits
all'' political status features for all territories, it has not been
agreed American Samoa should be the only U.S. territory with a local
constitution that has to come to Congress after the people have voted
to amend the constitution. Like the local constitutions of all
unincorporated territories, American Samoa's constitution applies only
to local affairs to the extent consistent with federal law, so local
amendment is limited to local matters in all territories.
That is why American Samoa has not agreed the historical role
Secretary of the Interior in approval of amendments justifies singling
American Samoa out for the requirement of Congressional action after an
act of local self-determination and Secretarial approval. While each of
the other four territories has been authorized by Congress to adopt a
constitution, only American Samoa's constitution was authorized by the
President and Secretary as enabled and authorized by Congress.
Thus, just as each territory's legal relationship with the U.S. is
unique, American Samoa's right of self-determination should not be
uniquely burdened because of the unique features of its organic law
grounded in the Deeds of Cession. Section 1662a was an ad hoc and never
reviewed revision of what was in 1983 a 54-year federal-territorial
relations success story under 48 U.S.C. 1661.
The mandate of Section 1662a is for what amounts to a secondary
after-the-fact Congressional approval. The effect is to hold acts of
local self-determination in abeyance indefinitely, until Congress acts,
or even to nullify amendments by omission or silence.
Perhaps most fundamentally, Congress does not need 1662a to
exercise its plenary and supreme power under the Territorial Clause to
approve or disapprove any amendment approved by the Secretary under
Executive Order 10264. Whether an amendment is proposed in a local
convention and ratified in a referendum or any other lawful procedure
under local law, approval by the Secretary does not bind the Congress
before or after the Secretary acts.
The U.S. DOJ position is that there is no vested right under local
or federal law to a local constitution or any amendment to it, whether
or not adopted under authorization by Congress in 48 U.S.C. 1661. Thus,
there is no gain of Congressional authority by requiring a second
authorization by Congress under 1662a, and no loss of Congressional
power if the 1983 statute is repealed. Indeed, Congress can disapprove
amendments approved by the Secretary, approve amendments that have been
disapproved by the Secretary, or simply amend the local territorial
constitution as Congress chooses.
Because the local constitution was adopted by the people and
approved by the Secretary on behalf of the President as authorized by
Congress, the real effect of Section 1662a is to prevent the local
constitution from being amended in the same manner it was adopted. As
such, Section 1662a is a condition precedent and/or condition
subsequent that either way leaves an act of self-determination and/or
Secretarial act promulgated under Congressional authorization in limbo
unless and until Congress acts yet again.
In contrast, the power of Congress to approve or disapprove of any
amendment or act of the Secretary in American Samoa or other territory
is sovereign, supreme and of constitutional magnitude, not created by
or dependent on a mere federal statute like 1662a.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Talauega Eleasalo
Vaalele Ale, Lt.Governor, American Samoa

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Deputy Assistant Secretary Keone Nakoa testified at the
hearing that Department of the Interior review for the five
constitutional amendments approved during the November 2022 American
Samoa Constitutional Convention has been placed on hold at the request
of Governor Lemanu P.S. Mauga.

1a) Can you confirm if this request was made by Governor Mauga?

1b) If the Governor did request this from the Department of the
Interior, why did he make this request?

Answer. After submitting the five constitutional amendments to the
Secretary of the Interior on December 14, 2022, Governor Lemanu Mauga
subsequently asked the Secretary to hold off her review to allow time
for repeal of Section 12 of Public Law 98-213, 48 U.S.C. Section 1662a
(hereinafter ``Section 1662a'').
The leaders of American Samoa, including Governor Lemanu Mauga, the
Senate President, House Speaker, and Congresswoman Radewagen share the
strong conviction that Section 1662a poses an unacceptable risk and
unfair burden to American Samoa and her unique relationship with the
United States. This concern was raised during the constitutional
convention and led to Congresswoman Radewagen's decision in November
2022 and again in October 2023 to introduce legislation to repeal
Section 1662a. In fact, the American Samoa House of Representatives, on
February 2, 2023, passed a Resolution asking Congresswoman Radewagen to
take all necessary steps to repeal Section 1662a.
Section 1662a poses two primary concerns for the people of American
Samoa. First, application of Section 1662a will delay and possibly
prevent the people of American Samoa from amending their local
constitution. As explained in my oral and written statements, the
ability to pass legislation in Congress, even seemingly
noncontroversial legislation, is generally difficult and unpredictable.
For American Samoa, the burden is even greater. Not only are we a
small, remote territory in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, we have
only one non-voting Delegate in the House of Representatives and no
representation whatsoever in the Senate chamber.
Further, under Section 1662a, Congress has no obligation to act
within a reasonable time once we submit our constitutional amendments
for approval. In fact, Congress has no obligation under Section 1662a
to act at all, or even respond to us. Based on our review, no other
U.S. territory is required to endure such a burden in order to amend
their local constitution. Given these facts, our local leaders made the
only practical and logical decision for American Samoa in seeking
repeal of Section 1662a. Repeal of Section 1662a protects our right as
a people to self-determination and ensures fair treatment of all U.S.
territories. Of course, repeal of Section 1662a does not remove
Congress' ultimate authority over American Samoa under the Territorial
Clause of the U.S. Constitution and under 48 U.S.C. Section 1661(c).\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See 48 U.S.C. Sec. 1661(c) (``Until Congress shall provide for
the government of such islands, all civil, judicial, and military
powers shall be vested in such person or persons and shall be exercised
in such manner as the President of the United States shall direct; and
the President shall have power to remove said officers and fill the
vacancies so occasioned. (Emphasis added). This language reflects
Congress' clear intent to retain ultimate authority over governance of
American Samoa.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, application of Section 1662a to our constitutional
amendments, exposes our local constitution and our special relationship
with the United States to unnecessary risks.\2\ American Samoa's
relationship with the U.S. was forged on the promise made by the U.S.
to our forefathers that our ability to preserve our Samoan culture
would always be respected and protected. This promise, codified in the
Deeds of Cession and in 48 U.S.C. Section 1661(a), has allowed American
Samoa for over 120 years under the watchful eye of the President, the
Secretary of the Navy, and now the Secretary of the Interior, to
establish certain institutions and laws as incorporated into the local
constitution, to protect and preserve the Samoan culture. While some of
these protective measures may not be viewed or understood as
conventionally conforming practice under the U.S. Constitution, they
have been allowed to exist because of our special relationship with the
U.S. and because our constitution is generally viewed as a matter of
local law with limited applicability. Congressional review of our
constitutional amendments under Section 1662a could convert our entire
constitution into federal law subject to full application of the U.S.
Constitution and application of federal laws now applicable to other
territories. Worse, such congressional action could result in the
establishment of a ``de facto'' organic act that could be conformed in
the case of American Samoa to organic laws of other territories without
any input from our people.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Although enacted in 1983, Section 1662a has never been put to
test before. Congress has never had the opportunity to review
amendments to the American Samoa constitution under Section 1662a.
Unless repealed, this would be the first occasion where the provisions
of Section 1662a would be applied.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Governor Lemanu Mauga consulted with the Secretary of the Interior
regarding his concerns about Section 1662a and received useful advice
from the DOI on how to proceed. The Secretary graciously agreed to
delay her review of the amendments to allow time for repeal of Section
1662a.

Question 2. In your testimony, you stated that the Congressional
approval requirement under Section 12 of Public Law 98-213 has made it
``infinitely more difficult for the people of American Samoa to amend
their constitution when they see fit.'' However, the Department of the
Interior testified at the hearing that the reason why Congress has yet
to review and approve the 2022 amendments is because American Samoa
officials requested from the Department of the Interior to not finalize
its review of the amendments, thus not submitting them to Congress for
review.

2a) Can you explain why you believe that it is the Congressional
approval authority making it difficult for the people of American Samoa
to amend their constitution when it has not been Congress holding up
the amendments, but rather the Department of the Interior, at the
request of American Samoan officials?

Answer. Congress never delayed or held back approval of the five
constitutional amendments we submitted to the Secretary of the
Interior. If my testimony suggested otherwise, I sincerely apologize.
In fact, the amendments have not been officially submitted to Congress
by American Samoa or the Department of the Interior in furtherance of
the purposes of Section 1662a because the Secretary has not completed
her review or taken action to approve or disapprove any amendment. My
statement, both orally and written, refers prospectively and reflects
an honest assessment of American Samoa's unique disadvantage, as
compared to other jurisdictions, when it comes to our ability to push
legislation through Congress. This disadvantage is made even worse when
one considers the language of Section 1662a, which requires
Congressional approval of our amendments but contains no requirement
for Congress to even act upon receiving our amendments.

Question 3. When Section 12 of Public Law 98-213 became law in
1983, it was enacted because of the fear that the then-Secretary of the
Interior would act unilaterally in American Samoa. As such, American
Samoa requested Congress for constitutional amendments to require
congressional approval.

3a) Are you concerned about the potential for unilateral decisions
by the Secretary of the Interior if amendments are no longer required
to have congressional approval? If not, why?

Answer. No. Even without Section 1662a, American Samoa has other
available federal remedies to address any improper unilateral actions
by the Secretary of the Interior. American Samoa retains a direct line
to seek intervention by Congress under the Territorial Clause of the
U.S. Constitution and pursuant to 48 U.S.C. Section 1661(c). American
Samoa also has the option of seeking intervention by the President
pursuant to 48 U.S.C. Section 1661(c) and Executive Order 10264.
Finally, American Samoa may seek judicial intervention if deemed
necessary to address any improper unilateral action by the Secretary.

3b) In the event that the Secretary of the Interior does act
unilaterally, would American Samoa request to reinstate the
Congressional approval requirement? If not, what mechanism do you
believe would serve to mediate and resolve the issue?

Answer. No. Given the remedies available to American Samoa and the
concerns raised above about Section 1662a, American Samoa would have no
reason to seek reinstatement of Section 1662a if the Secretary acts
improperly or unilaterally in the future.
Questions Submitted by Representative Radewagen

Question 1. In my statement I noted we stay in close consultation
with both the Secretary and Congress based on trust and commitment to
what best for both the people of American Samoa and the American people
as a whole. Do you agree that it is respectful but also honest to
recognize that the Secretary, a territorial government or Congress may
exercise powers in a way that causes questions or concerns, and that
H.R. 6062 is an example of American Samoa asking Congress to reconsider
its exercise of powers in the 1983 act, knowing in the end that
Congress has the power but wanting to work together toward successful
federal and local law and policy for our territory and our nation?

Answer. The 1900/1904 Deeds of Cession create a relationship
between American Samoa and the U.S. that is fundamentally different
than nationhood, statehood or organized territory status. American
Samoa is an unincorporated territory with local government not
organized under federal statute like the other four unincorporated
territories. Congress never approved an organic act or local
constitution because Congress delegated its power to organize local
government to the President in 1929. The President established local
government under the Department of the Interior in the 1951-1960
period, and the Secretary approved the current constitution effective
in 1967.
In contrast, under federal statute organic acts Congress organized
local government and authorized each of the other four unincorporated
territories to adopt local constitutions subject to approval by
Congress. Even though the constitutions of the other territories are
authorized and approved by federal statute, those federal laws do not
require amendments to local constitutions to be approved by Congress.
Of course, all local constitutions and laws promulgated thereunder must
be compatible with applicable federal law.
Within the framework of federal territorial law and policy
applicable to American Samoa, there will be times when the local
government, Department of the Interior and Congress will act separately
or in some combination and create concerns or questions that each will
address. It is normative for corrections to be made based on joint
efforts to make federal territorial law and policy more perfect, just
as we never cease trying to make the U.S. more perfect.
The current effort being made by ASG, DOI and Congress to determine
if the 1983 amendment to 48 U.S.C. 1661 and the American Samoa's local
constitution by 48 U.S.C.1662a should be corrected is based on trust
and respect for the authorities, initiatives and actions of ASG,
Interior and Congress.

Question 2. Is it accurate to say that the 1983 act codified at 48
U.S.C. 1662a was in effect an amendment to the American Samoa local
constitution that was enacted without a hearing at which American Samoa
was afforded an opportunity to be heard, and without any formal
consultative process of any kind that we know of as we look back at
what happened?

Answer. Consistent with 48 U.S.C. 1661 (1929) and Executive Order
10264 (1951), the 1967 Revised Constitution of American Samoa and laws
adopted thereunder authorize the local government to propose amendments
to the local constitution. While it is within the authority of Congress
to do so, by adding an additional statutory Congressional approval
process for amendments, in addition to the approval requirements under
48 U.S.C. 1661, Executive Order 10264, and the 1967 Revised
Constitution, the effect of 48 U.S.C. 1662a is to directly change the
amendment process under existing federal and local law. It appears this
was done in Congress without regular order or the creation of a public
record before Congress to transparently inform Congress and the public
then or now as to the purposes and perspectives of all stakeholders in
the 1983 decision to approve Section 12 of P.L. 98-213.

Additional Background Provided by the American Samoa Government for the
Record in Response to the Preceding Questions and Answers:

1. Importance of Congressional action on H.R. 6062:
Governor Lemanu Palepoi Sialega Mauga, the American Samoa
Government and our fellow Americans in American Samoa welcome and are
grateful for Congressional oversight on local constitutional matters,
as provided in the hearing by the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular
Affairs on January 18, 2024. We deeply appreciate the care, time and
attention allocated to consideration of H.R. 6062, and the opportunity
to address here the important questions addressed to the ASG witness by
full House Natural Resources Committee Chairman Westerman.
The responsiveness by HNRC/SIIA to the efforts of ASG to work with
the Department of the Interior, in order to ensure the results of the
2022 referendum on local constitutional amendments are duly honored,
demonstrates the efficacy of confidence and trust we placed in Congress
to fully and fairly consider H.R. 6062. Without presuming, we hope
Congress can expedite its consideration of H.R. 6062 and signal its
intentions with regard thereto before the Secretary must act on this
matter subject to the 1983 amendment codified at 48 U.S.C. 1662a.
We believe that H.R. 6062 would restore the successful self-
government model established as authorized by Congress under 48 U.S.C.
1661, by repealing the disruptive 1983 amendment thereto codified at 48
U.S.C. 1662a. In that context, the following reply is offered to the
first of three specific questions directed to the ASG witness by
Chairman Westerman:
The American Samoa Government's efforts to achieve timely action
and approval of amendments ratified by a majority in the 2022
referendum has not been pursued by one or more ``requests'' to the
Department of the Interior or Congress. Rather, in our endeavors with
the Office of the Secretary, our Congresswoman who speaks with us for
the people, and with the Congress, we are making offers of
consultation, cooperation and collaboration to define and achieve as a
shared goal a policy that honors the 2002 vote, albeit in a somewhat
complex historical, legal and political context.
Accordingly, on December 14, 2022, the Governor transmitted the
amendments approved by a majority of voters in the referendum on
November 8, 2022 to the Secretary of the Interior. On behalf of the
American Samoa Government and the people of the territory the Governor
requested approval of these amendments by the Secretary, to enable the
most-timely local implementation possible for each amendment so
confirmed. This official and formal request, regarding amendments which
have been public record before and after the 2022 vote, also was made a
part of the record before Congress in the Governor's testimony of
February 9, 2023, before the U.S. Senate Committee on Energy and
Natural Resources.
During consultations by the Governor and senior ASG officials with
the Secretary and senior DOI officials, including ASG and DOI legal
counsel, it was recognized that potentially unproductive and possibly
prolonged delay in approval and implementation of amendments could
occur, due to the requirement of 48 U.S.C. 1662a that amendments
approved by the people and the Secretary have no effect unless and
until also enacted by a federal statute.
In addition, we have been cognizant of testimony by the U.S.
Department of Justice addressing the legal implications of 48 U.S.C.
1662a soon after it was enacted. At that time, DOJ expressed concern
and raised questions about whether Section 12 of P.L. 98-213 (48 U.S.C.
1662a) would alter the legal effect of 48 U.S.C. 1661 (1929), the
federal statute that ratified the 1900 and 1904 Deeds of Cession. 48
U.S.C. 1661 confirmed features of local autonomy created by the Deeds
of Cession and authorized the President to establish local self-
government under Executive Order 10264 (1951).
Without questioning the good will with which Congress and the
President would act in the event 48 U.S.C. 1662a were implemented to
enact as federal law each of the 2022 amendments approved by the
Secretary, that requirement creates a unique and unequal burden on
American Samoa. That burden is not justified by or compatible with the
unique structure and features of local self-determination established
for American Samoa under Executive Order 10264, as authorized by
Congress under 48 U.S.C. 1661.
Accordingly, after the Governor consulted with American Samoa's
elected Member of Congress and the elected leadership of the
Legislature of American Samoa, specifically the President of the Senate
and Speaker of the House, there was a consultative understanding
reached by the American Samoa Government with the Office of the
Secretary that Congress should have the opportunity to consider H.R.
6062 while the Secretary has the amendments under advisement, before
application of 48 U.S.C. 1662a is triggered and sets a precedent with
possible unintended consequences noted above.
This cooperative forbearance is undertaken as an affirmative step
to restore self-government instituted under Congressional authorization
in 48 U.S.C. 1661. That 1929 local territorial government enabling act
for American Samoa, as implemented under Executive Order 10264 (1951)
and the current 1967 Revised Constitution of American Samoa, is a
success story for Congressional oversight, in the only territory that
does not currently seek a change in its political status.
Yet, that same success story could be exposed to undue and
inappropriate political risk if 48 U.S.C. 1662a were to be applied and
set a regrettable precedent in federal-territorial relations. That risk
is not to be minimized, since 48 U.S.C. 1662a applies unequally and
unfairly only to American Samoa, when it arguably better would serve
U.S. interests nationally and locally if that 1983 provision applies to
none of America's territories.
The consultative consensus reached by the American Samoa Government
and the Office of the Secretary is a federal-territorial relations
success that has included consultations with and oversight by Congress.
It also has included creation of a record before Congress based on the
public record on the 2022 referendum and amendments approved and
transmitted to the Secretary. This has culminated in the hearing that
HNRC's Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs conducted on January
18, 2024.
2. Understanding the 2022-2024 amendment approval process:
The current joint effort of the American Samoa Government and the
Office of the Secretary of the Interior is to ensure all necessary and
appropriate steps to implement in the most-timely way amendments
approved by majority vote of our fellow Americans in the 2022
referendum. The import of the Governor's transmittal letter, dated
December 14, 2022, was that the people of American Samoa had spoken,
and accordingly the American Samoa Government supported timely action
by the Secretary to approve all five amendments.
On February 9, 2023, the Governor testified before the Senate
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and reiterated on behalf of
the American Samoa Government the request for the Secretary of the
Interior to take all steps ``necessary and appropriate'' in order to
``bring into effect'' the amendments approved by majority vote of the
people. Thus, the position of the Governor and the American Samoa
Government has been clear, and it is that timely action to approve and
implement the amendments was intended and desired by the people of
American Samoa and their leaders acting on behalf of the people.
Similarly, on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior, Assistant
Secretary Carmen Cantor and her staff consulted with the Governor and
his staff on the steps required for the Secretary to act on the
amendments in a timely manner, as authorized by federal and local law
and policy. In that context, the 2022 referendum results presented the
first occasion since it was enacted in 1983 that both the American
Samoa Government and Office of the Secretary were faced by the
practical administrative tasking and legal dilemma posed by the
requirement 48 U.S.C. 1662a that Congress act before any amendments
approved by majority vote of the people and by the Secretary became
effective and could be implemented.
Repeal of 48 U.S.C. 1662a had been proposed more than once by
American Samoa's representatives in Congress during the intervening
decades since it was adopted in 1983. But in 2023 it was recognized the
efforts of American Samoa Government to carry out the will of the
people could be delayed indefinitely--and the vote in effect nullified,
not by the affirmative exercise of Congressional authority but by
inability or inopportunity for Congress to act. That outcome could be
unrelated to any substantive issue, but understandably due to demands
and priorities in our nation's critical and urgent affairs, leading to
unwarranted delay or inaction on local territorial internal affairs
with no defined federal equities or imperatives at play.
But the flawed predicates of 48 U.S.C. 1662a are not primarily
procedural, parliamentary or political, but rather implicate
constitutional powers, statutory law and allocation of democratic
rights for Americans in the territory. Thus, while it is appropriate
for Congress to exercise oversight to ensure local law in a territory
applies only to extent not otherwise governed by federal law, the
burden on the territory is to ensure compatibility of all local law
with applicable federal law.
In contrast, the effect of 48 U.S.C. 1662a is to require that
amendments to local law embodied in the local constitution must be
enacted as federal statutory law. Yet, 48 U.S.C. 1662a is not the
source of and does not increase Congressional constitutional authority
to enact a federal law approving or disapproving amendments to the
local constitution. When the Territorial Clause gives Congress plenary
and supreme powers to which the federal courts have deferred for 125
years, Congress does not need a statute to permit itself to exercise
that power.
Accordingly, repeal of 48 U.S.C. 1662a would not diminish that
constitutionally conferred power of Congress, and would simply remove
an impediment and possible barrier to local self-government on local
matters. That hurdle to local democratic self-determination is posed by
48 U.S.C. 1662a as a condition subsequent imposed by federal law on the
promulgation of local law, with no effect other than the presumably
unintended disruption of local self-government on amendments to the
local constitution, which are invalid to the extent of any
inconsistency with federal law.
As noted in testimony offered as Lieutenant Governor in the role of
a witness, requiring Congress to act on every change to local law is
not fair to our fellow Americans in the territory and it is not fair to
Congress, because both have better uses of their respective
authorities, time and effort.
3. History of 48 U.S.C. 1661 (1929) and 48 U.S.C. 1662a (1983):
We are grateful for the opportunity to explain the statement that
48 U.S.C. 1662a significantly complicates and makes it far more
difficult to initiate, conduct and complete the local process for
approving locally developed amendments to the local constitution. There
are several ways to describe the problems that would arise from
implementation of Sec. 48 U.S.C. 1662a:

Congress authorized the President to organize local
civilian government in American Samoa in 1929 under 48
U.S.C. 1661, on terms confirming a U.S. obligation to
recognize local autonomy in local cultural and social
affairs to preserve the Samoan way of life.

The central aspect of the Samoan way of life implicated in
the U.S. obligation to protect and preserve local cultural
and social autonomy is perpetuation of the landownership
system that sustains social cohesion in Samoan society.

As authorized by Congress in 48 U.S.C. 1661, in 1951 the
President issued Executive Order 10264, delegating the
authority to organize local civil government under 48
U.S.C. 1661 to the Secretary of the Interior.

The Secretary of the Interior approved the local
constitution of American Samoa in 1960, and also approved
its amendment in the 1967 Revised Constitution of American
Samoa.

The exercise of the President's power under 48 U.S.C. 1661
and delegation of that authority to the Secretary in 1951,
as well as all local actions and actions of the American
Samoa Government under the local constitution, have been
and remain fully subject to Congressional oversight and the
Territorial Clause power to ``otherwise provide'' for
government of American Samoa as stipulated in 48 U.S.C.
1661.

It was under Congressional oversight that the American
Samoa constitution was approved by the Secretary under
Executive Order 10264 in 1960, and Congress also had
oversight when the revised constitution was approved in
1967.

The people of American Samoa and the American Samoan
Government believe that the local constitution should be
amended in the same way it was approved.

That is due to desire in American Samoa to preserve
continuity and stability in the unique historical structure
of federal-territorial relations under the 1900/1904 Deeds
of Cession, 48 U.S.C. 1661, Executive Order 10264 and the
1967 Revised Constitution of American Samoa.

After 54 years of continuity and stability in federal
territorial relations under 48 U.S.C. 1661, without
effective consultation between Congress, President,
Secretary or the American Samoa Government, in 1983 the
Congress amended 48 U.S.C. 1661 by enacting 48 U.S.C.
1662a.

48 U.S.C. 1662a amended 48 U.S.C. 1661 by providing that
amendments approved by the people and Secretary under 48
U.S.C. 1661 and Executive Order 10264 have no legal effect
unless approved as a new federal statute by Congress.

In 1984, a Deputy Assistant Attorney General of the United
States testified in a hearing before the Senate Committee
on Energy and Natural Resources on the Constitution of
American Samoa, including the effect of 48 U.S.C. 1662a on
federal-territorial relations.

In written and oral testimony the Department of Justice
witness advised Congress that the Office of Legal Counsel
had questions and concerns about whether having Congress
approve amendments to the American Samoa Constitution
pursuant to 48 U.S.C. 1662a would in effect alter the one-
of-a-kind system of local self-government and special
autonomy established under the Deeds of Cession, 48 U.S.C.
1661 and Executive Order 10264.

The preceding litany of historical, legal and political
considerations is the context in which the statement can be made that
48 U.S.C. 1662a makes the constitutional amendment process after 1983
more difficult than approval of the local constitution by the people
and Secretary in 1960, or its amendment and revision in same manner in
1967.
When the U.S. Congress adopted 48 U.S.C. 1661 in 1929, it expressly
``accepted,'' ``confirmed and ``ratified'' the 1900 and 1904 Deeds of
Cession, which served as documents of mutual consent setting forth
terms for local autonomy under U.S. sovereign rule over the islands.
While the 1929 ratification statute recognized the authority of the
U.S. Congress to ``otherwise provide'' terms for conducting federal-
territorial relations, Congress generally has recognized an obligation
and commitment to local autonomy in local cultural and social affairs,
as agreed and promised in the Deeds of Cession.
Accordingly, 48 U.S.C. 1661 mandates that ``. . . all civil,
judicial, and military powers shall be vested in such person or persons
and shall be exercised in such manner as the President of the United
States shall direct . . .''
48 U.S.C. 1661 also provided that, ``The existing laws of the
United States relative to public lands shall not apply to such lands in
the said islands of Eastern Samoa; but the Congress of the United
States shall enact special laws for their management and disposition.''
While the Department of the Interior has institutionalized the
political status and federal-territorial relations under 48 U.S.C.
1661, neither the ASG nor DOI has institutionalized 48 U.S.C. 1662a.
There is a high level of uncertainty about whether the 1984 DOJ
testimony warning of possible unintended consequences following
``federalization'' of matters that have been managed as local and
internal for 125 years.
Those DOJ concerns in 1984 could become self-fulfilling prophecy
should Congress not now institutionalize in 2024 that 125-year legacy
of special autonomy. The best way to do that is to repeal 48 U.S.C.
1662a.
Approval of local amendments by Congress will convert these local
amendments to a local constitution established under authority of the
Deeds of Cession, 48 U.S.C. 1661, Executive Order 10264 and the 1967
local constitution into a federal statute. DOJ expressed concern that
Congressional approval of amendments could convert the entire local
constitution into a federal statutory organic act and end the federal
territorial relationship defined by the Deeds of Cession, 48 U.S.C.
1661, Executive Order 102764 and the 1967 Revised Constitution.
Please be assured, then, that no one representing the American
Samoa Government would suggest that Congress, the Department of the
Interior or ASG has been ``holding up the amendments.'' Rather, we
appreciate the contributions that officials at DOI and both members and
staff in Congress have made to seeking and finding an approach to
action on and approval of the amendments approved by the voters that
redeems the promise of the Deed of Cession without unintended
consequences.
We hope the record created at the hearing on January 18 will
clarify the questions and issues that have been raised so that we can
work together find solutions that best serve Americans in the territory
and across our nation.
4. Flawed statute does not define Congressional power or territorial
policy:
The limited formal record before Congress regarding the actual
intent of Congress in allowing the 1983 amendment codified at 48 U.S.C.
1662a to be included in P.L. 98-213 makes it hard to confirm the
motives and reasons for that provision. Indeed, without any record
before Congress to confirm its purpose, 48 U.S.C. 1662a actually
constitutes an amendment to the 1929 authorization by Congress codified
at 48 U.S.C. 1661, under which local self-government measures for
American Samoa have been established and progressively democratized.
In addition, the flawed 1983 statute lacks precision and utility.
For example, it does not provide procedures for the Secretary to make
transmittal of amendments approved under Executive Order 10264 to
Congress, but rather mandates only that any such approved amendments
have no effect unless again approved by Congress. Additionally, there
are no limitations on the period within which ASG, DOI or Congress
should act to implement the requirement of Congressional approval.
Those tertiary procedural omissions aside, more fundamental issues
of considerable consequence arise from the anomalies in the 1983
amendment statute.
First, it is ironic that in the case of amendments approved by the
people in an act of self-determination 48 U.S.C. 1662a does not protect
the people of American Samoa from ``unilateral'' action by the
Secretary. That is true of actions under Executive Order 10264
disapproving amendments approved by the voters, which might be deemed
to be against the interests of the people in that territory.
Instead, all 48 U.S.C. 1662a does is require Congress to review
amendments voted on favorably by a majority of the people that have
been approved by the Secretary. 48 U.S.C. does not apply to
``unilateral'' actions of the Secretary disapproving amendments
approved by a majority of the people in a referendum lawfully conducted
under local law.
If Congress allows itself to be misled to believe its power to
review actions of the Secretary on amendments derives from 48 U.S.C.
1662a, then that means Congress is precluded from reviewing unilateral
actions of the Secretary when the people presumably need it most. That
is, not when a democratically approved amendment is approved by the
Secretary, but when the Secretary nullifies an amendment approved by a
democratic majority.
Of course, this is a false narrative, because 48 U.S.C. 1662a is
not the source of the power of Congress to ``otherwise provide'' for
federal law and policy in American Samoa. Instead, the 48 U.S.C. 1661
framework as implemented under Executive Order 10264 motivates ASG and
DOI to resolve differences and address issues the Samoan way, as much
or more than the Washington way.
The pragmatic predicate of Secretarial Order 10264 is that dealing
with the President's surrogates in the Office of the Secretary and
convincing one or two decision senior decision makers on an agreed
action by consensus requires far less effort than convincing 535
members of Congress to act on matters of local self-government.
But it remains true that if the Secretary and American Samoa can't
resolve a problem, routine Congressional oversight has to be augmented
and potentially legislation will be required to solve the problem.
That kind of special Congressional oversight is intended and
expected under 48 U.S.C. 1661, and Executive Order 10264. Those
instruments of delegated authority create no zone of executive power or
privilege outside the reach of Congressional authority to ``otherwise
provide'' for governance of the territory under 48 U.S.C. 1661 and, of
course, the Territorial Clause.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for their testimony. The
Chair now recognizes Delegate Jennings for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ALEXANDER ELI JENNINGS, SWAINS ISLAND
DELEGATE, AMERICAN SAMOA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, PAGO PAGO,
AMERICAN SAMOA

Mr. Jennings. Good morning, Madam Chair and distinguished
members of the Subcommittee this morning. Again, I also want to
submit my verbal testimony this morning, together with the
written statement that was already given to the Committee
earlier.
My name is Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings. I am the Swains
Island delegate to the American Samoa House of Representatives,
the only non-voting member of the legislature of American Samoa
for over 63 years.
In the 2022 Constitutional Convention of American Samoa,
after a very difficult and uphill battle, Swains Island was
able to submit on the last minute on the last day an amendment
to seek the right to vote in the legislature of American Samoa.
When the distinguished delegates of this convention heard for
the first time that there was absolutely no reason why the
Swains Island delegate wasn't given the right to vote, this
amendment was passed by an overwhelming majority of 73 to 43.
And when the people of American Samoa heard for the first time
the contributions of Swains Island to the territory, this
amendment was passed for the first time by a majority of the
people of American Samoa.
I am also a fifth-generation descendant of a U.S. citizen,
Eli Hutchinson Jennings from Southampton, Long Island, New
York, the owner of Swains Island. In 1800, he and his wife,
Malia, the daughter of a prominent chief from Lefaga, started a
plantation on Swains Island in the 1840s. By the 1900s, Swains
Island was extremely prosperous with the copra trade.
At that same time, the Americans, the Germans, and the
British were dividing up the Samoan Islands. In 1900, the
United States signed a Deed of Cession with the leaders of
Tutuila, and in 1904, the United States signed the Deed of
Cession with the Kingdom of Manu'a. And if you read the history
of American Samoa, everything stopped for American Samoa for
the next 25 years. During that time, the Navy requested that
the Swains Island, who was already a territory of the United
States from 1856 under the Guano Act, to be brought in and made
a part of American Samoa.
Because of all the resources American Samoa had, the
greatest resource to the United States was the largest natural
harbor in the Pacific, which is why they wanted it. Other than
that, they needed help with this very fragile economy. By an
Act of Congress, House Joint Resolution 294 passed on March 4,
1925. Swains was finally brought in and made a part of American
Samoa.
Then, later on, 4 years later in 1929, and under the
Ratification Act, Congress approved the two Deeds of Cession
between Manu'a and Tutuila and the United States. And now we
have the territory of the United States.
And I am also a second generation of Tokelau descent when
my grandfather married a very prominent figure, his wife from a
prominent Pedro family of the Tokelau Islands. After I was
born, my parents divorced, and my grandmother took me to Swains
Island and raised me there with my brother. It was there that I
developed a strong passion for my Tokelau side. And in 2005,
when I assumed the duties of the Delegate of Swains Island 18
years ago, I was also installed as the traditional leader for
the Swains Island Tokelau community in American Samoa, which,
by the way, is the least recognized community in all of
American Samoa. Besides presiding over traditional ceremonial
events, I helped this community.
Finally, Madam Chairwoman, I am again also a fifth
generation of Samoan descent from my great-great-grandmother,
Malia Su'a Jennings, the daughter of a prominent chief from
Lefaga, Samoa. In 2008, I was asked on her behalf to take the
High Chief title under the Samoan tradition, Su'a, from Lefaga.
So, I come before you this morning as a non-voting delegate
of Swains Island, as the traditional leader for the Swains
Island community, and as a traditional high chief under the
Samoan culture.
And Madam Chairwoman, distinguished members of this
Committee, I would like to start off by saying I am not here
deliberately to go against our distinguished Congresswoman, the
Honorable Aumua Amata Radewagen. She has been an amazing
delegate for American Samoa. I am not here this morning to
deliberately defy the authority of Madam Secretary Deb Haaland
or the Department of the Interior, especially not here to go
against the Honorable Governor Lemanu Mauga, our Governor of
American Samoa, and the Honorable Lieutenant Governor here this
morning. I am only here for one reason, and one reason only,
and that is to fulfill my obligation under my sworn oath to
defend the Constitution of American Samoa and the rights of
every American Samoan Native, which includes lineal descendants
of Tutuila, Manu'a, and Swains Island.
All I am asking is that we need assurance that we can
verify that the rights of every American Samoan Native is
protected and respected by the Department of the Interior. The
only way we can do that is to reject H.R. 6062, or amend H.R.
6062 to include ``including Swains Island.''
What really got me about this, Madam Chairwoman, is when I
start noticing these grants. Every grant that I have read says
American Samoa and Swains Island. I thought they were the same
thing. Madam Chairwoman, there are two separate territories of
the United States: Swains Island in 1925 and American Samoa in
1900. Unfortunately, by our discovery, it appears that the
Department of the Interior is not under any mandate to
recognize Swains Island, which may possibly explain why we have
gone 63 years without a vote in the legislature.
I am just here, Madam Chairwoman, to ask that we please
recognize the rights of every American Samoan Native and to
include Swains Island in the mandate that DOI has to comply
with in overseeing American Samoa.
I have the outline of my written testimony and I would
refer that to my written statement. That is all I would like to
say this morning, and that is the only reason why I am here.
But otherwise, I thank you very much for this time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Jennings follows:]
Prepared Statement of Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings, Swains Island
Delegate, 38th Legislature of American Samoa, House of Representatives
on H.R. 6062

Honorable Subcommittee, since 1983, the procedure for amending the
American Samoa Constitution has been (1) approval by the people, (2)
approval by the Secretary of the Interior, and (3) approval by
Congress. At that point amendments become part of the American Samoa
Constitution.
H.R. 6062 seeks to take Congress out of the picture, leaving sole
authority to approve changes to our Constitution with the Secretary of
the Interior by repealing 48 U.S.C. Sec. 1662a.
In November 2022, the people of American Samoa approved 5 of 11
proposed amendments to the American Samoa Constitution. As the Swains
Island Delegate to the Fono for the past 18 years, I would like to
extend my sincere appreciation and gratitude to all of those who voted
in favor of the Swains Island Amendment giving the Swains Island
Delegate the ability to vote in the Fono for the first time. I would
also like to extend my appreciation and gratitude for the approval of
the ``Swains Island Amendment'' as the Traditional Leader of the Swains
Community in Tutuila for the past 18 years. The Swains Community in
Tutuila consists mostly of Americans of Tokelauan descent, which are
the least recognized American Samoan Natives in the Territory.
The Hon. Governor Lemanu P.S. Mauga sent the approved amendments to
the Secretary of the Interior in December 2022. Under the Constitution,
the Secretary of the Interior (also referred to herein as ``DOI'') is
required to approve or disapprove amendments within four months after
which Congress makes the final decision. To date, DOI has taken no
action.
In October 2023, eleven months after the 2022 referendum, without
DOI approval and without having introduced any of the 5 approved
amendments to Congress, Congresswoman Amata introduced H.R. 6062,
seeking to remove Congress from the amendment process. I am opposed to
this change for one reason: DOI has not treated Swains Island as an
equal part of American Samoa since they assumed administration of this
Territory in 1951 and H.R. 6062 lacks assurances from DOI that things
will change in the future.
Without verifiable guarantees that all American Samoan Natives,
including descendants of U.S. citizens and nationals of Swains Island
shall be protected from the forced alienation of their lands, and all
rights under the American Samoa Constitution, there is no reason to
support this bill. While DOI claims to support the protection from
alienation of family lands in American Samoa, history paints a
different picture for Swains.
Swains Depopulation

Swains Island's status as an American possession predates that of
the rest of American Samoa. Swains Island was bonded to the United
States in 1856 through the Guano Islands Act. 48 U.S.C. ch. 8
Sec. Sec. 1411-1419. The Jennings family, who descend from Eli Jennings
of Southampton, NY, has been in continuous ownership of Swains Island
from the 1850s to the present. I am a lineal descendant of the original
owner of Swains Island, Eli Jennings, one of Swains' current owners,
and currently serve as the Swains Island Delegate in the American Samoa
Legislature, or Fono.
United States sovereignty over Swains Island was recognized by
Congress in 1925 when it was made a part of American Samoa. 48 U.S.C.
Sec. 1662. The Islands of Eastern Samoa, meaning all islands of
American Samoa other than Swains Island, were recognized by Congress as
part of the United States in 1929, four years after Swains. 48 U.S.C.
Sec. 1661.
During American Samoa's Naval administration (1900-1951), Swains
Island enjoyed unprecedented prosperity and a growing population
exporting copra for the production of coconut oil, which was also an
essential part of the very fragile economy of the new Territory of
American Samoa and provided jobs, tax revenues, and the opportunity for
Tutuila and Manu'a to combine their copra harvests with that from
Swains Island for export.
However, the 1951 transfer of American Samoa's civil administration
from the U.S. Navy to DOI marked the beginning of a slow decline. The
lack of services provided to Swains Island, e.g., transportation,
communications, fresh water, electricity, and basic infrastructure made
the island uninhabitable, resulting in the ultimate depopulation of the
island by 2013 and the internal displacement of Swains Islanders into
other parts of American Samoa and the rest of the United States.

When Swains Islanders were finally forced to abandon Swains Island
in 2013, they left behind several pristine natural resources, many of
which could help reduce American Samoa's dependency on the federal
government, including:

Hundreds of acres of coconut trees grown with no chemicals
or pesticides making them suitable for Organic Virgin
Coconut Oil

Hundreds of acres of monster coconut crabs (birgus latro),
some weighing up to 9 lbs. and measuring 3 feet in width
which are a delicacy for local and world markets. The
population of coconut crab, a vulnerable species, has
steadily developed and increased since the last export of
copra in 1966.

Hundreds of old coconut trees at the maturity level for
use as coconut wood for building homes and furniture.

A National Marine Sanctuary protecting pristine marine
resources for dive tours and sports fishing.

A favorite destination for Science Research, Film
Production, and Amateur Radio Operation.

Excellent destination for corporate retreats and special
guests.

Swains Island is truly one of the last jewels of the planet.\1\
However, the Swains Island Delegate lacking a vote in the Legislature
results in Swains Islanders throughout American Samoa being in a
``taxation without representation'' governance scheme. Despite the
existence of such extensive natural resources, Swains Island today
remains uninhabited, visited sporadically only when transportation
becomes available. Without a vote in the Legislature, the Swains Island
Delegate has had little opportunity to advocate for the Island's
interest for the past 63 years under DOI's watch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Swains Island: One of the Last Jewels of the Planet (Ocean
Futures Society, 2014), https://www.imdb.com/title/tt5352610/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The threat of depopulation is not limited to Swains. As recognized
by Gov. Lemanu P.S. Mauga in his 2024 State of the Territory address,
Manu'a may follow the same demise as Swains because of the lack of
government services for the people living there; our Governor shedding
tears seeing people at Faleasao on Ta'u island having to swim out to
bring their cargo to shore when the boat was unable to enter the
harbor.
In 2024, Swains Islanders can only travel to their home--over 200
miles away from Tutuila--if they personally charter private
transportation, while other islands in American Samoa are given
regularly scheduled, federally subsidized transportation. To put it
bluntly, Swains has been on the receiving end of neglect and
abandonment under the unmindful hand of DOI from 1951-the present and
DOI has failed to address any of my concerns for decades.
The Department of the Interior's Role in American Samoa

DOI's authority in American Samoa is not well understood by many in
American Samoa and sadly, many in DOI. On paper, the entire
governmental structure in American Samoa operates under the authority
of the Secretary of the Interior. And while in practice, DOI has taken
an increasingly ``hands-off'' approach to American Samoa during 63-year
relationship, under the law, the Secretary of the Interior can still
unilaterally overturn decisions of the judiciary and the executive and
legislative branches. It is irrelevant that this does not take place
often, if at all. As stated by U.S. Territorial scholar Arnold
Leibowitz ``the very fact that the Secretary of the Interior exists as
an ombudsman, to put it kindly, or as a benevolent dictator--to put it
less generously--depreciates all Samoan government institutions and
makes the Samoan Constitution adopted in 1960 a giant deceit.''
Leibowitz, Arnold, Defining Status: A Comprehensive Analysis of U.S.
Territorial Policy, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, The Hague (1989) at
420.
DOI and the American Samoa Government often says things about
Swains Island such as ``nobody lives there,'' or ``it's private land''
whenever a valid concern is raised about Swains' treatment. Addressing
the claim of ``nobody lives on Swains'' first, Swains was permanently
inhabited for over 150 years and it was the very policies of DOI and
ASG that caused the ultimate depopulation of Swains in 2013. Imagine
the DOI claiming A'asu or Aoloau Tuai villages don't deserve
recognition because ``nobody lives there.'' Secondly, to the
``privately-owned island'' claim, 90% of all land in American Samoa is
privately-owned family land: under the fa'asamoa for Tutuila and
Manu'a, and descendants of U.S. Citizens for Swains Island. Those who
point out that Swains is private land are probably unaware that private
landownership is what made Swains such an ideal community for Congress
to partner with American Samoa 99 years ago.
When Swains Island became part of American Samoa in 1925 and joined
Tutuila, Aunu'u and the islands of the former Kingdom of Manu'atele, it
marked the merging of three cultures and peoples under one flag which
has remained to this day; this is the American Samoa of our times.
Unique among the territories, the United States' contribution of Swains
to American Samoa extended the protections against alienation of
communal land under the fa'asamoa to Swains Island while explicitly
stating Swains ``is not under the matai system.'' The private ownership
of Swains made it a perfect fit with American Samoa.
The initial differences between Swains and American Samoa have
faded over time. Despite many Swains Islanders being descendants of
U.S. Citizens, in 1952, U.S. Citizens by descent born on Swains Island
became non-citizen nationals with the passage of the Immigration and
Nationality Act of 1952, thus bringing Swains Islanders into the same
U.S. National category as the rest of American Samoa.

The 1960 and 1967 Constitutions ratified under DOI's sole authority
gave voting power to all representatives and senators in the Fono
except the Swains Island Delegate, thereby separating Swains Island
from the rest of the American Samoan Islands for the first time. See
Rev. Const. Am. Samoa Art. II, Sec. 2:

The adult permanent residents of Swains Island who are United
States nationals may elect at an open meeting a delegate to the
House of Representatives who shall have all the privileges of a
member of the House except the right to vote. (Emphasis added).

I have a simple question about the Swains Delegate's non-voting
status: why? That one-word question has gone unanswered by ASG and DOI
for the past 63 years. The closest thing to an answer I have received
from DOI or ASG is ``talk to a lawyer.''
Swains Island receives little to no money from the federal
government. In 2021, out of $1.4 Billion in COVID related CARES Act and
American Rescue Plan Act Funds allocated to American Samoa, Swains
Island was only eligible to receive $3,400.00 (three thousand four
hundred dollars). My concerns about the inequalities in funding around
2020-21 were expressed in a November 30, 2021 letter to the DOI Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Insular and International Affairs, Keone Nakoa.
See Attachment 1. After no response from DOI for seven months, I wrote
to the Secretary of the Interior, Deb Haaland on June 7, 2022. See
Attachment 2.
Without a response to my various concerns about the past, present,
and future inequities facing Swains Island, I was able to arrange a
meeting with Deputy Assistant Secretary Nakoa and DOI Field Rep. for
American Samoa, Lydia F. Nomura in the Tradewinds Hotel lobby In Tafuna
village, American Samoa on November 7, 2022. It was at this point I was
informed that DOI is not going to fight my battles for me and that I
should talk to a lawyer.
The Constitution of American Samoa clearly provides ``American
Samoans,'' meaning lineal descendants of Tutuila, Manu'a, and Swains
Island have the basic fundamental right to protection from the
alienation of their lands. Every time the American Samoa Government has
issues with the Federal Government, they cite the right to the
protection from the alienation of land and culture. Unfortunately, that
same reasoning has not worked within American Samoa for Swains Island.
Not having a vote in the local legislature means the Swains Island
Delegate cannot effectuate the protection of this right, which led to
the complete evacuation of its people.
2022 Referendum and H.R. 6062

In November 2022 a constitutional referendum a majority of American
Samoans voted to give the Swains Island Delegate the right to vote in
the Fono. The amendments were submitted by the Governor to the
Secretary of the Interior in December 2022. Under DOI's 1967 Revised
Constitution of American Samoa, once a majority of voters pass a
constitutional amendment, the Governor submits the proposed amendment
to the Secretary of the Interior, who shall give ``formal approval or
disapproval within 4 months after its receipt.'' It has been over one
year since the voters passed the amendments and over one year since the
amendments were forwarded to the DOI Secretary. DOI has taken no action
nor provided justification why.
In October 2023, the American Samoa Senate passed Fono Senate
Resolution 38-28 introduced by Sen. Togiola Tulafono urging the
Governor ``to pursue Congress with urgency and petition the approval of
our constitutional amendments.'' \2\ The American Samoa Senate, the
upper house of the Fono (Legislature) is unique among all state and
territories in that it is the only body not elected by popular vote,
but rather, selected among chiefly matai title holders through
traditional means according to the traditions of each district of
American Samoa. The decisions of the American Samoa Senate are the
cultural barometer for policy in American Samoa. I am not standing in
opposition to H.R. 6062 alone, in addition to my concerns about H.R.
6062's impact on Swains Island, I am taking the same position as that
of the traditional leaders of Tutuila and Manu'a in the American Samoa
Senate. The people have spoken through the passage of these 5
amendments. Yet, DOI has still taken no action. Why are these
amendments being held up?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Senate Approves Legislation regarding Constitutional
Amendments, Talanei News Now (American Samoa), October 3, 2023,
available at https://www.talanei.com/2023/10/03/senate-approves-
resolution-regarding-constitutional-amendments/
council%20paper%20on%20self-determination, last accessed January 14,
2024.

In the 2022 referendum we rejected amendments 1-3 that sought to
diminish the oversight role of the Secretary of the Interior in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
American Samoa by:

1.  Transferring the power to appoint the Chief and Associate
Justices of the High Court from the DOI Secretary to the
Governor, Defeated: 66% No-34% Yes (defeated by the largest
margin of any amendments;);

2.  Removing the power of the Secretary of the Interior to change
decisions of the High Court, Defeated: 60% No-40% Yes;

3.  Removing the Secretary of the Interior's power to change the
Fono's override of the Governor's veto, Defeated: 61% No-
39% Yes.

These all failed.\3\ At least we were given an opportunity to vote
on the Secretary of the Interior's oversight role. Where was the vote
on Congress's oversight role?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Results of 2022 American Samoa Constitutional Referendum.
Source Ballotpedia.com, available at https://ballotpedia.org/
American_Samoa_2022_ballot_measures, last accessed Jan. 14, 2024.

I have been told that H.R. 6062 didn't exist in 2022, and that it
deals only with federal law, and that's why it wasn't included in the
Constitutional Convention (the ``ConCon'') or the referendum. But
amendments 1-3 we voted down deal with federal law also. The Secretary
of the Interior gets her powers from Congress and the President.
American Samoa cannot supplant powers of federal officials granted by
federal law. We tried anyway.
At the ConCon, Congresswoman Amata said ``We have the option of
asking Congress to repeal the law and revert to the previous
arrangement of approval by the Secretary of Interior, amending the law
just to prohibit unilateral changes by the federal government, or leave
the law as it is. This body may want to recommend a course of action in
its transmittal to the Governor. As your representative in Congress, I
will be guided by your wishes and introduce any changes needed in the
laws.'' \4\ Congresswoman Amata was talking about H.R. 6062 before it
was introduced. Everyone at the ConCon heard her speech and the
Congresswoman even went as far to make a press release about it.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See Amata's Remarks at 2022 ConCon (link available at https://
radewagen.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/amata-speaks-self-
government-and-self-determination-concon-decries, last accessed,
December 30, 2023).
\5\ See Amata Speaks of Self-Government and Self-Determination at
ConCon; Decries Threat from Outside Special Interests, screenshot of
press release by Congresswoman Amata, September 22, 2022, (available at
https://radewagen.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/amata-speaks-
self-government-and-self-determination-concon-decries, last accessed,
December 30, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ConCon never introduced a resolution to change Congressional
involvement in the process. To me, that appears to be (in Congresswoman
Amata's words) asking Congress to ``leave the law as it is.'' \6\
Nonetheless, on October 25, 2023, Congresswoman Amata introduced H.R.
6062, which seeks to remove Congress from the approval process. Again,
why was such an important change never included in the ConCon or the
referendum?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See supra n. 4 at 4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For simply asking these questions locally and to Congress, I have
created enemies. Directly due to my opposition of H.R. 6062, I have
been publicly threatened physically \7\ and verbally threatened that if
I don't change my position on this bill, the Swains Island Amendment
will possibly not be implemented for five years or more. These threats
are not coming from members of the public, they're coming from senior
level members of the legislative and executive branches. On the
contrary, I have also been told if I support this legislation, I could
have the vote by the end of the year by some of the same people. This
does not seem right to me.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Spar of Words Turns Physical After House Session, Talanei
News Now (American Samoa), Jan. 10, 2024, available at https://
www.talanei.com/2024/01/10/spar-of-words-turns-physical-after-house-
session/, last accessed January 15, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I have been told DOI does not review constitutional amendments. I
have been told they do not review local legislation. I have been told
there may have been conflicts with the federal constitution in the
amendments that came out of the 2022 ConCon. I have been told these
things by ranking officials at the DOI Office of Insular Affairs.
National Security Concerns

Swains' recent thrust into the center of constitutional
deliberations in American Samoa has caused the amount of online
misinformation about its history to increase. Swains and the
neighboring New Zealand dependency of Tokelau share a rich history,
which was recognized and celebrated since the marriage of the 3rd
generation Jennings, Alexander Eli Jennings I, to his wife of the
prominent Pedro family in Tokelau, Margaret Pedro. However, Tokelau has
since made historic claims to ownership of Swains Island, recently
given the name Olohega in the Tokelauan language. The 1980 Treaty of
Tokehega between New Zealand and the United States delineating the
maritime boundary between American Samoa and Tokelau increased the
United States' exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the South Pacific by
roughly 100,000 square miles that has continued to feed the canneries
of American Samoa for 70 years; Swains Island being geographically
responsible for the extension, once again signifying that Swains Island
has been a major economic asset to American Samoa since its inclusion
nearly 100 years ago. First with the coconut farm and up to the present
day with the EEZ.
While New Zealand confirmed U.S. sovereignty over Swains with the
Treaty of Tokehega the government and people of Tokelau continue to
question the validity of the United States' sovereignty over Swains
Island.
In 2006, Tokelau held an independence referendum which failed to
reach the required 2/3 majority by a mere 38 votes. One year later in
2007, Tokelau's independence referendum failed by just 16 votes. In
2008 Swains sought to add another layer of federal protection over the
Island by establishing it as part of the National Marine Sanctuary
prior to its people being forced to abandon the Island completely in
2013. In 2022, the General Fono (Legislature) of Tokelau issued a paper
entitled Conversation of the Question of Tokelau's Path Toward Self
Determination (the ``2022 General Fono Paper''). See Attachment 3.
In the 2022 General Fono Paper, the Tokelau Government stated
publicly that they plan to ``Develop a Strategy for Olohega [Swains
Island]'' by 2025/26. It is no secret that Swains Island is in the
forefront of Tokelau's minds when deliberating their potential
independence from New Zealand.
American Samoa is the only U.S. Territory in the Southern
Hemisphere. Swains is the most remote part of American Samoa over 200
miles to the north. Its position on the border with a potentially new
sovereign country who challenges the very legitimacy of American
sovereignty over Swains Island and its surrounding waters represents a
significant threat to national security. DOI's history of indifference
to the rights and affairs of Swains Island jeopardizes not just the
security of Swains, but the integrity of the United States'
international borders.
Conclusion

As a veteran of the U.S. Navy and as a member of the Fono, I took
an oath to defend the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of American Samoa. And I am grateful the voters approved
the Swains Island Amendment and want it to be implemented as soon as
possible. But is H.R. 6062 necessary to implement the amendments we
approved? If there is an issue with the amendments, bring it to light
so the people of American Samoa can agree on a way to fix it.
Unfortunately, I do not believe we have been given enough information
about H.R. 6062.
I have tried for decades to resolve the issues with Swains Island
at the local level and with DOI with no success. No one wants to talk
about Swains Island. It was only with the introduction of H.R. 6062
that I had a chance to tell the story of Swains Island and
surprisingly, several Members of Congress were interested, resulting in
my invitation to Congress this Thursday. This is not about politics. If
DOI can somehow ensure Swains Island is treated fairly with Tutuila and
Manu'a when it comes to protections from alienation of land, and all
rights under the American Samoa Constitution, then I have no problem
supporting H.R. 6062. But if H.R. 6062 can't ensure equal treatment for
all American Samoan Natives, whether your family is from Tutuila,
Manu'a, or Swains, then I see no point in supporting it.

*****

Swains Island by drone, November 2023
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ATTACHMENT 1

Letter from Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings to Deputy Secretary of Insular

and International Affairs, Keone Nakoa, U.S. Department of the
Interior,

November 30, 2021

37th LEGISLATURE OF AMERICAN SAMOA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

November 30, 2021

Hon. Keone Nakoa
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs
U.S. Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240

Re: Request for Assistance to the Office of Insular Affairs

Aloha Honorable Keone Nakoa,

I would like to extend my heartfelt congratulations on your recent
appointment as the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Insular and
International Affairs. My name is Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings; I am the
current serving Swains Island Delegate to the American Samoa House of
Representatives--the only non-voting member of this legislative body.
In my capacity as a Community Leader, I also have the monumental task
and grave responsibility for preserving and perpetuating our unique
Swains Island cultural history, traditions, and economic livelihood. I
am writing this letter to you to seek your assistance in mitigating the
dire struggles we face as a people.
For background information, here is a brief history of Swains
Island. Eli Jennings (an American from Long Island, NY) acquired Swains
Island in 1856; the United States first established a claim of
sovereignty about 1860 under the Guano Act of 1856. In a report to
Congress in 1924, the Secretary of State indicated that the U.S.
Government had ``. . . the responsibility either of extending its
sovereignty over Swains Island and assuming the obligations which such
a course would necessarily entail, or of disclaiming the exercise of
any control or jurisdiction over the island . . .'' The following year
Swains Island was officially annexed by the United States through an
act of Congress and was placed under the jurisdiction of the government
established in American Samoa by the United States (administered by the
Commanding Officer of Naval Station Tutuila until 1951, when it was
transferred to the U.S. Department of Interior).
While American Samoa has benefited from its relationship to the
United States, Swains Island has not . Though we are United States
nationals, we have no significant voice in the government of American
Samoa (where I am a non voting delegate to the Legislature) or of the
United States. Swains Island continues to be a vital economic asset to
American Samoa and the United States, adding some one hundred thousand
square miles of ocean to the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). But the
Swains Island community has been forced to relocate elsewhere due to
the complete lack of economic support from the governments of American
Samoa and the United States.
Now Swains Island has been notified that out of the $1.4 billion
anticipated for American Samoa through the CARES and ARPA fundings,
Swains Island is only eligible for $3,400 (Three Thousand Four Hundred
Dollars). This is like the on-going practice of allocating only
$50,000.00 (Fifty Thousand Dollars) yearly to Swains Island out of an
annual ASG budget of over $400 Million Dollars. It was further
explained that the distribution of ARPA funding was set by the Federal
Government and based on population.
On July 28, 2021, I wrote the American Samoa Leadership, explaining
why Swains Island was forced to evacuate it s residents, and our
desperate need for Infrastructure Development and employment
opportunities. To my disappointment, I have received no response. In
subsequent discussions with the OIA Field Representative it was
revealed that Swains Island is set to receive $3 million. However, the
ASG government responded that they are not aware of any such funding
for Swains Island. In a recent public meeting (on November 9, 2021) for
ports, airports, and transportation projects, it was confirmed again
that Swains is not included under any of these projects, where millions
of dollars are allocated to Tutuila, Manu' a, and Aunu'u. Even under
non-specified areas where flexible justifications are acceptable for
additional millions of dollars to Tutuila, Manu'a, and Aunu'u, Swains
Island does not qualify for assistance.
The purpose of my letter is to bring to your attention the
inequities, injustices and neglect that have seen the systematic demise
of our Swains Island Community. We are a United States Territory by
annexation, not by a Deed of Session. In our view the governments of
the United States and of American Samoa have failed to assume the
obligations which that annexation necessarily entails. The unfair
treatment under the CARES Act and ARPA is the most recent and most
egregious example of this failure.

Therefore, as the Agency with oversight over American Samoa and
Swains Island, and as stated in my original letter to the ASG
Leadership dated July 28, 2021, I humbly submit to you the following
request:

Funding for Swains Island: I respectfully request
assistance in providing me with information on any funding
which may be available through CARES, ARPA, or the
Department of the Interior for Swains Island. Also as
mentioned in my letter to the ASG Leadership, Swains Island
is seeking $10 Million for infrastructure development and
$3 million annual funding for essential services.

Resources to explore other political options for Swains
Island: I respectfully request funding assistance to
explore other political options for Swains Island under the
United States.

Finally Honorable Keona Nakoa, if we are unable to resolve these
injustices to a 165-year Territory of the United States, then On May
13, 2025, Swains Island will recognize one hundred years since becoming
part of American Samoa in 1925, and 70 years of oppression under the
jurisdiction of the U.S. Department of Interior since its transfer from
the U.S. Department of the Navy. I look forward to your favorable
response to my request, and please do not hesitate to let me know if
more clarification is needed.

Respectfully yours,

S'ua Alexander Eli Jennings,
Swains Island Delegate

ATTACHMENT 2

Letter from Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings to the Secretary of the
Interior,

Deb Haaland, June 7, 2022.

37th LEGISLATURE OF AMERICAN SAMOA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

June 7, 2022

The Honorable Deb Haaland
Secretary of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington DC, 2024

Dear Madam Secretary,

My name is Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings, and I have served as the
Delegate of Swains Island for the last 18 years in the American Samoa
House of Representatives. Moreover, during the last 18 years I have
also served as the Traditional Leader for the Swains Island Tokelau
Community in American Samoa, and among other things I preside over
Traditional and Ceremonial events.
With much apprehension, I plea for your leniency given this stretch
of extreme events in the United States, the Insular Areas, and even
here in American Samoa and the Pacific Region, to consider my desperate
appeal for assistance to the Office of Insular Affairs (OIA) in my
attached letter dated November 30, 2021.
My apprehension and disappointment in writing to you stems from the
apparent lack of significance to claims of inequities, injustices, and
neglect against Swains Island in the Territory of American Samoa for
over fifty years, including potential violations of the Constitutional
rights of a U.S. Territory and U.S. Nationals, because of the lack of a
response from OIA for nearly seven months. The situation is further
escalated by the rapidly approaching and long-anticipated Constitution
Convention of 2022, and the 2023 Budget Hearings which will negatively
impact Swains Island even more without a response from the Department
of the Interior. Meanwhile, Swains Island is forced to be abandoned and
left alone and unprotected two hundred miles to the North, even while
the threat of influence by the People's Republic of China in the
Pacific (including illegal fishing activities) is attracting other
countries to the aid and security of neighboring islands.
Therefore, I beg your indulgence to support a prompt response from
OIA to my letter, so that Swains Island can be better prepared for the
upcoming Constitution Convention and Budget Hearings, as well as to
afford a solid foundation for moving forward to a better future for all
American Samoa. I am prepared and willing to provide any additional
information, or recommendations, or to answer any questions at your
pleasure.

Very Respectfully Yours,

S'ua Alexander Eli Jennings,
Swains Island Delegate

ATTACHMENT 3

Council Paper on Self-Determination for May 2022 General Fono
(Tokelau),

available at https://www.matauala.org.nz/_files/ugd/f198ee_

c91191cfc2db4ea88c73da395a32f6a0.pdf, last accessed Jan. 14, 2024.

UNCLASSIFIED

CONVERSATION ON THE QUESTION OF TOKELAU'S PATH TOWARDS SELF-
DETERMINATION.--Malo Fakaauau

Purpose
1. The purpose of the paper is to propose a revisit the views of
our people on the question of self-determination for now and into the
future.
Introduction

2. We are well aware of our efforts in the government development
agenda through our forefathers and foremothers who have passed and
those who are still alive, the able men--aumaga/taulelea, elderly women
and Fatupaepae, through to our children.

3. Tokelau expressed many views to a number of international forum
especially the UN starting back in 1993, to detail Tokelau people's
dreams and their aspirations for the future. Right up to this moment
Tokelau continues to present a voice annually to the C24 (UN Committee
of 24 on Decolonization) who is responsible to decolonize countries.

4. The two referenda in 2006 and 2007, we know didn't achieve the
threshold required for the referendum. But the nature of the views and
our dreams remains. It's now 14 years since we took that referendum,
and there has been silence since with no further conversation where to
from here.

5. That is the spirit of the proposal; Tokelau should be looking at
defining its position. What future dreams does Tokelau wants? The
answer is only within Tokelau.

6. It's is not an easy task, but it is controllable. We keep our
faith that our Lord will help strengthen us because of the nation. We,
Tokelau, should start meeting and have a conversation in our respective
national forums. Also, in villages the conversations should be had.
There may also be a decision required to include our diaspora overseas
to be involve in the conversation. The purpose is to ensure the people
of Tokelau understands what is ahead.

7. Some thoughts that may generate the conversations:

Who will lead such thinking?

Don't leave it for others to start the thinking, but
initiate an internal conversation first

Tokelau should be well prepared to respond to the
question: of a preferred type of governance appropriate for
Tokelau

It is a belief such a conversation will be supported by NZ

If we are not willing and start exploring now, we may be
questioned by our future generation

8. Once Tokelau has decided, then a discussion with our
administering power, NZ to support in improving our capacity and
capability towards our preparations.

9. It is proposed that, by 2025--2026 Tokelau will have a clear
response. The reason being Tokelau was administered by Samoa and NZ
since 1925. If we are fortunate enough to be alive in 2025, that is the
100 year anniversary the people of Tokelau have been administered by
NZ. And there will be other thoughts to improve this matter.

10. But the thinking is, if approved by the three Taupulegas and
villages than we look and investigate we have a clear understanding of
the relationship between Tokelau and NZ over the past century. It will
remind Tokelau also of the efforts to date since the delegation of the
Administrator's powers to the 3 Taupulegas and the GF. It is hoped
there will be important workshops, which will be crucial for Tokelau to
consider on the way ahead.

11. There should be no proposed model from us, but we leave that to
be decided by our people. Or do we select a model from the governance
models provided by UN, or develop our own fit for purpose model that
suits Tokelau and using some component of outside models to achieve the
most appropriate governance model for Tokelau.

12. What is important, as our ancestors would say `Taia ko Lata
Matau'. Let's be strong to first allow Tokelau to develop then seek
help later. Let's look forward for better days, knowing, there will be
many challenges, but Tokelau can initiate the work to know the right
tack depending on the wind direction whether it's from the stern, the
bow, starboard or port side. Important the vaka is buoyance, steady
keel, straight forward sailing, kae, e lahi foki na pokotau, kae e
mafai lava ia Tokelau ke taumaka, ke gauku, fuafua lava ki te matagi pe
tuliheke, pe fetalaaki pe uamua. Ko te Vaka ke hako na tau, ke takele
lelei, ke teletonu, ke gutua, ke tauala, ke malu, ke tologa. And very
dependent on the Voyage Guidance (`Taki Folau').

13. The three models from UN:

Independent

Free Association

Integration

14. Tokelau should first understand these models, as well as
another model that may be different, should Tokelau decides. The final
decision is Tokelau.

15. There are a number of development that works alongside with the
preparation for our internal self-determination agenda.

16. We hope that once agreed by the Taupulegas, then, it is the
time to formally inform NZ

17. By the year 2025-2026 progress made:

Workshops has happened

Activate workshop meetings, reviewing and discussions in
villages and the nation;

Decide on a model that may be selected in future

Improve structures of governance with politics in all
levels of decision making.

Improve governance of services in villages and national,
and properly put right the Office in TALO

The national airport would be complete by then

A proper inter-atoll vessel in place

The fibre optic cable is cut over for high speed internet

Complete priorities for Education and Health

Complete preparation for Climate Change

Tokelau continues to be protected from COVID19

Complete part of the independent Judiciary sector
(consultation?) and the laws themselves

The Tokelau Language Commission is established

The TREEP project is complete.

Secured the EZZ and fishing boundries

Develop a strategy for Olohega

18. There may be other development agenda that the General Fono and
the Taupulega may wish to add.
Recommendations:

19. It is recommended that the General Fono:

i) note that the purpose of the paper is to encourage and seek
endorsement that Tokelau now start the conversation on self-
determination heading into commemorating 100 years under NZ
administration;

ii) agree that Tokelau revive the conversation on self-
determination heading into commemorating 100 years under NZ
administration

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Alexander Eli Jennings,
Swains Island Delegate, American Samoa House of Representatives

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. One of the Constitutional amendments voted upon by
American Samoa citizens in 2022 allowed the delegate seat you currently
occupy the ability to vote in the American Samoa House of
Representatives.

1a) Could you please explain to us the impact of H.R. 6062 on this
amendment attempt?

Answer. H.R. 6062 impacts this amendment attempt by suspending the
requirements for DOI to review of our Amendments within 4 months to an
indefinite time. H.R. 6062 was introduced on October 25, 2023, 10
months after the Governor sent the Amendments to the Department of the
Interior for review, and 3 weeks after the passage of Senate Resolution
38-28 on October 2, 2023, calling on Governor Lemanu P. Mauga to
``pursue the U.S. Congress with urgency and to petition the approval of
our Constitutional Amendments.'' There's no guarantee H.R. 6062 will be
passed by both Houses this year given the Presidential and General
elections in November (SR 38-28 was submitted to the Subcommittee on
Indian and Insular Affairs as additional information on January 31,
2024). DOI has shown that they are willing to unilaterally suspend
certain provisions of our constitution without warning, namely, the 4-
month approval requirement in the American Samoa Constitution being
completely disregarded both before and after the introduction of H.R.
6062.
H.R. 6062 impacts this amendment because it denies Swains Island's
reliance on a Congressional review to get to the core of why Swains
Island has been mistreated and separated from the rest of the islands
of American Samoa for over 63 years under the Administration of the
Department of Interior. Resulting in the nonexistence of Federal
Funding assistance for Swains Island and the forced alienation from our
lands in violation of our Constitutional rights.

1b) How would the passage of this bill affect Swains Island?

Answer. Passage of H.R. 6062 removes requirements for ASG and/or
DOI to consider the Constitutional rights of Swains Island, as
demonstrated by the Executive Order that only includes the 1929
Ratification Act which only recognizes Tutuila and Manu'a as American
Samoa, but does not include HJR 294 approved March 4, 1925, that also
recognizes Swains Island as a part of American Samoa. This is further
demonstrated by the ASG and DOI's failure to respond to letters related
to Constitutional rights violations going back to 2014, and more
recently leading up to the 2022 Constitutional Convention.

Question 2. The 2022 constitutional amendments have yet to be
approved as they are currently still with the Department of the
Interior.

2a) What has been the impact on Swains Island from this delay?

Answer. Swains Island has had no ability to impact any financial
measures that affect Swains Island, such as the 2024 Budget Hearings,
and soon the rapidly approaching 2025 Budget Hearings. Swains Island
only receives local funding for transportation under the Governor's
Special Programs which is further obscured by being combined with the
Manu'a Transportation where they have scheduled by-weekly trips to
Manu'a, while there are no set trips to Swains Island. This practice
has resulted in going for months or even years without transportation
to Swains Island, and the forced evacuation of our lands against our
Constitutional Rights, despite budgeted funds for the Swains Island
transportation during all those years.
Another Legislation was the SB 38-26 Supplemental Appropriation
Bill where $5 million from local surplus fund were allocated for a
Swains Island airport but was cut to $1.5 million and the rest
distributed for other projects in Tutuila and Manu'a, despite Swains
Island's appeals. That is in addition to the recent millions of dollars
out of the $1.4 Billion ARPA funds that were also distributed to
Tutuila and Manu'a for airports, roads, and other infrastructure
projects, but none was ever allocated for Swains Island.
This delay is causing Swains to continue to lose out on having a
vote on these important measures despite the fact the people of
American Samoa already voted in favor of giving Swains voting
representation in the legislature.

Question 3. Can you describe your experience with attempting to
reach out to the Department of the Interior on the 2022 Swains Island
amendment?

Answer.
2014
Efforts to reach out to the Department of the Interior on the 2022
Swains Island amendment originated in 2014, with attempts to resolve
matters at the local level.
On March 13, 2014, I introduced HJR 33-2 seeking the right to vote
for the Swains Island Delegate. At a subsequent Hearing of the House
Ways and Means Committee on HJR 33-2 on March 16, 2014, then Attorney
General Talauega Elesalo Ale (now the Lt. Governor), the late Secretary
of Samoan Affairs Paramount Chief Satele Galu Satele, and the late
Legislative Counsel Henry Kappel, all endorsed the Legislation stating
it was long overdue.
On September 29, 2014, I wrote the Ways and Means Committee
Chairman, I'aulualo Faafetai Talia, explaining my reasons for calling
for a vote on HJR 33-2. A copy of my letter was also sent to
Congressman Faleomavaega E. Hunkin and the ASG Leadership. On October
3, 2014, HJR 33-2 was brought up for a vote of the House where it was
defeated by a vote of 6 to 5, 4-abstained, and 5-absent (a copy of the
letter to the Ways and Means Chair including a copy of HJR 33-2 was
submitted as additional documents to the U.S. House Subcommittee on
Indian and Insular Affairs on January 31, 2024).
Seeking assistance from DOI Assistant Secretary Esther Kiaaina
On October 17, 2014, I wrote the Department of the Interior's
Assistant Secretary Esther Kiaaina, explaining my failed attempts to
seek the right to vote for the Swains Island Delegate, despite the
endorsements of the Attorney General, Secretary of Samoan Affairs and
the Legislative Counsel and requesting a meeting on her anticipated
visit to American Samoa. I also copied the Interior's American Samoa
Field Representative Lydia F. Nomura. I never got a response from
Assistant Secretary Esther Kiaaina and was not granted a meeting with
her on her visit to American Samoa (a copy of the letter to Assistant
Secretary Kiaaina and a copy of the letter to the Ways and Means
Chairman including a copy of HJR 33-2 was submitted to the Subcommittee
on Indian and Insular Affairs as additional information on January 31,
2024).
HJR 33-2 was later submitted as a proposed amendment to the 2022
Constitutional Convention where it passed by an overwhelming vote of 73
to 43 and approved by the people of American Samoa on the 2022
election.
2021
My recent attempt to reach out to the Department of the Interior on
the 2022 Swains Island Amendment again began with a letter to Governor
Lemanu P. Mauga, the President of the Senate Tuaolo Manaia Fruean, and
the Speaker of the House Savali Talavou Ale on July 28, 2021. This was
in response to a notification from Mr. Keith Gebauer, Manager of the
Rescue Plan Coordinator that out of $1.4 Billion Dollar ARPA and Cares
Act funds for American Samoa, Swains Island was only eligible for
$3,400.00 (Three Thousand Four Hundred Dollars). In my letter to the
American Samoa Government (ASG) Leadership, I cited several
inconsistencies in the American Samoa Constitution and treatment of
Swains Island that has contributed to our forced evacuation and
disqualification for ARPA funding. At the same time words of a possible
Constitutional Convention in 2022 started to surface. Also in that
letter, I specifically requested a seat in any Constitutional Review or
Political Status Review Committee (the letter to the ASG Leadership was
submitted to the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs as
additional information on January 31, 2024).
Seeking assistance from DOI Deputy Assistant Keone Nakoa
After 4 months without any response from the local Leaders, I
requested the assistance of the Honorable Keone Nakoa in a letter dated
November 30, 2021. I forwarded a copy of my letter to the ASG
Leadership citing the inequities, injustices, and neglect that has
plagued Swains Island for years in American Samoa to Deputy Secretary
Nakoa (the letter to Deputy Assistant Nakoa was attached to our written
testimony). No response to my letter to Deputy Nakoa was ever received.
2022

Swains Island Administratively denied the Introduction of a
Constitutional Amendment

At the convening of the 3rd Session of the 37th Legislature in
January 2022, the 2022 Constitutional Review Committee was set to
convene on February 9, 2022. Swains Island was not granted a seat on
the Constitutional Review Committee. On February 12, 2022, I requested
through an email to House Legal Counsel Nat Savali to review an
attached copy of HJR 33-2 from 2014 for resubmission as an Amendment
for the 2022 Constitutional Convention. After several discussions with
Legal Counsel Nat Savali and a meeting with the Speaker, my Amendment
was not allowed to be introduced by the end of the 3rd Session of the
37th Legislature.

Seeking the assistance of Madam Secretary Deb Haaland

On June 7, 2022, with no response from Deputy Assistant Nakoa and
repeated discussions with the Office of Insular Affairs as well as
failed attempts to introduce an amendment in the House of
Representatives, I wrote to the Honorable Deb Haaland, seeking her
assistance given the approaching 2022 Constitutional Convention and
2023 Budget Hearings. I have not received a response from the Secretary
(letter to Secretary Deb Haaland was included in our written testimony
to the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs).

Meeting with Policy Director Basil Ottley and DOI American Samoa Field
Representative, Lydia F. Nomura

On August 29, 2022, Interior Assistant Secretary Carmen Cantor was
on hand for the opening of the 2022 Constitutional Convention as the
Keynote Speaker. Accompanying her was Mr. Basil Ottley, Policy Director
of OIA. After the opening Ceremony, I was granted a meeting with Mr.
Ottley and DOI Field Representative Lydia F. Nomura. The purpose of the
meeting was to specifically seek a response from Deputy Secretary Keone
Nakoa to my letter dated November 30, 2021, or Secretary Haaland to my
follow-up letter of June 7, 2022. Neither Mr. Basil nor Ms. Nomura were
aware of any response to my letters.
2023-2024

Meeting with DOI Deputy Assistant Secretary Keone Nakoa

On November 7, 2023, I met Deputy Assistant Keone Nakoa and DOI
American Samoa Field Representative Lydia F. Nomura. When asked about a
response to my letter to him dated November 30, 2021, or my follow-up
letter to Secretary Haaland dated June 7, 2022, he replied that he did
send a reply on behalf of the Secretary. He directed Field
Representative Nomura to forward his response to me. I never received
his letter dated June 30, 2024, which is also consistent with the
response from Policy Director Ottley and Field Representative Nomura
almost 30 days later August 29, 2022, and our Legislative staff's
report that they never received a letter from DOI.
As for any Constitutional violations against Swains Island, Nakoa
stated there are none because the U.S. Constitution does not fully
apply to American Samoa, and DOI does not review local Constitutions.
There may be inconsistencies with the American Samoa Constitution, but
no violations. Besides there may be some illegalities with the American
Samoa 2022 Constitutional Convention. He stated that DOI will not
litigate my case and advised that I seek the help of a lawyer. That's
when I assembled my Opposition to H.R. 6062 Team to oppose
Congresswoman Radewagen's Legislation, resulting in my testifying
before the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs on January 18,
2024.
3a) Follow-up: What responses has the Department of Interior
provided if any?

Answer. I have not received a response from the Department of the
Interior to any of my letters. I only had a chance to meet with Policy
Director, Basil Ottley and the American Samoa Field Representative
Lydia F. Nomura on August 29, 2022, where they assured me, they are not
aware of any response to my letter from Deputy Assistant Nakoa or,
Madam Secretary Haaland. Over a year Later I met with Deputy Assistant
Keone Nakoa and DOI Field Representative in American Samoa, Lydia F.
Nomura on November 7, 2023. There he informed Nomura and I that he sent
a response on behalf of Secretary Haaland, which I never received.

3b) Follow-up: Do you believe that removing the requirement for
amendments to receive Congressional approval would address this issue?

Answer. No. This bill will remove the ability for Swains to address
Congress about DOI and ASG's mistreatment of Swains Island under the
American Samoa Constitution. The only way to resolve this issue is to
have assurance from Congress or DOI that DOI can be held accountable
for disparate treatment of certain classes of American Samoans. This
requires either Congress to amend this legislation and insert a
provision that all people of American Samoa shall be protected from the
forced alienation of their family lands, or an amendment of the
Presidential Executive Order 10264 stating the same. At the least, DOI
needs clarity on the fact that Swains is a part of American Samoa under
their civil administration, and that Swains is a politically co-equal
part of American Samoa as the islands of Tutuila, Aunu'u, and Manu'a.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for your testimony, and I
am sure that you have generated some questions for the Members
up here, thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Governor Guerrero for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LORDES AFLAGUE ``LOU'' LEON GUERRERO,
GOVERNOR, HAGATNA, GUAM

Governor Guerrero. Hafa adai, Madam Chair and members of
the Committee. I am testifying before you today to support the
provision in H.R. 6273 that continues language in the 2003
Compact of Free Association agreements that authorized and
appropriated annual grants to host communities to defy costs
incurred as a result of increased demands placed on health,
educational, social, and public safety services due to the COFA
agreements.
The United States has primarily treated the COFA agreements
as a foreign policy issue. However, it is also crucial for the
United States to fully understand the impact of the COFA
agreements on the domestic policy front. Jurisdictions such as
Guam and other states and territories are adversely affected by
the woefully underfunded mandate of the COFA agreements. Now,
the Federal Government is seeking to make this an unfunded
mandate on host states and territories, which will negatively
impact our state government coffers.
Reimbursements to the government of Guam have been
insignificant. Before Fiscal Year 2024, Guam received between
$12 million and $16 million annually from the Federal
Government for our government's cost in providing public
services and programs to COFA citizens, and between $1.4
million to $2 million annually in compact impact discretionary
funds. We estimate that the Government of Guam spends between
$132 million to $150 million each year providing such services
and programs.
Therefore, I request your support for compact impact
funding solutions. H.R. 1571, also known as the Compact Impact
Fairness Act, CIFA, alone cannot adequately reduce the cost
that COFA migrants have on our host communities. Several local
services and programs rely on compact impact funding that CIFA
cannot cover, with education and public safety costs being the
most significant.
The United States, as the administering power of Guam, the
territory of the United States, is responsible for ensuring,
maintaining, and seeking the island's economic advancement
according to the United Nations charter under chapter 11,
article 73.
Interestingly, House Joint Resolution 96 authorizes and
appropriates to the United States Postal Services a total of
$602.3 million, or $31.7 million for each year of Fiscal Year
2024 through 2043, to fund its services in the FAS. However,
per a 2022 GAO report, USPS stated it incurred a total loss of
$110 million since 2002 by providing services to the FAS.
The USPS appropriation is significantly more than it
requested. Therefore, I ask that the Federal Government fulfill
its duty as an administering power by appropriating sufficient
funding to Guam for the compact impact costs, which is between
$132 million to $150 million each year.
In 2013, GAO submitted a statement for the record to the
U.S. Senate's Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. The
GAO identified several weaknesses related to compact impact
estimates. Following GAO recommendations, Guam applied for a
DOI grant to conduct a cost benefit analysis and develop an
acceptable methodology to address the impacts of the COFAs,
which will help us share the most adequate data with Congress.
Therefore, I ask that continued annual reporting of compact
impact costs to Congress be maintained.
I want to thank my Delegate for his quick introduction of
H.R. 6273, and I appreciate your Committee urgently moving the
bill forward. I strongly urge Congress to pass the provision of
H.R. 6273 to reauthorize and continue to appropriate annual
grants to host communities to defray costs incurred as a result
of increased demands placed on health, educational, social, and
public safety services due to the COFA agreements.
Thank you, and si yu'us ma'ase.

[The prepared statement of Governor Guerrero follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Lourdes A. Leon Guerrero, Governor
of Guam
on H.R. 6273

I strongly urge the Committee to pass the provision in H.R. 6273 to
reauthorize and continue to appropriate annual grants to host
communities to defray costs incurred as a result of increased demands
placed on health, educational, social, and public safety services due
to the COFA agreements. Upon taking office in January 2019, one of my
first letters to the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI) stated that the
government of Guam would address the methodology concerns Congress had
with Guam's annual reports documenting the cost impacts of the Compact
of Free Association (COFA).
Knowing in 2019 that negotiations on the economic terms of the COFA
agreements would have to begin ahead of the 2023 termination date, I
shared the policy points that Guam proposed to be included in the
renegotiated compacts. These five policy points hardly varied over the
past four years, and the message stayed consistent for every current or
incoming legislative or executive official. Topping my list was the
need for adequate reimbursement of compact impact costs with a
dedicated funding source. Without a seat at the renegotiation table, I
took every opportunity to share Guam's needs with those who did have a
seat.
Guam's latest unaudited Compact Impact costs for 2022 show that the
government of Guam spent more than $148 million in local funds to live
up to the obligations the U.S. has made to the COFA nations. To secure
strategic access for U.S. military forces within the FAS boundaries and
strategic denial rights that prevent the use of the FAS boundaries by
other governments without U.S. consent, the U.S. told the FAS that they
could avail themselves of government services when living in the U.S.
Guam is the favored first stop on the migration trail for many FAS
islanders. Their presence within our community has been welcomed and
challenged as we learn how to strengthen and grow from our shared
migration experience. The story is heard across every U.S. community of
a struggling immigrant community.
On Guam, low-income families battle with a limited housing market,
which is also impacted by the largest peacetime military buildup in
America's history. The housing crisis is forcing Indigenous families to
leave the island because they can no longer afford to own a home here,
and many FAS islanders struggle to afford and live comfortably with
many individuals in one housing unit. In contrast, a single 18-year-old
military soldier can pay $2,100 monthly to rent a one-bedroom
apartment. The Guam Housing and Urban Renewal Authority (GHURA) Housing
study also indicates that Guam will need nearly 10,000 new housing
units between 2020 and 2025 to accommodate potential demand, household
growth, and homeless households re-entering the housing market. Guam's
housing crisis is due to the high cost of construction and the lack of
housing inventory. More affordable homes must be built quickly to
stabilize the critical housing shortage.
Our healthcare workforce grapples with an infant mortality rate
among the FAS population that is three times higher than the U.S.
national average. The government of Guam began tracking in 2017 why so
many infants were dying, and the statistics paint a grim picture of how
FAS mothers had high rates of infant deaths due to lack of access to
health care. The Guam Department of Public Health & Social Services
(DPHSS) Child Fatality Review Report highlights that the government of
Guam's locally funded Medically Indigent Program (MIP) can help cover
medical expenses for low-income expectant mothers. However, MIP paid
low rates, which led to many OB/GYNs not accepting patients with
locally funded MIP. Until 2020, FAS young mothers did not have access
to Medicaid. We hope to turn our staggeringly high infant mortality
statistic around due to Congress allowing FAS islanders to be eligible
for Medicaid once again.
The DPHSS also deals with high rates of tuberculosis, including
cases of antimicrobial drug-resistant variants of TB. The medicine for
this program is mainly purchased with local funds. Guam is on the
frontline of challenging, complex public health issues that impact us
hard with further adverse consequences to multiple government of Guam
agencies. The June 2020 GAO report that the state of Arkansas was so
concerned about the high rates of TB among the Marshallese community
that they sent Arkansas officials to the Marshall Islands to conduct
screening for active and latent tuberculosis, diabetes, and leprosy.
The Guam Department of Education (GDOE) is the most impacted
government agency, which reported spending a little over $62 million of
local funds to educate nearly 7,000 FAS students in School Year 2021-
2022. H.R. 1571, also known as the Compact Impact Fairness Act (CIFA),
would not cover this cost. The enrollment of FAS students in our
schools has been as high as 27% of the entire school population.
Multiply your state school population by 27% and then imagine that
locally generated funds were paying that obligation every year and have
been doing so since the Compacts were first signed in 1982. This number
should give you an idea of the magnitude of the unfunded burden Guam
has been carrying.
Our public safety agencies, in 2022 alone, expended nearly $39
million in services to FAS citizens. Our public safety agencies are on
the front lines where many FAS islanders are struggling to adjust to
their lives in Guam and far too often find themselves in the criminal
justice system. Yet, CIFA does not provide a solution to help the
government of Guam with the growing costs of its public safety services
to FAS citizens.
In multiple letters to executive and congressional leaders, I have
stated that Guam has millions of dollars of annual expenses that CIFA
will not cover. My office has supported Delegate James Moylan in
securing federal funding sources for unfunded local costs due to the
COFA agreements. See the table below for a list of some of Guam's local
departments and agencies, mainly education and public safety, that
spend the most local money to provide services to FAS citizens since I
have been in office from FY 2019 to FY 2022. FY 2023 data have not been
compiled yet.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Members of Congress, Guam is dealing with two substantial
federal policies: the COFA agreements allowing unrestricted migration
from Micronesia and the military build-up of Guam, including the first
Marine Corps base built in 68 years and an environmental impact
statement (EIS) process underway right now for the feasibility of
building up to 20 missile defense sites throughout Guam.
As Guam participates in the defense of the country and the FAS
region, we need continued funding, support, and a greater voice where
we can say what is working or not and what is about to break and needs
attention immediately.
We need to continue the processes we are engaged in with Congress/
GAO and DOI to determine the level of funding and support required to
ensure that the local people of Guam and the FAS islanders who call
Guam their home can lead a peaceful existence together. The impacts on
Guam are more significant than those impacting anywhere else in the
country. Multiply 18.5% by every affected state population, and you
will understand the magnitude of what Guam is dealing with. Chairman
Westerman, the GAO stated your FAS population to be nearly 6,000
between 2013 to 2017. Thus, your state of Arkansas would have to have
at least 567,530 FAS islanders in Arkansas to feel the impact that Guam
bears.
It stands to reason that since Guam's impacts are so significantly
huge, finding and fixing them would be arduous and time-consuming. We
are inventing the wheel for calculating the impacts of legal migration
to U.S. host communities.
To continue the process we are engaged in, I ask Congress to
continue the language concerning the intent of Congress, Compact Impact
reimbursement, the definition of a FAS islander to be counted for
impacts, debt relief, census taking, commitment to fund medical
facilities and reporting of impacts in Section 104(e) of U.S. Public
Law 99-239 and U.S. Public Law 108-188. The U.S. Congress has yet to
reimburse Guam for actual expenditures relating to costs incurred from
the COFA agreements, as DOI and Congressional leaders have concerns
about the methodology to compile Guam's statistics. It has been
represented to us that if we fix the methodology, we will have a better
chance of having our Compact costs reimbursed by Congress.
My administration submitted a grant to DOI and secured funding that
would enable the government of Guam to submit audited annual reports
for reimbursement using an accepted methodology that showcases only the
locally generated funds used to provide needed services to the FAS
population.
We are informed by and complying with the dictates of numerous GAO
reports. One of the guidelines that has been the most difficult to
comply with, according to the University of Guam (UOG), which is
administering the grant, is how to calculate the positive impacts to a
local government by FAS islanders who are working in the economy paying
taxes and buying goods and services. UOG has reported a 90% completion
of their preliminary review of the government of Guam agency data and
intake forms.
We have worked with DOI and our subject matter expert/consultant on
crafting a new process that will enable the government of Guam to
capture more information on the impacts of the compacts. We will soon
be able to use our revised methodology to measure the impacts of the
FAS population living and working in Guam because of the COFA treaties
with the US.
Once it is totaled up, we anticipate that the government of Guam
will still be adversely affected by the COFA agreements, expending
nearly $150 million annually in locally generated funds. The compact
impact reporting pathway that winds from Guam to DOI to Congress must
be maintained so Guam can submit a report of impacts for reimbursement.
Our preferred course of action is to deal with this matter within the
U.S. system.
In 1985, with the passage of the first COFA agreements, the
language in U.S. Public Law 99-239 stated, ``The Congress hereby
declares that if any adverse consequences To United States territories,
commonwealths or the State of Hawaii result from implementation of the
Compacts of Free Association, the Congress will act sympathetically and
expeditiously to redress those adverse consequences.''
In 2003, in U.S. Public Law 108-188, the U.S. Congress stated, ``In
reauthorizing the US-FSM Compact and the US-RMI Compact, it is not the
intent of Congress to cause any adverse consequences for an affected
jurisdiction.''
Guam is the most affected jurisdiction in the country, and our
adverse consequences will not be solved solely with the passage of
CIFA. We ask that Congress update Section 104(e) and live up to the
federal government's commitment to not negatively impact Guam with the
implementation requirements of the COFA treaties. We ask that Congress
pass the provision in H.R. 6273 to provide funding to Guam for the
compact impact costs we incur due to the U.S. treaty obligations to the
FAS.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Lourdes Aflague Leon
Guerrero, Governor,Guam

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. There are significant concerns about enacting laws that
prevent citizens of the Freely Associated States (FAS) from obtaining
residency in Guam as that would violate the terms of the Compacts of
Free Association.

1a) Do you believe in the importance of the Compacts of Free
Association and the benefits they provide for all of us Americans, both
here in the states and in the territories?

Answer. During the Pacific battles of World War II, the United
States learned how important it is to keep these islands and sea lanes
open and free. The Compact nations' EEZs encompass the largest and most
significant trading routes between the populous manufacturing countries
of Asia and the rest of the world. I recognize that it is vitally
important for the United States that the enduring relationship with the
Compact nations is nurtured and strengthened through the COFAs.

1b) Would it be fair to say that it is important to both honor the
terms of these international agreements while finding ways to help
address Guam's needs?

Answer. The federal government must provide adequate funding to
host communities such as Guam to help cover Compact Impact costs caused
by providing local government services such as education and public
safety that the Compact Impact Fairness Act will not cover. The
Pacific, including allies and adversaries, will be looking at how Guam
and the COFA nations are treated in the United States' push to
strengthen its Pacific footprint and relationships. I am confident that
the federal government can both honor the terms of the COFA and find
ways to help address Guam's needs, including providing funding for
Compact Impact costs by reauthorizing Compact Impact grants to host
communities.

Question 2. How has Guam used the Compact Impact grant funds
provided under the 2003 Compacts of Free Association?

Answer.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

2a) What impact would it have on Guam and its communities if
they were not renewed?

Answer. If the Compact Impact grants are not renewed, the
government of Guam would have to bear the entire cost of providing
local government services to Compact migrants. For the latest year,
Fiscal Year 2022, the government of Guam spent over $148 million
providing health, educational, social, and public safety services to
Compact migrants. This significant financial burden on our government
coffers adversely affects how we budget and spend our local money.

Question 3. In what ways have the migrants from the FAS positively
benefited Guam?

Answer. DOI grant funds have been subgranted to the University of
Guam (UOG) to address the GAO's concerns with an expected deliverable
of the methodology and cost benefit analysis. The DOI grant has been
extended with a new performance end date of September 30, 2024. UOG has
reported a 90 percent completion of their preliminary review of the
government of Guam agency data and intake forms. One of the major
components is featured to achieve overall estimates of the benefits and
costs of migrants. The UOG has secured the Input-Output (I/O) analysis
using the IMPLAN economic model. This economic model will allow users
to conduct economic impact analysis for planning purposes. The IMPLAN
software application will support the framework to conduct an analysis
of economic impacts. The Guam IMPLAN hybrid model profiles DOI
payments, local government spending, and the creation of jobs. The
development of the model format includes the construction of an Excel
benefit-cost template to identify the baseline and scenario changes
related to programs and services for the compact migrants to Guam. The
extension of the project has allowed UOG to meet the project
deliverables of producing a methodology in computing the financial
impacts for servicing COFA residents and the cost-benefit analysis.

Individuals and families from the Compact nations utilize the
Compacts to further their economic advancement and enhance the quality
of their lives, and in doing so, they often become important members of
the host communities. Our labor force depends on the Compact nations'
workers, who play a vital role in every job category and industry.
Islanders from the Compact nations bring cultural diversity to every
setting, be it the classroom, job site, church, sports, or
neighborhood.

______

Ms. Hageman. I thank the witness for their testimony, and
the Chair now recognizes Mayor Alig for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JESSE ALIG, MAYOR, PITI, GUAM

Mr. Alig. Good afternoon and hafa adai, Chairman Hageman
and distinguished members of the House Committee on Natural
Resources and the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs.
My name is Jesse Alig, and I am the Mayor of Piti, a village in
Guam. I present this testimony as the President of the Mayor's
Council of Guam. Nineteen mayors and seven vice mayors comprise
our council, and this is my second term. I sincerely thank you
for this esteemed opportunity to speak on the importance of
passing H.R. 6273.
I begin my testimony by painting a picture of a COFA
migrant's journey into my beautiful island home. A couple with
seven children living in Chuuk makes the difficult decision to
send the husband to Guam in search of better opportunities.
Chuukese is his first language, and he is not proficient in
English. Upon arrival in Guam, all travelers must go through
customs and immigration process. He needs help understanding
the forms presented to him for completion, and answers them as
best as he can. Upon leaving the baggage claim terminal, family
or friends residing in Guam meet him, and he is excited at the
prospect of one day reuniting with his wife and children in
Guam.
He is not accustomed to searching online for jobs, so he
begins his job search by speaking with those in his social
circle. After months on Guam, living with 15 relatives in a
substandard wood and tin two-bedroom home, and remaining
unemployed, he finally lands a job as a yard maintenance
worker, and earns less than $500 a month. He slowly discovers
that reunification with his family will be more complicated
than he imagined, and he longs for his wife and children.
Out of frustration, he turns to alcohol to numb the
loneliness and pain of being unable to provide the life he and
his wife dreamed of for their family. He continues to utilize
alcohol as a crutch, and in an inebriated state commits an
unintentional crime of vehicular homicide. He then becomes a
consumer within Guam's justice system.
This story I just shared with you is more common than you
think. Although the man in this story unintentionally committed
vehicular homicide, if you were to Google crimes on Guam
involving COFA migrants you would quickly see stories that
include sexual abuse, home invasion, assault, robbery, and the
list goes on and on.
Guam has graciously hosted our COFA guests for almost four
decades. In 2018, the U.S. Census Bureau officially reported
that Guam has the highest number of COFA migrants in the
country, with 18,874 residents from the Freely Associated
States, or a little over 10 percent of our total population.
Now, in 2024, the number is estimated to be around 24,000
migrants, close to 15 percent of Guam's population, which
includes a couple of generations of COFA American citizens.
Despite hosting the most COFA migrants, Guam still does not
receive the most significant amount of compact impact funding.
The Office of Insular Affairs allocated only $35 million in
compact impact funding, including $5 million which may be
available at the discretion of Congress. Guam's costs alone for
educating, providing health care, as well as enforcing the law
and keeping COFA migrants safe, is at least $30 million
annually.
Guam's homeless population has increased exponentially
since the COFA agreement was enacted, many of whom are FAS
citizens. Our mayors have to deal with this issue at the
village level. Guam's homeless looked to unlawfully occupy
abandoned houses or homes that are currently vacant and are in
between rental tenants. Guam's parks are littered with many
homeless COFA migrants. Because of their constant loitering,
and many in an inebriated disposition, homeowners, churches,
and small businesses are forced to make costly mitigation
efforts on their private properties to keep them safe.
My words alone are insufficient to describe the enormous
impact of COFA citizens on Guam's quality of life. There are
many realities that the mayors see and experience that many
outsiders, including here in Washington, DC, don't see and may
not immediately understand.
My proposal for using the financial support enabled by this
legislation would be to establish a welcoming process upon a
COFA migrant's arrival in Guam. By establishing this process, I
believe we can better address potential issues before they
arise, and improve COFA migrants at the start of their journey.
Assimilation should include education on social services, legal
processes, and local and Federal laws. While this sounds like
it should be already in place, Guam cannot financially support
these necessary services using its current budget.
Let it be clear that there are success stories of COFA
migrants on Guam. They are our caregivers, our pastors, our
cooks, and our helpers. Because of their respect and
appreciation for culture and life, we entrust our families and
homes to their care.

I hope this testimony has shed some light on our daily
issues living together in Guam. Guam is a melting pot of many
cultures, and her people continue to be warm and welcoming to
those who wish to call it home. But the hard reality is that
there is a cost to ensuring a safe and caring community, and we
look forward to working with our Federal partners to make this
happen.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Alig follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jesse L.G. Alig, Piti Mayor
and President, Mayors' Council of Guam
on H.R. 6273

Good afternoon and Hofa Adai, Chairman Harriet Hageman and
distinguished members of the House Committee on Natural Resources and
the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs.
My name is Jesse Alig, and I am the Mayor of Piti, a village in
Guam. I present this testimony as the President of the Mayors' Council
of Guam. Nineteen mayors and seven vice mayors comprise our Council,
and I am in my second term as President.
I sincerely thank you for this esteemed opportunity to speak on the
importance of passing H.R. 6273, the ``Guam Host Community Compensation
Act,'' introduced by Guam's Congressional Delegate James Moylan.
While many other proponents will testify, referencing vital
statistics and historical data, today, I offer you my perspective on
the impact of the Compact of Free Association--or COFA--from a
grassroots level.
I ask you to indulge me as I begin my testimony by painting a
picture of a COFA migrant's journey into my beautiful island home,
which is home to approximately 165,000 Guamanians.
A couple with seven children living in Chuuk makes the difficult
decision to send the husband to Guam in search of better opportunities.
Chuukese is his first language, and he is not proficient in English.
Upon arrival in Guam, all travelers must go through the customs and
immigration process. He needs help understanding the forms presented to
him for completion and answers them as best as he can. Upon leaving the
baggage claim terminal, family or friends residing in Guam meet him,
and he is excited at the prospect of 1 day reuniting with his wife and
children in Guam.
He is not accustomed to searching online for jobs, so he begins his
job search by speaking with those in his social circle. After several
months on Guam, living with 15 relatives in a sub-standard, wood and
tin, two-bedroom home, and remaining unemployed--he finally lands a job
as a yard maintenance worker and earns less than $500 a month. He
slowly discovers that reunification with his family will be more
complicated than imagined, and he longs for his wife and children.
Out of frustration, he turns to alcohol to numb the loneliness and
pain of being unable to provide the life he and his wife dreamed of for
their family. He continues to utilize alcohol as a crutch and, in an
inebriated state, commits an unintentional crime of vehicular homicide.
He then becomes a consumer within Guam's justice system.
This story I just shared with you is more common than you think.
Although the man in this story unintentionally committed vehicular
homicide--if you were to google crimes on Guam involving COFA
migrants--you would quickly see stories that include sexual abuse, home
invasion, assault, robbery, and the list goes on and on.
Guam has graciously hosted our COFA guests from the Federated
States of Micronesia, the Republic of Palau, and the Republic of the
Marshall Islands for almost four decades. In 2018, the U.S. Census
Bureau officially reported that Guam has the highest number of COFA
migrants in the country, with 18,874 residents from the Freely
Associated States, or a little over 10% of our total population. Now,
in 2024, the number is estimated to be around 24,000 migrants, close to
15% of Guam's population, which includes a couple of generations of
COFA-American citizens.
Despite hosting the most COFA migrants, Guam still does not receive
the most significant amount of Compact Impact funding. The Office of
Insular Affairs allocated only $35 million in Compact Impact Funding,
including $5 million, which may be available at the discretion of
Congress. Guam's cost alone for educating, providing healthcare as well
as enforcing the law, and keeping COFA migrants safe is at $30 million
annually.
Guam has received between $14 million and $17 million since 2003
from the federal government for hosting COFA migrants, which has been
grossly insufficient. Our island leaders, including current and former
governors, our current and former Congressional delegates, and our
current and former legislators, have traveled to Washington, DC, for
several decades, meeting with leaders of our federal government to
increase COFA reimbursements for Guam, but to no avail. To complicate
matters, the latest COFA agreement expired in September 2023, and Guam
is not scheduled to receive Compact Impact funding. Congressman
Moylan's legislation, H.R. 6273, will restore this critical Compact-
Impact funding for another ten years.
A significant area of concern regarding COFA migrants is the high
volume of criminal activity, from theft and driving under the influence
to violent crimes like sexual assault and even murder. One in five
convicted criminals currently incarcerated at Guam's correctional
facility is from one of the Freely Associated States, and in 2023, more
than one-third of arrests were COFA citizens. It is virtually
impossible to see a local police blotter, open a Guam newspaper, or
watch a local television newscast without seeing a COFA migrant
arrested, charged, and incarcerated for a felonious crime.
The negative impact this has on our community is overwhelming,
including the cost of investigating these crimes, prosecuting the
accused, and eventual incarceration, not to mention the damage and
trauma each victim of their crimes in our community has to bear.
Congressman Moylan will alleviate the incarceration component through
H.R. 6273 by requiring the Federal Bureau of Prisons to incarcerate FAS
citizens who are convicted of a felony.
H.R. 6273 will also mandate that COFA citizens provide proof of
work or education before permanently settling in Guam.
Making matters worse, Guam's homeless population has increased
exponentially since the COFA agreement was enacted, many of whom are
FAS citizens. Our mayors have to deal with this issue at the village
level. Guam's homeless look to unlawfully occupy abandoned houses or
homes that are currently vacant and are in between rental tenants.
Guam's parks are littered with many homeless COFA migrants. Because of
their constant loitering and many in an inebriated disposition,
homeowners, churches, and small businesses are forced to make costly
mitigation efforts on their private properties to keep them safe.
My words alone are insufficient to describe the enormous impact of
COFA citizens on Guam's quality of life. There are many realities that
the mayors see and experience that many outsiders--including here in
Washington, DC--don't see and may not immediately understand.
Therefore, when you receive testimony recommending COFA children attend
Department of Defense schools instead of our overcrowded and strained
Guam school system or receive medical care at the U.S. Naval Hospital
instead of the dilapidated Guam Memorial Hospital, please consider them
as solutions in support of our absolute willingness to ensure we take
care of all residents.
The residents of Guam have welcomed COFA citizens to our small
island, and we will continue to invite them and take care of them.
However, their impact and burden must be addressed and funded. On
behalf of the Mayors' Council of Guam, I implore you to pass H.R. 6273
to allow us to continue to adequately improve and maintain the quality
of life for all U.S. citizens and COFA migrants on the island of Guam.
Through passage, Guam can address issues from the front end. We are
advocates of culture and welcome all cultures to our home. Through
proper assimilation, we can help our COFA brothers and sisters fulfill
their dreams by providing a stronger start. We put enormous efforts
into educating young children, and I believe the idea can carry on to
our COFA migrant crisis. Solutions should now focus on the front end of
migrant issues rather than dealing with them at the final straw.
My proposal for using the financial support enabled by this
legislation would be to establish a welcoming process upon a COFA
migrant's arrival in Guam. By establishing this process, I believe we
can better address potential issues before they arise and improve COFA
migrants at the start of their journey. Assimilation should include
education on social services, legal processes, and local and federal
laws.
While this sounds like it should be already in place, Guam cannot
financially support these necessary services using its current budget.
Let it be clear that there are success stories of COFA migrants on
Guam. They are our managers, supervisors, caregivers, our pastors, our
cooks and our helpers. Because of their respect and appreciation of
culture and life, we entrust our families and our homes to their care.
I hope this testimony has shed some light on our daily issues
living together in Guam. Guam is a melting pot of many cultures and we
are well known and recognized for our hospitality and family-oriented
nature in the western Pacific region. We want to continue to be warm
and welcoming to those who wish to call it home. But the hard reality
is that there is a cost to ensuring a safe and caring community and we
look forward to working with our federal partners to make this happen.
Thank you!

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Jesse Alig,
Mayor of Piti, Guam

The Honorable Jesse Alig did not submit responses to the Committee by
the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Do you have an estimate on how many migrants from the
Freely Associated States (FAS) reside in Guam and how many among them
are employed or attend Guam's academic institutions?

1a) Do you believe that the intent of H.R. 6273 is to try to
discourage FAS migrants from working or studying in Guam?

Question 2. What impact would it have on Piti if H.R. 6273 was not
enacted?

Question 3. How have Compact Impact grants provided under the 2003
Compacts served Guam's local communities?

Question 4. In what ways have the migrants from the FAS positively
benefited Guam?

______

Ms. Hageman. The Chair thanks the witness for their
testimony, and the Chair will now recognize Members for 5
minutes of questioning, starting with myself.
H.R. 6062 would grant the President and, subsequently, the
Secretary of the Interior, the sole responsibility of approving
any amendment to the American Samoan Constitution. The current
process under existing law is that the Secretary of the
Interior must approve amendments, and then Congress.
In 2022, the citizens of American Samoa supported several
amendments to their constitution, and they have been submitted
to the Department of the Interior for approval. Congress has
yet to receive these proposed constitutional amendments. Mr.
Nakoa, can you provide the Committee an update on DOI's review
of these amendments?
Mr. Nakoa. Thank you for the question, Chair Hageman.
The Department has indeed received the five approved
amendments from the Governor, as transmitted in, I forget the
date.
However, after consultation or conversations with both
Governor Mauga and his staff, as well as Representative
Radewagen and her staff, the consensus decision has been to
pause the ultimate review in order for Congress to act on H.R.
6062.
Ms. Hageman. OK, so my understanding is you are not going
to be moving forward with those amendments at this time.
Mr. Nakoa. At this point, that is the request and that is
our intention.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Compact Impact Grants have provided $30
million annually in grant funding to the Pacific Territories
and Hawaii since Fiscal Year 2004. This program expired in
Fiscal Year 2023, and the Biden administration's COFA proposal
did not reauthorize Compact Impact Grants, but instead included
compact impact fairness provisions.
My question is why does the Administration believe that the
compact impact fairness provisions are a better solution to
addressing the impact of the compacts?
Mr. Nakoa. Thank you for the question.
As mentioned in, I guess, the hearing about the Compact
Impact Fairness Act earlier, and in several other hearings that
we have had on the compacts, the position of the Administration
is that the Compact Impact Fairness Act is a more holistic,
enduring solution for addressing the impacts on host states and
territories from the immigration or migration provisions of the
compacts.
So, with that, the benefits would also follow the FAS
citizens wherever they are choosing to live, as opposed to just
staying with the four identified jurisdictions in the Compact
Impact Grant authorized under P.L. 108-188 in 2003.
Ms. Hageman. Well, Mayor Alig, do you agree that the
compact impact fairness is the best solution for Guam?
Mr. Alig. I do not agree.
Ms. Hageman. OK, would you please explain?
Mr. Alig. In my testimony, I talked about all the expenses
that we endure as an island, and how our economy is affected.
So, I don't believe that it gives us a fair share at what we
really should be receiving in order to take care of the
migrants and our own people.
Ms. Hageman. Do you believe that the number needs to be
higher than the $30 million?
Mr. Alig. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Hageman. OK. But what about the way that it is being
addressed through the compact impact fairness, rather than
through the Compact Impact Grants? Is there any difference
between the two?
Mr. Alig. Unfortunately, I cannot answer that question.
Ms. Hageman. OK, thank you. I have a couple of questions
for Lieutenant Governor Ale.
If H.R. 6062 becomes law, Congress will lose part of its
oversight authority. And while Congress still has the authority
granted under the Territory Clause of the U.S. Constitution, it
would no longer be directly part of the American Samoan
constitutional amendment process. Can you explain to us why you
believe that this is still the best path forward for American
Samoa?
Mr. Ale. Thank you, your honor. It is the best process
because currently we have five amendments. And if approved by
the Secretary, we will have to take it through Congress. And as
mentioned by Delegate Radewagen, well No. 1, Congress has no
obligation to take up our amendments, so we could be waiting
for a very long time before these amendments are approved.
Congress has so much more important activities that is on
its table. The issues that we talk about in our local
constitutional amendments are local issues, and it should be
resolved locally. We have developed a very good relationship
with the Secretary for over many years, and we believe they
will give more attention to our issues than Congress. So, that
is the best way forward.
Ms. Hageman. Mr. Jennings, if I understand your testimony
correctly, you disagree with that position, is that correct?
Mr. Jennings. Madam Chairwoman, only for the fact that
there is no assurance that the rights of all Americans,
including Native American Samoa comprising of the lineal
descendants of Tutuila, Manu'a, and Swains Island. It is not
part of the mandate that we feel that DOI is under, based on
the discoveries with the Executive Order. It only recognizes
one resolution, and that was the Ratification Act of 1929. But
it failed to recognize the 1925 joint resolution of Congress
that made Swains Island part of American Samoa. And rather than
pointing fingers, I have to say that is where the problem is.
Ms. Hageman. OK, perhaps we can figure that one out.
I yield back. I am out of time, but I am going to recognize
the Ranking Member, Ms. Leger Fernandez, for 5 minutes for
questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, witnesses, once again for
sharing the perspectives across the islands with us today.
And I know nobody wants to leave the beautiful islands that
we have visited, but they feel that they must to seek health
care, to seek job opportunities, and Arkansas has more COFA
migrants than New Mexico, with our zero, but we know it is a
hardship.
You have described the numbers to us. You have described
what a life story could look like and does look like, and the
need to address those impacts, and the need for a welcoming
center, which sounds like a great idea.
Can you share with me, Governor, the trend as you are
seeing it? I think I picked up that it went from 10 percent of
the population to 15 percent. But Governor, what has been the
trend over the last 5 years, and what are your worries if that
trend continues?
Governor Guerrero. The trend of migration from these FAS
states has been increasing significantly every year. The cost
of expenses to provide services to these migrants have been
increasing tremendously from since my administration, from
Fiscal Year 2019 to 2022. We now see a total of about $424
million of total expenses to include public safety, education,
and so forth, with only a $54 million reimbursement.
I wanted to also mention, Congresswoman, that we support
CIFA, but CIFA only addresses Federal programs. They are
Federal dollars for Federal programs. Our local coffers provide
the financial means to provide services to our people and our
Micronesian brothers and sisters, but they come out of our
general fund. And these services are education, public safety,
fire, Department of Corrections, the judicial services, DYA,
Department of Youth Affairs. So, these services are very
important also to provide for the quality of life. CIFA does
not address the expenses that come from those programs. These
are programs that we provide from our local funding. And that
is the difference between CIFA and our local funds. So, the
impact is greater to our local funds than what CIFA is meant to
address.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much. And when I look
at this bill, I wanted you to address the fact that the COFA
agreement states that residents of the Freely Associated States
are granted non-immigrant residency status, which means you can
migrate. But section 4 of this bill would require proof of
employment or admission to an education facility, as well as
proof of a residential address for any citizen of the Freely
Associated States.
And we heard, Mayor, your story highlighted one of the
concerns that this might be intended to address, right, so that
you have somewhere to go, you know what you are doing. However,
it appears that there would be a conflict between those two
provisions.
So, Governor Guerrero, could you help me understand how to
deal with this conflict that it looks like these two sections
of the bill would be in conflict with each other, and do you
have any suggestions of how to deal with that?
Governor Guerrero. First of all, I want to make it very
clear that we welcome our brothers and sisters to improve their
quality of life. And we also benefit from their job services,
their labor. It improves the economy. So, we support migration.
There definitely has to be some reconciliation, because
what we do not want to experience is becoming wards of our
state. We want every migrant that comes in to be able to be
educated, to be able to learn, to be able to get medical care,
to be able to provide residency for their families. So, there
is some necessary work, I believe, that can be done for
reconciliation, and I am very confident that our Congressman,
who has the pulse of our community and our constituencies, will
come up, in conjunction with our support and also our ability
to work with him very closely, and with your Committee, to come
into some very positive reconciliation.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much. And just real
quickly, with regards to H.R. 6062, it is a bill that has seven
words, right, as you pointed out. It is not even a full
sentence, almost. It is seven words. And real quickly, those
seven words, Lieutenant Governor, what do they mean to you?
I mean, we don't have a lot of time, we have run out of
time, but can you just give me two sentences of why those seven
words are so key to your future?
Mr. Ale. As mentioned earlier, and I thank you for the
question, it really kills our ability to have local self-
determination. One of the amendments is to give this good
gentleman the right to vote in our local legislature. That
amendment will sit and probably die on the vine in Congress.
But if this provision is removed and repealed, then with the
support of the Secretary that could be passed, and this
gentleman could be voting in the local legislature of American
Samoa this year. That is a wonderful self-determination issue.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much. My time is
expired, and I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Radewagen for 5
minutes of questions.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Lieutenant Governor, [speaking Native language]. The 1983
statute not only suspends the approval by the Secretary of the
Interior, but when the amendment has been approved by the
people it suspends an act of self-determination, and yet the
statute does not provide any criteria or standard for approval
or disapproval, or a time limit for Congress to act.
Do you agree that the real test Congress should apply to
local self-determination does not need to be in a statute
because it is in the territorial clause, and that the real
standard for congressional review of local self-government and
local law should be in compatibility with Federal territorial
law and policy as determined by Congress, which American
Samoans have honored and obeyed as patriotic Americans?
Mr. Ale. Thank you, Congresswoman Radewagen, for the
question. The answer is absolutely yes.
The territorial clause is all Congress needs to have its
authority maintained to govern American Samoa and all
territories of the United States. This additional provision
that we are seeking to repeal is completely unnecessary. And as
you mentioned in your testimony, it was added into an
appropriations bill without Committee review or regular order.
So, it is time for it to be removed so that the people of
American Samoa can finally proceed to amend its constitution.
Thank you.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you.
Secretary Nakoa, although some of the details may be lost
to history, the original reasoning behind the 1983 statute
included concerns over unilateral changes to the constitution
made by Interior. What is the current policy regarding
administrative changes to territorial law?
Mr. Nakoa. I would have to consult the departmental manual
for more specific processes.
That being said, in general, when we receive something like
this that would impact the territories, one of the major things
that we seek to do is consult with the territories and the
territorial leadership, so that the Department can be well
aware of their stance on the proposal, and that we are seeking
to both move ahead in what is in the best interest of the
territory, in coordination with the territorial governments.
Mrs. Radewagen. Has Interior finished reviewing the
proposed constitutional amendments from the recent referendum?
And do you have any issues with or opposition to any of the
amendments?
Mr. Nakoa. I think I would have to say that we are still
technically in the process of reviewing those amendments, only
because when we conclude the process, I believe we are due to
report out to Congress.
However, I can say that I have not heard any opposition to
any of the five amendments that were approved by the people of
American Samoa.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Jennings, first of all, I want to let you know that I
am in favor of fair representation for all of our people. I
support self-governance and any amendments our people wish to
make to our local laws. And to that end, thank you for being
here.
In your testimony, your opposition to H.R. 6062 seems to be
predicated on whether it will help move the recent amendments
forward based on the testimony of Secretary Nakoa and
Interior's stated policy of respecting local affairs. Do you
still oppose H.R. 6062?
Mr. Jennings. Thank you, Congresswoman. I appreciate the
question.
As mentioned earlier, I think the reason why I am here
today is for the rights of every American, which includes
American Samoan Natives.
My opposition, and not really an opposition, is the fact
that there are no guarantees that if we revert this back to the
Department of the Interior, that the rights of every American
Samoan Native will be considered under the Administration of
the Department of the Interior.
For example, why hasn't there been a vote for Swains Island
after 63 years?
Mrs. Radewagen. I have 12 seconds left, Delegate Jennings.
Mr. Jennings. If I can have assurance that we can verify
that H.R. 6062, this legislation, will acknowledge the rights
of every American Samoan Native, I am ready to embrace you and
support this legislation. That is all I am looking for.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, sir. I am totally out of time.
I have other questions I would like to submit for the
written record, Chairwoman.
I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Yes, we can do that. The Chair now recognizes
Mr. LaMalfa for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Mayor Alig, when we look at the impact grants, and that the
Biden administration's COFA has moved away from the Compact
Impact Grants, they have instead, as we have talked about,
chosen to implement impact fairness provisions, as I have it.
So, Mayor, would you touch a little bit more on the pros and
cons of the decision and how, for you, as a director of all the
mayors, the mayors association there, what are you and your
colleagues looking at here on this?
Mr. Alig. In regards to the CIFA and how CIFA would be
beneficial to us? Is that your question?
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes, going away from Impact Grants to the
fairness provisions, how does that change, and is it overall
going to be better for you, or are you concerned about it?
Mr. Alig. Well, we are most concerned about the funding, or
the lack of funding that we would receive, that we would lose
because of it and its effects, yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes, because my understanding, the overall
numbers are probably going to go down for you, so you will have
less ability to fund the program.
Mr. Alig. That is correct, yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. All right. Please send us more background
on that as we go. I know we are going to run short here pretty
quick with votes coming up.
But I would also like to yield the remainder of my time to
Mr. Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. Mayor, thank you for your testimony. It was very
helpful, giving that example and understanding how rough it is
for migrants to come on over to the island, and the struggles
that we face and, unfortunately, some of the lawbreaking
activities that do happen.
Mr. Mayor, we have problems with the Department of
Corrections. Would you agree?
Mr. Alig. I do agree, yes.
Mr. Moylan. And if nothing comes around, and we are not
able to make some changes through the help of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons by assisting us with these migrants, what do
you see as the future of the Department of Corrections under
this situation?
Mr. Alig. Well, it is obvious that the overcrowding will
continue. And the biggest issue for us, as mayors, is the
safety of our community. And we will see that continue to rise.
Our police department does the best that they can do, but we do
know that our current administration is working on plans for a
better Department of Corrections, but without any support from
the Federal Government we are not going to see a safe
community.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Mayor.
Governor Lou Leon Guerrero, likewise, the Department of
Corrections' current situation. If we are unable to move this
measure forward, what do you see the future of the Department
of Corrections, please?
Governor Guerrero. I think the future of the Department of
Corrections is going to be bleak, and there will be some crisis
in terms of overcrowding, in terms of ability to provide more
personnel capacity to monitor these prisoners. So, I feel that
the section that creates a Memorandum of Agreement with the
Federal Government to incur the cost for those individuals who
have committed a crime that are from the FAS, to incur that
cost would greatly help our general coffers.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Governor. We have a little bit more
time left. Governor Guerrero, in previous hearings, Secretary
Cantor said that CIFA will be a net positive for the
territories. Could you speak on what effect CIFA has on the
costs the Government of Guam must endure to host migrants?
Please further expand.
Governor Guerrero. As I mentioned earlier, CIFA is the
Federal dollars for Federal programs. When CIFA was started to
be discussed in Congress, Congressman Ed Case and Senator
Hirono sought my perspective and my comments on it, and I
totally support it. I support the ability to provide SNAP
programs, housing programs, these Federal programs to our
brothers and sisters from the Micronesia. It is not enough for
us in terms of the impact of the expenses to provide the local
programs to our citizens, and to our residents, and to the
migrants that come to Guam.
You must also understand that there are two Federal
policies that Guam is facing. One is the COFA migrants, two is
the military buildup. Both policies will incur and have an
outcome of increased population to our small island.
For us as a government to provide the kind of services, the
substantive services, the quality of services to all of the
residents of Guam requires more financial capacity and more
increase in funding to pay for the expenses. As a result of
that, our general fund is greatly and significantly impacted
with these local programs. CIFA, I think, will help, but it is
not enough in terms of sufficient financial capacity to provide
those services.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Governor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair will now recognize Mr. Moylan for
any additional questions that he may have.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Nakoa, why does the Biden administration feel that non-
citizens deserve entitlements not available to American
citizens that have served their country and happen to live on
Guam or Puerto Rico?
Mr. Nakoa. I guess, just to clarify the question, are you
asking why FAS citizens who choose to live in the States would
be eligible for certain programs so that, so yes, I guess to
clarify one thing that has been maybe miscommunicated about the
impact of the Compact Impact Fairness Act, FAS citizens who
live in Guam or any jurisdiction where certain Federal programs
are not available to a U.S. citizen or U.S. resident living in
that community, this is not an affirmative grant of any
eligibility right to FAS citizens. So, they would sit in the
same shoes as their neighbors in Guam, or American Samoa, or
CNMI, or Hawaii, or Arkansas. So, that is one thing.
And then I guess the Biden administration doesn't, I guess,
we have supported extending certain programs in the territories
in general. We have supported SSI, we have supported extending
other programs that additionally----
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, and I understand that, and I think
it is really coming down to money and funding. Guam has been
asking for this for quite some time, as well as Puerto Rico.
Mr. Nakoa, I have a copy of the President's budget request
to Congress for Fiscal Year 2024, and it included a request for
$140 million for ASEAN and the IPEF. Both of these programs
have no benefit to Guam, nor are we part of it, and it is $2
billion to bolster the Indo-Pacific countries through game-
changing investments, which is the full amount necessary for
the Compacts of Free Association.
So, my concern is, Mr. Nakoa, and really, I am just making
this statement, how would you have me or the Governor explain
to our constituents that the Federal Government is willing to
find $2 billion for Pacific neighbors, but they cannot find $30
million a year for the cost to expand SSI to cover Guam?
I would like to also address that to Governor Lou Leon
Guerrero, please.
Governor Guerrero. I think for me, my immediate reaction
would be that it is a bit of an inequity. That it is a bit
discriminatory. And I know that under the Biden administration,
one of the biggest, biggest mantra of the Biden administration
is equity and fairness for all. And not to have these social
services, but yet being allowed these social services in other
states, speaks to me very loudly of unfairness, inequity, and
discriminatory.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Governor.
Mayor Alig, could you speak of the importance, and we are
going back to section 3 here regarding proof of employment and
education, mandating that our migrant brothers and sisters
coming on over have something to work for and look at, please?
Mr. Alig. Well, I know that there is some misunderstanding,
perhaps, of what that would provide. I do believe, and many of
us mayors and vice mayors on Guam believe, that every migrant
coming to Guam must have a plan. And if, in fact, this
amendment requires them to be enrolled in education or have
employment secured, then we certainly agree with it.
However, we do understand that there may be some
contentious idea behind it, and that we are willing to support
whatever extra funding we get, we support their migration to
Guam by fully educating them and providing them opportunities
for employment and for health care.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Mayor.
Mr. Nakoa, back to you, sir. Again, how would you have me
and Governor Leon Guerrero explain to our constituents that the
Federal Government can find $2 billion for these other programs
that we are not involved with, but they can't find $30 million
a year that it would cost to expand and provide SSI to cover
Guam?
Mr. Nakoa. I am not aware of the specific, and maybe I just
didn't catch the specific provisions you mentioned. But in
general, the President's budget has to cover the entirety of
the Federal Government, and provisions that are not specific in
nature are meant to benefit the entirety of the citizenry of
the United States. So, that is the only thing that I would
comment on that.
Mr. Moylan. Again, per the Governor's comments, it is not
acceptable, but I thank you.
And I also, in final, if I may, Madam Chair?
Mr. Nakoa, I just want to thank you for coming today and
speaking to us, and given the importance of the compact impact
and how much this revolves around the experience we are facing
in Guam, I want to invite you to join me, the Governor, and the
Mayor to come to Guam and hold a town hall listening session
later this year, hear the stories that we are referring to
today, and see with your own eyes why we need this funding, and
you will understand our perspective. I hope we can host you
sometime this year.
And I thank you, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Chairman
Bruce Westerman for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Hageman, and thank you
to the witnesses. And it is good to see so many familiar faces
from our trip this past fall down to Guam. And I appreciate all
the help that you all provided to us in coming up with the new
COFA agreement. And I understand there are issues that still
need to be resolved.
And I want to commend Mr. Moylan for all of his work and
Mrs. Radewagen for her work in organizing this hearing today.
Mr. Nakoa, H.R. 6273 would require the Secretary of the
Interior to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding with state
and territory governments ensuring that FAS citizens who are
convicted of a felony are transferred to Federal correctional
facilities. Does DOI have any concerns regarding the
implementation of this policy, and have you consulted with the
Department of Justice on it?
Mr. Nakoa. I am not sure, to my knowledge, that we have
officially consulted with the DOJ, but I believe there would be
some concerns on the implementation side. I would have to defer
to DOJ on some of the specifics.
But what it seems like, it would involve at least 55 or
some-odd potential MOUs to comply with at least section 3, I
believe.
Mr. Westerman. Is there any precedent for these types of
transfers that you are aware of?
Mr. Nakoa. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Westerman. H.R. 6273 would require reimbursements for
the costs associated with pre-conviction and incarceration of
felons from the FAS. And the funds for this reimbursement would
come from the Bureau of Prisons. Do you have any estimate of
the total cost of providing these reimbursements?
And does the Bureau of Prisons have the capacity to cover
these costs?
Mr. Nakoa. I have no idea what those costs would be.
Mr. Westerman. Maybe some follow-up actions we need to look
at.
Lastly, H.R. 6273 would bar FAS migrants from obtaining
residency in Guam unless they provide proof of academic
enrollment or employment and residential address. However, the
Compacts of Free Association provide the citizens of the FAS to
travel freely to the United States without visas, as well as
live and work indefinitely in the United States. Do you think
this could have a negative impact on the United States-FAS
relationship?
Mr. Nakoa. I do. Like I said in my testimony, it is unclear
what the impact would be on the compacts, as well as the INA,
the Immigration and Naturalization Act, I think it is. So, we
would have to seek to clarify how those would interact.
But I have heard from at least some of our FAS partners
that this would be a difficult situation to face.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
Lieutenant Governor Ale, it is apparent from the hearing
that the 2022 constitutional amendments are still being
reviewed by DOI, and this has resulted in none of these
amendments being approved and being transmitted to Congress for
approval. Do you believe that by removing congressional
oversight this process will be expedited?
Mr. Ale. Thank you, Chairman, and that is the reason we
support the legislation by Congresswoman Radewagen to remove
this provision of requiring these amendments to come to
Congress, because we believe there is no assurance that it will
be enacted or acted by Congress anytime soon. In fact, the law
doesn't even require Congress to even acknowledge. So, we are
asking to have it removed.
Secretary Nakoa cannot comment on their review of these,
but so far, we have received assurances that these amendments
will be approved. And once this law is removed, and the
Secretary approves the amendments, it becomes effective and our
right of self-determination comes alive again. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman. A follow-up, and this is a really, really
tough one here, since American Samoa is the only territory that
is required to have congressional approval for amendments to
its constitution: Do you believe this is fair and equitable?
Mr. Ale. Thank you for the question again. Yes, it is a
unique and unfair burden for American Samoa to have to come
here. I believe it is also an unfair burden for Congress to
have to deal with our local issues every time we decide as a
community to amend our local constitution.
Mr. Westerman. Madam Chair, I am out of time, so I yield
back.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. I want to thank the witnesses for
your valuable testimony and the Members for your questioning,
and for these very thoughtful bills that have been presented to
us for consideration.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and Mrs. Radewagen has indicated
that she will. We will ask you to respond to these questions in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit such questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Tuesday, January 23, 2024, and the hearing record will be held
open for 10 business days for your responses.
If there is no further business, and without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:37 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Prepared Statement of the Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chair, Committee on
Natural Resources

We are here to discuss two bills: H.R. 6062 introduced by
Representative Radewagen and H.R. 6273, introduced by Representative
Moylan. I want to thank them for working tirelessly to bring the issues
important to their districts to this committee and I look forward and
to working with you both to find ways to address the needs of the U.S.
territories.
This hearing marks the first step in the right direction. There is
much more Congress will need to consider as we continue to discuss and
understand the implications of these bills.
H.R. 6062 would return American Samoa's constitutional amendment
process to the pre-1983 process of requiring approval from only the
Secretary of the Interior.
This committee is committed to territorial self-determination and
improving the livelihoods of all Americans on the islands.
We are also committed to our oversight responsibilities and making
sure that Americans, both in the mainland and in the territories, are
not negatively impacted by federal laws and policies. And that the
bills coming out of this committee will positively benefit communities
and American prosperity.
To that end, we need to ensure that H.R. 6062 does not
unintentionally relinquish an aspect of congressional oversight and
prevent American Samoans from accessing an avenue for recourse against
unilateral actions by any administration.
We also need to ensure that legislation truly resolves the issue it
aims to solve. There have been reports that previous constitutional
amendment attempts by American Samoa have not yet received review by
the Secretary of the Interior. And we have not received the amendment
proposals here in Congress. I hope we can get clarity on this today
from the Department of the Interior. If the delay is indeed with the
Department of the Interior, then this issue may require a different
path forward.
Turning to H.R. 6273, this bill has three major components. First,
it would extend authorization for annual Compact Impact grant funds for
the Pacific territories of Guam, The Northern Marianas Islands, and
American Samoa. It would also require felons from the Freely Associated
States or FAS to be incarcerated in federal facilities and seeks
reimbursement for costs associated with those incarcerations. Finally,
the bill would place entry requirements for FAS citizens seeking
residency in Guam.
It is imperative that Congress ensure that this legislation not
only addresses the specific needs of Guam but is also fiscally
responsible and does not come into conflict with existing federal law
and international agreements.
My colleagues and I on this Committee have worked hard these past 8
months on the renewal of the Compacts of Free Association and we will
continue to work towards its timely passage.
We know fully well how critically important the Compacts are for
U.S. national security and the incredible mutual benefits that the
U.S.-FAS special relationship provides.
As such, it is important that we find a path forward on addressing
the unique needs of Guam, we must continue to work to preserve the
U.S.-FAS relationship.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here today, particularly those
who traveled to great lengths to testify on these important bills.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Moylan

GAO COMPACT IMPACT NUMBERS 1986-2018

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

Judiciary of Guam

January 18, 2024

Hon. Harriet M. Hageman, Chair
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Judiciary of Guam Testimony on H.R. 6273

Dear Chair Hageman:

On behalf of the Judiciary of Guam, thank you for the opportunity
to submit testimony on H.R. 6273, introduced by Delegate James C.
Moylan, to extend the authorization of certain grants to the
governments of Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
and American Samoa, and for other purposes.

Please be advised that the scope of these comments is limited to
Section 2 of the measure, relative to a continuing appropriation under
the Compact of Free Association Amendments Act of 2003.\1\ The branch
refrains from offering commentary on the policy positions outlined in
the remaining portions of the bill.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Extension of Authorization of Grants''

The U.S. Compacts of Free Association permit citizens from Freely
Associated States (FAS) unrestricted immigration into the United States
and its territories. Although annual reimbursements for compact
migration costs ceased in 2023, migration to U.S. areas is anticipated
to grow, as reported by the U.S. Government Accountability Office.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Compacts of Free Association: Populations in U.S. Areas Have
Grown, with Varying Reported Effects. GAO-20-491

A continuing appropriation is vital for maintaining essential
services and preserving the principles of justice for a community
grappling with this expanding population. While the Compact Impact
Fairness Act would alleviate some challenges for host jurisdictions,
existing federal initiatives may not adequately mitigate the extensive
financial burden associated with Compact-related expenditures,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
particularly in the sectors of public safety and legal services.

As the third branch of the government of Guam, the Judiciary of
Guam is charged with interpreting the laws of the territory. The branch
is composed of both a trial (Superior Court of Guam) and appellate
court (Supreme Court of Guam) that provides for the settlement of
disputes between parties and protects the rights of individuals as
mandated by the Organic Act of Guam and the Constitution of the United
States of America. Presently, COFA Migrants represent 20% of the
Superior Court of Guam's total case population.

Local expenditures on cases involving citizens of the Freely
Associated States have steadily increased over the past two decades. In
Fiscal Year 2004, the Judiciary expended $891,279 on cases involving
citizens of the Freely Associated States. By Fiscal Year 2023,
expenditures increased to $8,699,588. Over the past 20 years, the
cumulative cost to the Judiciary of Guam for cases involving citizens
of the Freely Associated States is $76,953,151.

A significant number of FAS citizens appearing before the Judiciary
of Guam also face financial challenges, impacting the state of the
court's indigent defense fund. The growing demand for indigent defense
services over the years raises concerns about a potential crisis within
our legal system. While strengthening these services remains a priority
for the branch--sustained financial support will be critical to meet
the constitutional mandate for adequate representation of indigent
individuals in Guam.
In summary, without the continuation of annual reimbursements as
outlined in H.R. 6273, Guam risks jeopardizing the quality,
accessibility, and fairness of its legal services. Inadequate funding
would strain the Judiciary's ability to handle an increasing caseload,
potentially resulting in delays, reduced access to legal
representation, and a compromised justice system for the People of
Guam. The Judiciary respectfully urges support of the continuation of
annual reimbursements to not only ensure the equitable allocation of
funds but also sustain the essential services our community provides.

Thank you for your time and consideration.

Sincerely,

Robert J. Torres,
Chief Justice

______

Submissions for the Record by Lt. Governor Ale

(Supplements to Testimony)

2022 American Samoa Election Results Certification Letter
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

2022 American Samoa Referendum Ballot
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

2022 American Samoa Referendum Results
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Supplemental Documentation Supporting Testimony
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

*****

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II24/20240118/116694/HHRG-
118-II24-20240118-SD013.pdf

------

Submissions for the Record by Delegate Jennings

(Supplements to Testimony)

SR 38-28 (English and Samoan)
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

37th LEGISLATURE OF AMERICAN SAMOA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

July 28, 2021

Hon. Lemanu P. Mauga          Hon. Tuaolo M. Fruean
Governor of American Samoa    President of the Senate
A.P. Lutali Executive
Building                      Legislature of American Samoa
Utulei, American Samoa        Fagatogo, American Samoa

Hon. Savali T. Ale
Speaker of the House
Legislature of American
Samoa
Utulei, American Samoa

Subject: Swains Island's Request for Assistance

Malo ni tau Afioga,

Mua na kave te fakafetai ma te vikiga i te Aliki mo tona aloha ma
te agalelei kua aulia mai ai tenei taeao. Tatalo hoki ke maua pea e tau
afioga te malosi o te tino kae maihe te agaga. Tulona tau afioga, ke
kavatu he talohaga vaivai a Olosega mamao (Swains Island) mo he
fesoasoani mai te malo, ma te fakaaloalo lahi lele.

I have been informed by the Manager of the American Rescue Plan
Coordinator that Swains Island does not qualify for any of the American
Rescue Act Funding. So far out of the estimated $1.4 Billion slated for
American Samoa, Swains may receive $3,000.

Swains Island first became a Territory of the United States in
August 1856 under the Guano Act and went on to be very prosperous in
the copra trade. Then at the request of the U.S. Navy and the U.S.
State Department, along with the support of President Calvin Coolidge,
Swains Island was made a part of American Samoa by an Act of Congress
on May 1925. Swains Island immediately contributed to the newly formed
government with tax revenues from the copra. Swains became a greater
economic factor by bringing in over 200 miles (or several hundred
thousand square miles) of ocean to the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) that has fed the canneries for nearly 70 years.

Unfortunately, the collapse of the copra industry in the 1960s not
only devastated Swains Island's economy, but it exposed its Political
Status with American Samoa as a destructive force incapacitating a U.S.
Territory to near annihilation. Secondly, the Tuna Industry continues
to show evidence of decline and unsustainable future. Despite our
contributions to the American Samoa economy for nearly 100 years, as
well as the dedication of many of our men and women who served
honorably and sacrificed their lives in the United States Armed Forces,
Swains Island received no compensation for the depletion of its ocean
resources, and no assistance for basic human needs to sustain life.

We are unable to live on our lands and have no resource to combat
the effects of Climate Change that is impacting every island in the
pacific. No resource to protect against illegal entry by foreign
fishing vessels or government. Despite annual budget allocations for
Swains Island Transportation, there's not been a trip to Swains Island
for 4 years after numerous attempts and requests.

It is arguable that this territorial government has practiced a
policy of relocation, de-population, civic abandonment, and
disenfranchisement (exclusion, alienation) that is in effect compulsory
(enforced) rather than consensual, and that is not consistent with due
process and government by consent of the governed under the federal and
territorial constitutions.
Political Inconsistencies:

The U.S. government repeatedly and formally recognized and
confirmed (including the 2011 letter from DOI) the right of
Swain Island to a legal and political status, as well as
public governance by the federal and territorial
governments, on an equal basis with the islands of Tutuila,
Manu'a and Aunu'u.

American Samoan ancestry: means lineal descendants of the
inhabitants of Tutuila and Swains Islands whose permanent
place of residence was American Samoa on 17 April 1900, and
the inhabitants of Manu'a Islands whose permanent place of
residence was American Samoa on 16 July 1904. (American
Samoa Code Annotated ASCA: Chapter 02--General Provisions
41.0202 Definitions.)

Swains Island has a Delegate in the American Samoa House
of Representatives with all the powers of a Representative,
except the right to vote, like other U.S. Territory
Delegates to the U.S. House of Representatives

Like other U.S. Territory Delegates to Congress, the
Swains Island Delegate to the American Samoa Legislature
can introduce Bills/Resolutions, Chair Committees, vote in
Committees, but cannot vote in the chamber for the final
passage of Legislation.

The Swains Island Delegate to an American Samoa
Constitution Convention, can vote for changes to the
Constitution of American Samoa, but a Swains Island
Delegate to the American Samoa Legislature cannot vote on
Legislation.

Like other U.S. Territories with Delegates to Washington
without a Senator, Swains Island has no Senate Seat in the
Fono.

All Territories with Delegates to Congress are exempted
from taxation without representation. Swains Island has
been paying taxes, without representation and depleting its
Resources for nearly 100 years.

It seems Swains Island has become a Territory of American
Samoa, and no longer of the United States. Yet, the U.S.
State Department Foreign Affairs Manual (FAM) still
recognizes Swains Island as a Territory of the United
States.

Swains Island Request:

Request Representation in any Constitution or Political
Status Review.

Request for at least 2 trips a month to Swains like Manu'a
and allow for the repatriation of island residents.

Swains Island is Requesting $10 million from the American Rescue Plan
Act for the following infrastructure development and to provide
employment for Swains Island Residents. Also an additional $3 Million
annual budget to maintain essential services for the people.

Landing Craft: A Landing craft is needed to safely
transport equipment and material to Swains Island because
of the lack of wharf or dock.

Safe Wharf/Dock/Ramp/Channel: The channel needs to be
widened and dredged for safety. Also, a dock or ramp needs
to be installed.

Airport: Land and/or Sea (lagoon)

Communication/Internet

Water Purification System

Sustainable Renewable Power

Thank you for your consideration, and I look forward to your
favorable response and deliberations.

Ma le ava tele e tatau ai,

Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings,
Swains Island Delegate

______

37th LEGISLATURE OF AMERICAN SAMOA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

October 17, 2014

Hon. Esther Kia'aina
Assistant Secretary of Insular Affairs
U.S. Department of Interior
1849 C Street, NW
Washington, DC 20240

Re: The Matter of the Swains Island Representation in the American
Samoa Legislature

Malo ni and Aloha Madam Secretary,

Please allow me, from American Samoa, where you'll be visiting soon
to introduce myself. I am Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings and I am the
delegate to the American Samoa Legislature from the northernmost part
of the territory, which was made part of the territory in 1925 (two
decades after the territory was created by the U.S. Congress). I
represent Swains Island, also the birth place of the Hon. Papaliitele
Jack ``Tihati'' Thompson (Counsel General of Samoa in Hawaii), whom you
may also know along with wife Cha as owners of Tihati Productions,
headquartered in Honolulu. If at all possible, despite your super-busy
schedule while you are here in American Samoa, I would appreciate very
much, please, an appointment with you to discuss with you the following
situation involving Swains Island:

On March 13, 2014 I sponsored House Joint Resolution, HJR 33-2 to
amend the Revised Constitution of American Samoa to grant the Swains
Island Delegate the right to vote in the House of Representatives
(please see HJR 33-2 attached). The Resolution was referred to the
House Ways & Means Committee, and a Hearing conducted around March 16,
2014.

In that Hearing the Attorney General, the Legislative Council, and
the Secretary of Samoan Affairs all testified in support of the
Resolution, despite objections by some lawmakers. After the matter was
left in Committee for six months, with no new evidence or further
discussions, I submitted a written request to the Chairman, Hon.
I'aulualo Faafetai Talia, to bring HJR 33-2 up for a vote (please see
letter to Chairman I'aulualo attached.) On October 3, 2014, HJR 33-2
was brought up for a vote of the House where it was defeated by a vote
of 6 to 5, 4-abstained, and 5-absent.

Unfortunately, the decision of the House of Representatives to
defeat HJR 33-2 seals the fate of Swains Island to be permanently
disenfranchised in this Territory. Furthermore, it concludes over 8
years of attempts to address ambiguities in our political relations
through the local government and traditional leaders, and over 89 years
of being treated as second class citizens of American Samoa, and not as
a Territory of the United States.
BACKGROUND:
American Samoa Constitution Convention June 2010

Preparations for the 2010 Constitution Convention began in 2006
when then Governor Togiola Tulafono created the Future Political Status
Study Commission FPSSC (ASCA Title 2: Chpt. 14). Part of their mandate
stated in paragraph (d): ``To study and evaluate the impact of American
Samoa's political status and relationship with the United States as to
the economic, cultural, land tenure, health, safety and social needs of
American Samoa and the need for a comprehensive study to include Swains
Island.'' Unfortunately, the Commission did not include a
representative from Swains Island. However, based on their mandate, the
Commission issued the following recommendations on Swains Island:

The Commission recommends that to avail themselves of the
public services to which they are entitled, the US
Nationals of Swains Island consider relocating to the main
islands of American Samoa.

The Commission recommends that the constitutional process
for the election of the Swains Island delegate (to the
House of Representatives) be made more practical.

(http://faleomavaega.house.gov/sites/faleomavaega.house.gov/
files/pdfs/fpssc_report.pdf)

The Constitution Review Committee was subsequently created in 2009,
to consider the recommendations of the Commission and submit proposed
amendments to the Constitution Convention scheduled for June 2010.
Again, no representative of Swains Island was invited to be part of the
Constitution Review Committee. However, in their recommendation, the
Review Committee proposed only that the Swains Island Delegate be
selected by popular vote of all Swains Island residents on Swains and
in American Samoa and given the right to vote. The other recommendation
by the FPSSC, to relocate residents to Tutuila, was not approved by the
Review Committee.

Approximately two weeks before the Constitution Convention, all the
preparations were in place except no Delegate from Swains Island was
invited to participate. I spoke with the Review Committee and was
advised that due to the number of people on Swains Island it was
determined that Swains Island will not have a Delegate. I referred them
to the Constitution which specifies that Swains Island will have a
Delegate in a Constitution Convention. I later received a call to
conduct a selection for the Swains Island Delegate, and I was selected
as the Swains Delegate.

During the Convention, I argued in the Legislative Committee that
the selection of the Swains Island Delegate to the House of
Representatives was consistent with the right to the protection of
lands, customs, culture, and traditional family organization of
American Samoan Ancestry, as provided in the Constitution (similar to
the selection of Senators). My position was upheld, and the Committee
agreed to remove the proposal and leave the Swains Island selection as
it stands.

Meanwhile, in the Preamble Committee, Congressman Faleomavaega
proposed that the Preamble include three paragraphs to recognize the
three islands that were united to form the Territory of American Samoa.
The first paragraph to include the Deed of Cessions with the
traditional leaders of Tutuila, the second paragraph to include the
Deed of Cessions with King Elesara and the traditional leaders of
Manu'a, and the third paragraph the act of Congress making Swains
Island part of American Samoa. Both recommendations from the
Legislative Committee and Preamble Committee were approved in the
Convention. Unfortunately, all proposed Amendments were defeated in the
General election by an overwhelming 70% of the vote, because of the
decision of the Election Officer to select one vote ``Yes'' or ``No''
for all proposed amendments on the ballots.
Letter to Congressman Faleomavaega E. Hunkin January 14, 2011

In my letter to Congressman Faleomavaega dated January 14, 2011, I
tried desperately in my limited capacity, to provide a comprehensive
review of the political status of Swains Island and its impact on
economic, cultural, land tenure, health, safety, and social needs of
Swains Island (please see letter to Congressman Faleomavaega attached).
On July 6, 2011, Congressman Faleomavaega solicited the assistance of
the Department of Interior (please see Congressman Faleomavaega letter
to then Secretary Ken Salazar attached). Assistant Secretary of Insular
Affairs then, Anthony Babauta, responded to our Congressman, indicating
that Swains Island constitutes an area in American Samoa equal to
Tutuila, Aunuu, and Manu'a, when considered throughout the DOI and
other federal offices (please see Secretary Babauta response attached).
House Joint Resolution (HJR) 33-2 March 2014

HJR 33-2 was introduced in the House of Representatives in March
2014, requesting an Amendment to the Revised Constitution of American
Samoa to grant the Swains Island Delegate the right to vote in the
House of Representatives. On the Second Reading of the House, approval
of the measure failed by a vote of 5-ayes, 6-nays, 4-abstained, with 5-
absent.
REQUEST:
Madam Secretary, I believe that the non-voting status of the Swains
Island delegate to the American Samoa Legislature is an oversight and
bears correction through Interior Department action. One, because our
Constitution sanctions laws that protect the lands, customs, culture
and traditional family organization of Swains Island, and two, it also
prohibits the enforcement of laws that abridge against the privileges
and immunities of the citizens of American Samoa. Consequently, I
support the position of the Attorney General, the Legislative Counsel,
and the Secretary of Samoan Affairs, in that granting the Swains Island
Delegate the right to vote is a basic step in correcting this
oversight.
I further believe that I have exhausted every reasonable action
over the last eight years to rectify this oversight at the lowest level
through the local government and traditional leaders. Therefore, I
humbly request your assistance on this matter and request a meeting
with you during your upcoming visit to American Samoa.

Respectfully yours,

Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings,
Swain Island Delegate

______

LEGISLATURE OF AMERICAN SAMOA

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Hon. I'aulualo Faafetai Talia, Chairman
House Ways and Means Committee
Legislature of American Samoa
Pago Pago, Am. Samoa 96799

Re: HJR 33-2: Right to Vote for the Swains Is. Delegate

Talofa lau Afioga I'aulualo,

I submit this statement as requested on HJR 33-2: Constitution
Amendment granting the Swains Island Delegate the Right to Vote. Around
March 6, 2014 there was a House Ways & Means Committee Hearing on the
HJR 33-2 with the Secretary of Samoan Affairs, Paramount Chief Satele
Galu Satele, Attorney General, Talauega Eleasalo Ale, and Legislative
Council, Henry Kappel as witnesses. At the conclusion of the Hearing
all three witnesses endorsed the Resolution as written, and indicated
by testimonies that this was ``long overdue''. In other words Chairman,
by the testimonies of these three witnesses representing the executive
branch, legislative branch, and Our Samoan Traditions, there are no
traditional or legal grounds to deny the Swains Island Delegate the
right to vote in the House of Representatives. Regrettably, the matter
was referred back to Committee for further deliberations over the same
concerns that were presented to the witnesses during the Hearing.
Perhaps the greatest opposition to the Resolution is the selection of
the Swains Island Delegate, which is by selection in a meeting of the
Permanent Residents (similar to Senators) and not by popular vote like
the rest of the House Members. Another issue was the lack of residents
on Swains Island. Again, these were all discussed with the witnesses in
the Hearing, yet the Attorney General, Legislative Counsel, and
Secretary of Samoan Affairs all endorsed the Resolution as it is
written at the end of the Hearing. Then on August 12, 2014, the matter
was discussed in Committee, but again it was decided to keep it in
Committee for further deliberations, yet no new evidence was
introduced. However, it was suggested that I provide the Committee with
a written statement and therefore I provide this statement to the
Committee for the record.
Background:
Political Status of Swains Island:

A. Swains Island has been a Territory of the United States since August
13, 1856:
According to Federal Regulations, Swains Island first became a
Territory of the United States on August 13, 1856 under the Guano Act.
On March 4, 1925, Swains Island was made a part of American Samoa by a
Joint Resolution of Congress which Stated:

Whereas Swains Island . . . is included in the list of guano
islands appertaining to the United States, which have been
bonded under the Act of Congress approved August 18, 1856

Whereas the island has been in the continuous possession of
American citizens for over fifty years and no form of
government therefore or for the inhabitants thereof has
been provided by the United States

Therefore, be it resolved by the Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States of America in Congress
assembled, that sovereignty of the United States over
American Samoa is hereby extended over Swains Island, which
is made a part of American Samoa

d. Native inhabitants of Swains Island of a race Indigenous to
that island who were not already U.S. citizens or nationals
became non-citizen U.S. nationals if residing in Swains
Island on March 4, 1925 (U.S. State Department Foreign
Affairs Manual (FAM): 7 FAM 1120 Page 20).

Swains Island was made a part of American Samoa in that
the Sovereignty of the U.S. over American Samoa was also
extended over Swains Island. Swains Island was placed ``. .
. under the jurisdiction of the administrative and judicial
authorities of the government established therein by the
United States'' (American Samoa Constitution: Acts of
Congress 1662) Swains Island did not become a Territory of
American Samoa, as implied by current applications of law,
but remains a Territory of the U.S.

Swains Island is equally entitled to the same privileges
as Tutuila, Aunnu'u, and Manu'a in the Territory of
American Samoa. ``Swains Island constitute an area within
American Samoa just like Tutuila, Aunu'u, and Manu'a''
(Assistant Secretary for Insular Affairs, Anthony Babauta
letter to Faleomavaega July 2011)

B. Swains Island became an ``Unincorporated Territory or Outlying
Possession'' of the United States in 1925.

According to Federal Regulations there are two Unincorporated
Territories or Outlying Possessions of the U.S., American Samoa and
Swains Island (7 FAM 1120 Page 18 & 19).

An ``unincorporated territory'' or ``outlying possession''
is an area over which the Constitution has not been
expressly and fully extended by the Congress within the
meaning of Article IV, Section 3 of the United States
Constitution (7 FAM 1120 Page 2).
Constitutional Rights of Swains Island

A. Right to have a voting Delegate in an American Samoa Constitution
Convention

Swains Island has the right to select a Delegate (similar to the
Delegate to the Fono), except with voting rights to an American Samoa
Constitution Convention. Yet he/she cannot vote on Bills or Resolutions
in the House. ``Swains Island shall have one delegate selected in open
meeting by the adult permanent residents of the island who are United
States nationals'' (AS Rev. Const. Article V Miscellaneous Section 3).

I was the delegate of Swains Island in the 2010
Constitution Convention, and voted both in the Legislative
Committee, and the Full Committee.

B. Right to protection of Lands, Customs, Culture and traditional
family organization of Samoan Ancestry (Article 1 Section 3 Protective
Legislation).

(d) ``American Samoan ancestry'' means lineal descendants
of the inhabitants of Tutuila and Swains Islands whose
permanent place of residence was American Samoa on 17 April
1900, and the inhabitants of Manu'a Islands whose permanent
place of residence was American Samoa on 16 July 1904 (ASCA
41.0202 Definitions).

Any law that protects the lands, customs, and traditional
family organization of Swains Island people does not
violate the Constitution. Subsequently, the Swains Island
Delegate is selected in an open meeting (not by popular
vote) of the Permanent Residents to protect its lands,
culture, and family organization traditions (AS Rev. Const.
Article II Legislature Sect. 2 Members)

C. Right to the protection against laws that abridge against the
privileges or immunities of the citizens of American Samoa (Article I
Bill of Rights Section 16: Unspecified rights and privileges and
immunities)

Denying the Swains Island Delegate the right to vote
violates section 16 of the Bill of Rights.
Discussion
Chairman, Swains Island is a Territory of the United States that
was made a part of American Samoa through a Joint Resolution of
Congress. Swains Island is not a Territory of American Samoa, but is
equal to Tutuila, Aunu'u and Manu'a according to the U.S. Department of
Interior. The Swains Island Delegate to the House of Representatives is
selected the same way the Swains Island Delegate is selected for a
Constitution Convention (an open meeting of the permanent residents of
Swains Island). Yet the Swains Delegate to a Constitution Convention
has the right to vote both in Sub-Committees as well as the Committee
as a Whole. I was the Swains Island Delegate to the 2010 Constitution
Convention and I voted both in the Legislative Committee and the
Committee as a whole for proposed Amendments from all Committees. The
selection of the Swains Island Delegate to the House of Representatives
protects the lands, customs, and traditional family organization of
Swains Island under Article I Section 3 Protective Legislation. The
same way the selection of Senators to the Senate protects Tutuila and
Manu'a. As such, granting the Swains Island Delegate the right vote
does not violate the Constitution. However, denying that Delegate the
right to vote may very well violate Article I Section 16 Unspecified
rights, privileges and immunities, by enforcing a law that abridge the
privileges and immunities of citizens of American Samoa. This logic is
consistent with the testimonies of the Attorney General, Legislative
Counsel, and Secretary of Samoan Affairs.
Finally Chairman, in two subsequent Committee meetings since the
testimonies of the Attorney General, Legislative Counsel, and the
Secretary of Samoan Affairs, there's been no new evidence or arguments
to justify keeping this Resolution in Committee. However it is becoming
more apparent that an Amendment to the Constitution may not be the best
course of action for this deficiency. Therefore Chairman, with this
statement I humbly ask that HJR 33-2 be brought up for a full vote of
the House, and let the distinguished Members utilize the greatest tool
of a free society, the expression of their decision with the right to
vote.

Ma le ava tele e tatau ai,

Su'a Alexander Eli Jennings,
Swains Island Delegate

*****

ATTACHMENT

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
