- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025 BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR THE U.S. BUREAU OF RECLAMATION, U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRA- TION, AND THE POWER MARKETING ADMINISTRATIONS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025
BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR THE U.S.
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION, U.S. FISH AND
WILDLIFE SERVICE, NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION,
AND THE POWER MARKETING
ADMINISTRATIONS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND
FISHERIES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Thursday, May 16, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-122
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-690 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jared Huffman, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Garret Graves, LA                    Joe Neguse, CO
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Mike Levin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Katie Porter, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Pete Stauber, MN                     Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
John R. Curtis, UT                   Kevin Mullin, CA
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Val T. Hoyle, OR
Jerry Carl, AL                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Ed Case, HI
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, May 16, 2024...........................     1

Statement of Members:

Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     2
Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Touton, Hon. Camille, Commissioner, Bureau of Reclamation,
Department of the Interior, Washington, DC.................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Questions submitted for the record.......................    11
Williams, Hon. Martha, Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, Department of the Interior, Washington, DC........    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    21
Spinrad, Hon. Richard, Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans
and Atmosphere & National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Administrator, Department of Commerce,
Washington, DC.............................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    27
Questions submitted for the record.......................    30
Hairston, John, Administrator and CEO, Bonneville Power
Administration, Department of Energy, Portland, Oregon.....    35
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Questions submitted for the record.......................    42
LeBeau, Tracey, Administrator and CEO, Western Area Power
Administration, Department of Energy, Lakewood, Colorado...    43
Prepared statement of....................................    45
Wech, Mike, Administrator, Southwestern Power Administration,
Department of Energy, Tulsa, Oklahoma......................    51
Prepared statement of....................................    53
Questions submitted for the record.......................    56
Hobbs, Virgil, Administrator and CEO, Southeastern Power
Administration, Department of Energy, Elberton, Georgia....    56
Prepared statement of....................................    58

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Bentz

Santa Ynez Band of Chumash Indians, Letter to the Office
of National Marine Sanctuaries.........................   102
State of Oregon, Letter to Committee on Delisting of Grey
Wolves.................................................   104

Submissions for the Record by Representative Hageman

Protect the Public's Trust, Letter to U.S. Dept of
Commerce and NOAA......................................    80
The Heartland Institute, ``Corrupted Climate Stations,
The Official U.S. Temperature Record Remains Fatally
Flawed''...............................................    90

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Wildlife conservation groups, Letter to U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.......................................   106

Submissions for the Record by Representative Newhouse

E-mail exchange with Canadian government.................   108

Submissions for the Record by Representative Carter

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, ``Frequently Asked
Questions--Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge and Twin
Pines Mine''...........................................    97

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE
PRESIDENT'S FY 2025 BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE U.S. BUREAU OF RECLAMATION,
U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, NATIONAL
OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRA-
TION, AND THE POWER MARKETING
ADMINISTRATIONS

----------

Thursday, May 16, 2024
U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Committee on Natural Resources
Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:35 p.m., in
Room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bentz, Graves, LaMalfa, Webster,
Carl, Hageman, Westerman; Huffman, Napolitano, Peltola, Mullin,
Hoyle, and Dingell.
Also present: Representatives Stauber, Moylan, Newhouse,
Carter, Murphy, D'Esposito; and Schrier.

Mr. Graves [presiding]. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife
and Fisheries will come to order.
I am going to do something a little bit out of order, in
that Chairman Bentz had to go over to a different Committee to
go vote, so I am going to forego the opening statement. He will
come back and deliver an opening statement whenever he is
available to do so. So, we are going to go ahead and roll right
in, provided that my friend from California is OK with that.
Mr. Huffman. Yes.
Mr. Graves. All right, good deal. Good afternoon. I want to
welcome our witnesses, Members, and our guests in the audience
of today's hearing.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on a
hearing entitled, ``Examining the President's FY 2025 Budget
Proposals for the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration, and the Power Marketing Administrations.''
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
Minnesota, Mr. Stauber; the gentleman from Guam, Mr. Moylan;
the gentleman from Washington, Mr. Newhouse; the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Carter; the gentleman from North Carolina, Dr.
Murphy; and the gentleman from New York, Mr. D'Esposito be
allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
And as I mentioned, I am going to defer Mr. Bentz's opening
statement.
Do you want to give one now?
Mr. Huffman. I would.
Mr. Graves. I would yield to the gentleman from California
for his opening statement.
Mr. Huffman. I thank the gentleman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTA-
TIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Good afternoon, everyone. It is good to see
you all. It is an impressive lineup of agencies that does
really important work. Certainly, managing our natural
resources to protect wildlife and habitat, clean water, clean
air, healthy environments, electricity, safeguarding our
nation's resources against the impacts of climate change, all
of that important work is complicated by the fact that just in
the past year our nation has faced record droughts and heat
waves, $28 multi-billion disasters, to be exact.
And, of course, we also have declining biodiversity,
fishery closures, and a lot more. And as you deal with all of
that, you are also tasked with helping do something that could
change this terrible fossil fuel paradigm that is driving the
climate crisis, rolling out a transition in terms of managing
and permitting authority of clean energy infrastructure in
unprecedented amounts. And you are delivering on the America
the Beautiful initiative at the same time. So, that is really a
hugely important set of programs and policies.
And to be blunt, if a budget reflects one's priorities,
this 2025 budget is a bit confusing in some respects. Some
programs within this Committee's jurisdiction that provide for
sustainable fisheries and essential coastal resilience face
significant cuts, while others remain relatively whole. And I
know that the budget constraints of the Fiscal Responsibility
Act force you to make tough decisions. But in several cases,
the cuts are actually below the FRA levels.
So, the rationale for some of these decisions is not always
clear, and I think that clarity is important because my friends
across the aisle who demand draconian cuts for fish and
wildlife and coasts and Great Lakes and water programs have a
pattern of turning around and then criticizing the same
agencies that received those cuts when they are not permitting
things fast enough, or when they are not doing enough to remove
species from the endangered species list, and on and on.
And this MO of kneecapping Federal agencies and then
turning around and arguing that government is ineffective
really puts us on an unfortunate treadmill, and it is no way to
make natural resource policy or to get things done. It also
kind of hands policy over, if it works in the way it is
intended, to polluting industries and their lawyers and
lobbyists, and I think we are going to hear some talking points
today that come straight from many of those special interests.
I hope some of us, as we wade through all of this, we will
remember the bigger picture. The issues and the programs that
we are talking about here today shouldn't be about Democrats or
Republicans trying to score political points. It is really
about the future of our nation and our planet. And if history
teaches anything, it is that this idea of strategically
underfunding natural resource agencies will ultimately cost
taxpayers more money in the long run.
And the flip side of that is, if we adequately fund
environmental programs, we save money. Every dollar we invest
now in coastal adaptation and resilience saves $6 in future
disaster costs. For every dollar we put into restoration
programs, we see an average of $10 in local benefits. Real,
tangible economic benefit.
So, one of these days I hope that my colleagues across the
aisle will accept that the science community is right, that
these extreme weather events that we are all living through are
not a hoax or a conspiracy or a biblical omen. They are just
real. And ideology is a poor substitute for facing reality,
especially with water: 2023 was the hottest year on record, and
2024 is on track to beat it.
The harsh reality will continue to adversely impact our
water supply, so we should be looking to smart, cost-effective,
resilient strategies instead of pointing to a single wet year
and arguing for huge amounts of money going to new surface
storage projects that won't deliver water when we need it most.
We should prioritize Federal water investments that protect,
preserve, and optimize our over-exploited water supplies
instead of big, controversial projects that carry huge price
tags, have major impacts, and don't yield nearly as much water
as investing in conservation, recycling, and climate resilient
strategies.
Reclamation's proposed budget advances much of this mission
through the WaterSMART program, aging infrastructure, and rural
water projects, and I support that.
I also support the proposed budget for mandatory funding of
Indian water rights settlements. These are important
strategies.
I look forward to discussing the rest of these budget
questions as we go forward.
I yield back.

Mr. Graves. Thank you, sir. I want to thank the gentleman
from California for reminding us that the lawyers and lobbyists
from Big Oil endorse the Inflation Reduction Act that all the
Members on this side of the aisle opposed.
And with that, I am going to defer to the Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. Well, I want to thank the witnesses for being
here today.
Thank you, Mr. Graves, for sitting in for me while I went
to vote in Judiciary.
This is an unusual opportunity for me to rebut the Ranking
Member.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Huffman. That is true.
Mr. Bentz. Yes, because usually it is the other way around.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. I just want to say a couple of words about how
important it is that we get back into our forests so that we
could actually do something for the watersheds in California,
for example. But we are being prevented from doing that by any
number of environmental organizations that, for some reason,
would rather see those forests burn up than help store water
for the folks in California.
And likewise, when it comes to budgets, and that is what we
are here today to talk about, the billions and billions and
billions of dollars that you folks here today are in charge of
and, in many ways, we rely upon you to do the very best you
can, and I am sure you are trying to do so, but that doesn't
absolve us, we here in Congress, of our oversight
responsibility to make sure that, indeed, those billions are
being spent the way they should be, at least in our opinion.
The challenge, of course, much disagreement on how money
gets spent. But on the other hand, there is little disagreement
on the fact that you do have billions and billions and billions
of dollars to spend, and much of that coming from budgets that
were passed before we Republicans took over. So, we will be
anxious to hear today how that money is being deployed,
taxpayers' money. And I am looking forward to that.
Appearing before us today we have the Bureau of
Reclamation, U.S. Fish and Wildlife, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, and the four regional Federal Power
Marketing Administrations.
Collectively, your agencies have requested in the billions.
It said $10 billion, it is more than that over the 2025 year.
It is absolutely essential that we exercise this oversight
authority, and it is our duty, overseeing what the executive
branch is doing. One way to do this is to have the agencies
come before Congress and explain, just as we are doing today in
the limited time allowed, their budgets and their missions.
Each of these agencies has a huge impact on the daily lives
of Americans. The Bureau of Reclamation manages multi-purpose
storage reservoirs in the Western states, including the
Deschutes and Klamath projects located in my district. Many of
these projects generate hydropower, and, of course, the power
marketing agencies that deliver that power to wholesale
customers, such as the rural electric cooperatives, municipal
utilities, and tribes. These projects are managed to comply
with rules set by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and NOAA,
who oversee the implementation of the Endangered Species Act.
These agencies often don't mesh, their opinions don't mesh,
resulting in severe damage to those who are dependent upon the
water controlled by these groups, and I am sure there will be
questions about that today.
The Fish and Wildlife Service manages the National Wildlife
Refuge System. Most recently, they proposed a rule that would
fundamentally change how our refuges are managed, and I don't
think for the betterment of the system, but we will hear about
that. Also concerning is this proposal to reduce funding for
the North American Wetlands Conservation Act by a third.
Questions may well be asked about the source of the rule
previously referenced.
NOAA's National Marine Fisheries Service is tasked with
implementing the Magnuson-Stevens Act, a primary law governing
our fishery resources, yet the NMFS budget appears to
prioritize offshore wind development over fisheries management
and important data collection. We do want to make sure that the
focus is on our fishery resources, and also at the same time
making sure that extreme rules that dramatically affect
negatively use of our oceans are not overly restrictive in
their approach, as compared to their effect.
There is a lot to cover today, and I am looking forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
We have already recognized the Ranking Member, so we are
going to move on.
Mr. Huffman. You can give me another----
Mr. Bentz. No, no, we are not going to do that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bentz. I will now introduce our witnesses.
The Honorable Camille Touton, Commissioner of the Bureau of
Reclamation in Washington, DC; the Honorable Martha Williams,
Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in Washington,
DC; the Honorable Richard Spinrad, Under Secretary for Oceans
and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator with the Department of
Commerce in Washington, DC; Administrator John Hairston, CEO of
the Bonneville Power Administration in Portland, Oregon;
Administrator Tracey LeBeau, Administrator and CEO of the
Western Power Administration in Lakewood, Colorado;
Administrator Michael Wech, Administrator of the Southwestern
Power Administration in Tulsa, Oklahoma; and Administrator
Virgil Hobbs, the CEO of Southeastern Power Administration in
Elberton, Georgia.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone, and I will remind you the microphones in this
room are sketchy.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Bentz. They are worse than that, so you will need to
speak directly into the microphone. And if you are not, I will
remind you.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute left, the light will turn yellow.
And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please stop.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
I now recognize Commissioner Touton for 5 minutes.
Commissioner.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CAMILLE TOUTON, COMMISSIONER,
BUREAU   OF  RECLAMATION,   DEPARTMENT   OF   THE
INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Touton. Good afternoon. My name is Camille Calimlim
Touton, and I serve as the Commissioner of the Bureau of
Reclamation. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman,
and members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss
the President's budget for the Bureau of Reclamation. It is a
privilege to be here with you today.
The Bureau of Reclamation is the largest deliverer and
manager of water in the nation, and the second largest producer
of hydropower. We have 189 projects across the American West,
and help to feed the nation and the world with 10 million acres
of irrigated agriculture, provide water to millions of
Americans, and meet our trust responsibility to sovereign
nations while sustaining ecosystems across the Western
landscape.
The need to secure, maintain, and modernize our nation's
water infrastructure is an Administration priority, and we have
a once-in-a-generation opportunity to utilize our Fiscal Year
2025 budget request of $1.6 billion with that of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act.
The cyclical nature of Western hydrology, as we have seen
over the last 3 years, highlights the need for immediate
actions as well as thoughtful, on-the-ground work to make our
infrastructure and operational decisions more resilient to
withstand future water scarcity and variability.
Our 2025 budget priorities reflect a commitment to drought
planning and response activities to promote water security in
the short and long term. This approach is illustrated by our
signing of a Record of Decision last week to protect the near-
term stability of the Colorado River system. With historic
conservation of 3 million acre-feet, in collaboration with our
partners, made possible by President Biden's Investing in
America agenda, we have staved off the immediate threat and
stabilized the system to protect water deliveries, the
ecosystem, and power production. Our focus is now on the
future.
Across the West, we are guided by the best available
science and engineering. The stability of our infrastructure
and our commitment to transparency remains our highest
priority. Reclamation's dams and reservoirs, water conveyance
systems, and hydropower facilities serve as the water power
infrastructure backbone of the American West.
However, as with all infrastructure, these features are
aging, and in need of critical maintenance to prepare for the
future. Our 2025 budget includes $74.8 million for
extraordinary maintenance, combined with our BIL investments
just announced today, $520.8 million in Fiscal Year 2024
funding for aging infrastructure. This includes over $2 million
for the installation of a surge tank at the Mill Creek plant
that is part of the Dalles project in Oregon, and approximately
$30 million to modernize and repair the Livingstone National
Fish Hatchery in Northern California.
Reclamation's WaterSMART Program also provided nearly $10
million in BIL funding to the North Unit Irrigation District
for fish screen replacement at the Bend Headworks in Oregon on
the Deschutes River.
We are also continuing construction of our largest dam
safety modification at B.F. Sisk in California, supported by
our Fiscal Year 2025 Dam Safety Program request of $211.2
million. At Sisk, we are also undertaking a dam raise that will
provide increased water storage in California. Since 2021,
Reclamation has invested $695 million in water storage projects
in California alone.
We must also address our infrastructure needs while
considering our economic inequities and the needs of rural and
underserved communities. Reclamation is establishing and
rebuilding water infrastructure for underserved populations by
ensuring that clean drinking water is provided to communities.
Our request includes $58.5 million for Rural Water Program, and
leverages the $1 billion in BIL funding to accelerate the
completion of these projects, of which we have already selected
$806 million.
The Department remains committed to upholding our trust
responsibilities with Tribal Nations, and over the past 3
years, Interior has allocated $2.43 billion available through
BIL to address Indian water rights settlements. In addition to
these investments, our request includes $181 million in our
Fiscal Year 2025 budget to support the White Mountain Apache
Tribe's Water Settlement Agreement.
The Administration also proposes legislation to expand the
Indian Water Rights Settlements Completion Fund, a proposal
that will provide $2.8 billion in mandatory funding over 10
years to ensure commitments are honored, as well as funding for
operation and maintenance costs.
We are committed to working with you, and working with
Congress and this Subcommittee, as well as our partners across
the West in carrying out our mission, and our Fiscal Year 2025
budget supports these actions.
Again, I thank the Subcommittee. I am happy to answer any
questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Touton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Camille Calimlim Touton, Commissioner,
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation

Thank you, Chair Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman and members of the
Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss with you the President's
Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 Budget for the Bureau of Reclamation. I am
Camille Calimlim Touton, Commissioner for the Bureau of Reclamation.
Reclamation manages water for agriculture, municipal and industrial
use, the environment, power production, and provides flood control and
recreation for millions of people. We are also the second largest
producer of hydropower in the United States and operate 53
hydroelectric powerplants that annually produced, on average, 40
billion kilowatt-hours for the last 10 years. Reclamation's project and
programs serve as the water and power infrastructure backbone of the
American West, constituting an important driver of economic growth in
hundreds of basins throughout the Western States. Reclamation's
activities support economic activity valued at $34.1 billion, and
support approximately 450,700 jobs.\1\ Reclamation delivers 10 trillion
gallons of water to millions of people each year and provides water for
irrigation of 10 million farmland acres, which yields approximately 25
percent of the Nation's fruit and nut crops, and 60 percent of the
vegetable harvest.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Department of the Interior Economic Contributions Report--
Fiscal Year 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reclamation's fundamental work to modernize and maintain
infrastructure, conserve natural resources, use science and research to
inform decision-making, serve rural, Tribal, and underserved
populations, and stay as nimble as possible in response to the
requirements of drought and aridification--position us to meet the
Biden-Harris Administration's core tenets. The Bureau of Reclamation's
2025 budget provides the foundation to meet our mission and remains
committed to working with a wide range of partners, including water and
power customers, Tribes, State and local officials, and non-
governmental organizations.
Reclamation is requesting a net total of $1,543,321,000 in Federal
discretionary appropriations, which is anticipated to be augmented by
almost $2.5 billion in other Federal and non-Federal funds for FY 2025.
Of the total, $1,443,527,000 is for the Water and Related Resources
account, which is Reclamation's largest account, $66,794,000 is for the
Policy and Administration account, and $33,000,000 is for the
California Bay Delta account. A total of $55,656,000 is budgeted for
the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund.
Reclamation is committed to efficient and effective implementation
of the Infrastructure Investments and Jobs Act, also known as the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), which was enacted as Public Law
117-58 on November 15, 2021. Title IX of the BIL, Western Water
Infrastructure, authorized $8.3 billion to be appropriated to Water and
Related Resources in $1.66 billion annual installments from FY 2022-FY
2026, making a once-in-a-generation investment in the Nation's
infrastructure and economic competitiveness. This landmark investment
will rebuild America's critical infrastructure, tackle the climate
crisis, advance environmental justice, and drive the creation of good-
paying union jobs. By addressing long overdue improvements and
strengthening our resilience to the changing climate, this investment
in our communities across the country will grow the economy sustainably
and equitably for decades to come.
Reclamation has been putting these resources to work in communities
with focus on areas where the greatest impact can be realized. Since
President Biden signed the BIL, Reclamation has selected 420 distinct
projects for funding, totaling more than $2.9 billion. The Spend Plan
that sets out FY 2025 allocations of this funding was submitted to
Congress at the same time as this FY 2025 request as required and is
available at https://www.usbr.gov/bil/2022-spendplan.html. The Spend
Plan allocates funding at the program level, and subsequent addenda to
the Plan allocate programmatic funds to the project level for certain
programs.
Reclamation is also committed to efficient and effective
implementation of The Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), Public Law 117-
169, which was enacted on Aug. 16, 2022. Title V, Subtitle B, Part 3 of
the law, entitled ``Drought Response and Preparedness,'' makes
available $4.587 billion to mitigate drought in Reclamation States; to
plan, design and construct domestic water supply projects for
disadvantaged communities or households that do not have reliable
access to domestic water supplies; to design and implement projects to
cover water conveyance facilities with solar panels; and to provide
emergency drought relief for Tribes. The programs and projects funded
under the IRA will help increase water conservation, improve water
efficiency across western basins experiencing long-term drought, and
prevent the Colorado River System's reservoirs from falling to
critically low elevations. Reclamation is actively engaged implementing
the law and has already directed funds to Colorado River water delivery
contract or entitlement holders for activities that mitigate drought in
the short term. A total of 23 Lower Basin agreements have been executed
in Arizona and California, serving to conserve up to 1,567,668 acre-
feet of water through 2026. An additional 104,427 acre-feet of system
conservation in the Upper Basin have been executed using IRA funding.
Information on plans, developments and funding will be available at
https://www.usbr.gov/inflation-reduction-act.

Modernizing and Maintaining Infrastructure: Reclamation's water and
power projects throughout the western United States provide water
supplies for agricultural, municipal, and industrial purposes.
Reclamation's projects also provide energy produced by hydropower
facilities and maintain ecosystems that support fish and wildlife,
hunting, fishing, and other recreation, as well as rural economies.

Activities to Support Underserved Communities, Tribal Programs &
Tribal Water Rights Settlements: Reclamation tackles the challenges of
underserved communities through investments in Tribal water rights
settlements, continuation of the Native American Affairs technical
assistance program, rural water projects, and investments in specific
projects for underserved communities through programs such as
WaterSMART. The BIL and IRA appropriations invest substantial portions
of its funding to underserved populations, rural, and Tribal
communities. Reclamation is committed to investing public dollars
equitably, including through the Justice40 Initiative, a government-
wide effort toward a goal that 40 percent of the overall benefits from
Federal investments in climate and clean energy flow to disadvantaged
communities.
Section 70101 of the BIL established the Indian Water Rights
Settlement Completion Fund (Completion Fund), making $2.5 billion
available to the Secretary of the Interior to satisfy Tribal settlement
obligations as authorized by Congress prior to enactment of the BIL. In
FY 2022 through FY 2024, the Secretary of Interior allocated $2.434
billion of those funds, $815.4 million of which supported Reclamation's
Tribal settlement implementation actions. The Department expects to
allocate the remaining $65.9 million in funding from the Completion
Fund in FY 2025; more detail can be found in the Permanents chapter of
the FY 2025 Reclamation budget request. In addition to the Completion
Fund, FY 2025 represents the sixth year of Reclamation Water
Settlements Fund (RWSF) allocations, which provides $120 million in
annual mandatory authority for Reclamation Indian water rights
settlements. The RWSF is authorized as an interest-bearing account; and
making use of the accrued interest, Reclamation anticipates $142
million being available in FY 2025. Funding made available by previous
mandatory authorities, such as that authorized in the Claims Resolution
Act, remain available for settlement implementation, while the ongoing
operations and maintenance requirements of the Arizona Water Settlement
Act are expected to continue to be supported within the Lower Colorado
River Basin Development Fund.
The 2025 President's Budget request continues previous proposals to
provide mandatory funding for Indian Water Rights Settlements. The 2024
President's Budget proposed legislation to provide mandatory funding
for Indian Water Rights Settlements to cover the costs of existing and
future water rights settlements and to address the ongoing Operation,
Maintenance, and Repair requirements associated with four enacted
Indian Water Rights Settlements managed by Reclamation. The proposal
would provide $2.8 billion: $250.0 million annually over 10 years for
existing and future water rights settlements and $34.0 million a year
over 10 years for requirements associated with the Ak Chin Indian Water
Rights Settlement Project, the Animas-La Plata Project (Colorado Ute
Settlement), the Columbia and Snake River Salmon Recovery Project (Nez
Perce Settlement), and the Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project. Funds
would be deposited into the Indian Water Rights Settlement Completion
Fund established by the BIL and be available to Reclamation for
implementation.
In addition to supporting the mandatory funding proposals, the FY
2025 discretionary request includes $181 million for the White Mountain
Apache Tribe (WMAT) Water Rights Quantification Act of 2010. P.L. 117-
342, enacted January 5, 2023, which amended the White Mountain
legislation, increasing the authorization of the WMAT Cost Overrun
Subaccount from $11 million to $541 million and extending
enforceability from April 2023 to December 2027. Funding will support
the design, construction, and eventual operations and maintenance of a
rural water system to provide clean, potable water.
The FY 2025 discretionary request also includes $29.5 million for
the Native American Affairs program to improve capacity to work with
and support Tribes in the resolution of their water rights claims and
to develop sustainable water sharing agreements and management
activities; $9 million of this amount will support Tribal drought
assistance efforts in FY 2025, while $500,000 will support Departmental
and Reclamation efforts for Tribal Co-Stewardship activities. This
funding will also strengthen Department-wide capabilities to achieve an
integrated and systematic approach to Indian water rights negotiations
to consider the full range of economic, legal, and technical attributes
of proposed settlements. Reclamation is committed to increasing
opportunities for Tribes to develop, manage, and protect their water
and related resources. The Native American Affairs Program is a
collaborative, coordinated, integrated function in Reclamation, which
performs activities that support the opportunities.
Reclamation's Rural Water program, under which many activities
support Tribal needs, addresses important needs in rural communities
for clean, reliable, safe drinking water; the FY 2025 request includes
$58.5 million to support investments made through BIL to ensure
construction, operations, and maintenance of the existing authorized
projects can proceed as efficiently as possible. Funding also supports
Reclamation efforts for Tribal Nations by supporting many activities
across the Bureau, including the Yakima River Basin Water Enhancement
Project, the Klamath Project, and the Lahontan Basin project, among
others.
Finally, the WaterSMART Program prioritizes funding under its
competitive grant programs for disadvantaged and underserved
communities. The WaterSMART Program aims to address water supply issues
and improve water management through partnerships with communities,
States, Tribes, municipalities, and agricultural stakeholders.

Conservation and Climate Resilience: The climate crisis is
challenging Reclamation's ability to both produce energy and sustain
reliable water delivery. The Nation faces undeniable realities that
water supplies for agriculture, fisheries, ecosystems, industry,
cities, and energy are confronting stability challenges due to climate
change. Reclamation's projects address the Administration's
conservation and climate resilience priorities through funding requests
for the WaterSMART program, funding to secure water supply to wildlife
refuges, and proactive efforts through providing sound climate science,
research and development, and clean energy. To address these
challenges, Reclamation has implemented its Climate Change Adaptation
Strategy, which affirms Reclamation will use leading science and
engineering to adapt climate-based situations across the West.
The WaterSMART Program serves as a contributor to Reclamation's/
Interior's Water Conservation Priority Goal. Since 2010, projects
funded under contributing programs, including WaterSMART Grants, Title
XVI (Water Recycling and Reuse Program), California Bay-Delta Program,
Yakima River Basin Water Enhancement Project, and Desalination
construction projects have achieved a total of 1,745,157 acre-feet
water savings.
Through WaterSMART, Reclamation works cooperatively with States,
Tribes, and local entities as they plan for and implement actions to
address current and future water shortages due to a number of factors
including drought, degraded water quality, increased demands for water
and energy from growing populations, environmental water requirements,
and the potential for decreased water supply availability due to
climate change. This includes cost-shared grants for planning, design,
and construction of water management improvement projects; water
reclamation and reuse projects; watershed resilience projects; the
Basin Study Program; and drought planning and implementation actions to
proactively address water shortages.
Reclamation's FY 2025 budget for WaterSMART also includes $500,000
for the Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration Program. Through this program,
Reclamation provides funding for fish passage improvements and aquatic
habitat enhancement, including removal of dams or other aging
infrastructure if such projects are supported by a broad multi-
stakeholder group, and if the project maintains water security for all
involved. This program aligns with the Administration's priorities for
climate change and climate resiliency. Reclamation was also
appropriated $250 million for aquatic ecosystem restoration and
protection projects in the BIL. The FY 2025 request includes $65.6
million for the WaterSMART Program.

Climate Science: Reclamation's FY 2025 budget for Research and
Development (R&D) programs includes $22.6 million for the Science and
Technology Program, and $7.0 million for Desalination and Water
Purification Research--both of which focus on Reclamation's mission of
water and power deliveries. Climate change adaptation is a focus of
Reclamation's R&D programs, which invests in the production of climate
change science, information and tools that benefit adaptation, and by
yielding climate-resilient solutions to benefit management of water
infrastructure, hydropower, environmental compliance, and water
management.
The Desalination and Water Purification Research program addresses
drought and water scarcity impacts caused by climate change by
investing in desalination and water treatment technology development
and demonstrations for the purpose of more effectively converting
unusable waters to useable water supplies. The Science and Technology
program invests in innovation to address the full range of technical
issues confronting Reclamation water and hydropower managers and
includes the Snow Water Supply Forecasting Program that aims to improve
water supply forecasts through enhanced snow monitoring and water
management to address the impacts of drought and a changing climate.

Dam Safety: At the time of publication, Reclamation manages 490
dams throughout the 17 Western States. Reclamation's Dam Safety Program
has identified 364 high and significant hazard dams at 242 facilities,
which form the core of the program. Through constant monitoring and
assessment, Reclamation strives to achieve the best use of its limited
resources to ensure dam safety and maintain our ability to store and
divert water and to generate hydropower.
The Dam Safety Program helps ensure the safety and reliability of
Reclamation dams to protect the downstream public. Approximately 50
percent of Reclamation's dams were built between 1900 and 1950, and the
majority of the dams were built before adoption of currently used,
state-of-the-art design and construction practices. Reclamation
continuously evaluates dams and monitors performance to ensure that
risks do not exceed the Federal Guidelines for Dam Safety Risk
Management and the Public Protection Guidelines. The Dam Safety Program
represents a major funding need over the next 10 years, driven largely
by necessary repairs at B.F. Sisk Dam in California. The B.F. Sisk Dam
is a key component of the Central Valley Project, providing 2 million
acre-feet of water storage south of the California Sacramento-San
Joaquin River Delta. Reclamation is modifying the dam to reduce the
risk of potential failure resulting from potential overtopping in
response to a seismic event, using the most current science and
technology to develop an adaptive and resilient infrastructure. In
addition to B.F. Sisk, Reclamation has identified 12 projects with
anticipated modification needs through 2030, as well as 5 additional
projects that will be assessed for potential risk reduction efforts
starting in 2024. The FY 2025 request includes $182.6 million to
support corrective actions at dams, $118 million of which is
anticipated to support modifications at B.F. Sisk.
The proposed budget also requests $74.8 million for specific
Extraordinary Maintenance (XM) activities across Reclamation in FY
2025. This request is central to mission objectives of operating and
maintaining projects to ensure delivery of water and power benefits.
Reclamation's XM request relies on condition assessments,
condition/performance metrics, technological research and deployment,
and strategic collaboration to better inform and improve the management
of its assets and deal with its infrastructure maintenance challenges.
Reclamation was also appropriated $3.2 billion in the BIL to repair
aging infrastructure.

Renewable energy: Reclamation owns 78 hydroelectric power plants.
Reclamation operates 53 of those plants to generate approximately 14
percent of the hydroelectric power produced in the United States. Each
year on average, Reclamation generates approximately 40 million
megawatt hours of electricity and collects over $1.0 billion in gross
power revenues for the Federal Government.
Reclamation's FY 2025 budget request includes $4.5 million to
increase Reclamation hydropower capabilities and value, contributing to
Administration clean energy and climate change initiatives and
enhancing water conservation and climate resilience within the power
program. Reclamation's Power Resources Office oversees power operations
and maintenance, electric reliability compliance, and strategic energy
initiatives.

Environmental Responsibilities: Reclamation remains committed to
meeting our environmental responsibilities through a variety of project
examples throughout the West, such as the Central Valley Project and
the Middle Rio Grande Collaborative Program. The FY 2025 budget also
funds Reclamation's Endangered Species Act recovery programs and other
programs that contribute towards these efforts, such as the Columbia/
Snake River Salmon Recovery Program, the San Juan River Recovery
Implementation Program, the Upper Colorado Recovery Implementation
Program, and the Multi-Species Conservation Program within the Lower
Colorado River Operations Program, among others.
The investments described in Reclamation's FY 2025 budget, in
combination with BIL and IRA implementation efforts will ensure that
Reclamation can continue to provide reliable water and power to the
American West. Water management, improving and modernizing
infrastructure, using sound science to support critical decision-
making, finding opportunities to expand capacity, reducing conflict,
and meeting environmental responsibilities are all addressed in this FY
2025 budget request. Reclamation continues to look at ways to plan more
efficiently for future challenges faced in water resources management
and to improve the way it does business.
Thank you for the opportunity to present the President's FY 2025
Budget Request for the Bureau of Reclamation.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Honorable Camille Touton,
Commissioner, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Department of the
Interior

The Hon. Camille Touton did not submit responses to the Committee by
the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. At the start of this year, the Department's final rule
for the Implementation of the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act went into effect. Within this budget request, there is
$1.2 million for NAGPRA in the Land Resources Management Program, could
you share how this funding will be utilized to ensure compliance and
implementation of the new rule?

Question 2. Within the budget request, there is $500,000 to support
Departmental and Reclamation efforts for Tribal Co-Stewardship
activities. Could you expand on how this funding will be utilized?

Question 3. The ability to release water from Glen Canyon Dam under
a wide range of hydrologic conditions is vital for Reclamation's
effective management of the Colorado River system and to ensure that
the Quechan Indian Tribe, the other four tribes whose water rights were
decreed by the U.S. Supreme Court in Arizona v California, and other
tribes and non-Indian water users in the Lower Basin are able to have
reliable access to clean and safe drinking water and water to support
their economies. Recently, Reclamation has identified engineering
concerns at Glen Canyon Dam related to the ability to release necessary
water to the Lower Basin through that facility's bypass tubes if Lake
Powell's elevation drops below elevation 3490 feet, a prospect that
cannot be ruled out with the challenging hydrology facing the Basin.

3a) What is in the proposed budget to address the infrastructure
limitations created by the bypass tubes at Glen Canyon Dam to ensure
that the Quechan Tribe and other tribes and non-Indian Lower Basin
water users are not deprived of necessary access to water?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Commissioner. I now recognize
Director Williams for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARTHA WILLIAMS, DIRECTOR, U.S.
FISH  AND  WILDLIFE   SERVICE,  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE
INTERIOR, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Williams. Good afternoon, Chairman Bentz, Ranking
Member Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate
the opportunity to testify today on behalf of the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service's 2025 budget request.
The President's budget for the Fish and Wildlife Service
totals $1.9 billion, an increase of $163.4 million above the
2024 enacted level. The budget promotes strategic investments
to conserve fish and wildlife species that face many stressors.
It connects Americans with the outdoors. It facilitates
economic development and creates good-paying jobs.
The Fish and Wildlife Service is a field-based organization
that works collaboratively and creatively to meet our
responsibilities. Our 9,000 dedicated employees carry out our
work across 8 regional offices and 800 field stations across
the country. These biologists, refuge managers, hatchery
operators, law enforcement professionals, maintenance
professionals, officers, and more depend on relationships to
help implement our mission in ways that respect local needs and
fit the places where we work.
We partner with state, local, and even foreign governments,
tribes, landowners, scientists, hunters, anglers, outdoor
recreationists, non-governmental organizations, schools,
industries, and other Federal agencies. Although we are a
relatively small agency, these partnerships greatly increase
our effectiveness and our reach.
Over the course of my career, and now as Director, I have
seen this firsthand. As an example, I recently joined our staff
at the Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge in Alabama to
celebrate the completion of a mine reclamation project. The
Fish and Wildlife Service worked side by side with the Alabama
Department of Labor and other partners to complete the project.
In addition to ensuring public safety, the project restored
hydrology and improved water quality. It also opened new access
to the refuge for the community, expanded hunting
opportunities, created a 10-acre fishing lake, and added 3.5
miles of hiking trails. All of this will pay long-term
dividends for the environment and the economic vibrance of the
surrounding communities. The celebration brought together the
mayor, county commissioners, the friends group for the refuge,
and even the Cahaba Lily Queen, showing strong community
support for the refuge and this important project.
Building and sustaining partnerships like these take people
and resources. However, over the past 20 years, due to
relentless budget constraints, the Fish and Wildlife Service
has had to significantly reduce our workforce, stretching our
ability to do our work safely and proactively to the point of
snapping.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has consistently adapted and
stretched our resources. For example, we seek reimbursable
agreements to support our staffing needs. Because we do not
have the capacity to staff each refuge as a stand-alone unit,
we now administer units of the refuge system under a complex
structure to achieve management efficiencies.
And we also innovate. For example, we developed an online
system that streamlines permitting, allowing project proponents
to quickly determine whether a project requires Endangered
Species Act consultation so they don't have to wait in line for
a response from the government.
When Congress makes strategic investments like those under
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Fish and Wildlife
Service, together with our partners, has demonstrated that we
can do great things for wildlife, local economies, communities.
It has given us a chance to show just what we can achieve
together. If funded, our budget request would help restore
capacity in key areas and, as a result, would provide positive
impacts to people, communities, and habitat. We would maximize
the budget's investments by leveraging the capacity of our
partners, tailoring the implementation of our mission to meet
the conditions and needs of local situations.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you
today, and I would be pleased to answer any questions you may
have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Williams follows:]

Prepared Statement of Martha Williams, Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, Department of the Interior

Introduction
Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Martha Williams, Director of the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service (Service). I appreciate the opportunity to testify
before you today on the Service's Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 budget request.
The FY 2025 budget promotes strategic investments to: address the
impacts of climate change on Service trust resources, conserve species
and habitats, reconnect Americans with the outdoors, facilitate
economic development, and create good-paying job opportunities.
The President's Budget for FY 2025 invests in America and
prioritizes key conservation initiatives while following the Fiscal
Responsibility Act of 2023. The President's Budget request for the
Service totals $1.9 billion, an increase of $163.4 million above the FY
2024 enacted level.
The mission of the Service is working with others to conserve,
protect, and enhance fish, wildlife, and plants and their habitats for
the continuing benefit of the American people. Meeting our mission is
dependent on the Service leading with our values of collaboration,
stewardship, integrity, respect, and innovation. The Service is a
diverse and largely decentralized organization that works
collaboratively and creatively to meet its conservation and management
responsibilities. In addition to our headquarters office, the Service
has eight regional offices and nearly 800 field stations. The backbone
of the Service is its nearly 9,000 dedicated employees working in our
regional offices and field stations across the country. The Service's
headquarters office sets national policy to provide consistency and
clarity, and stewards and implements most of our international
conservation work, while the majority of our domestic conservation work
is carried out on the ground by our regions and field stations. Our
biologists, refuge managers, hatchery operators, and more build
relationships at the global, regional, state, Tribal, and local level,
to implement the Service's mission and carry out our statutory mandates
in a way that respects local needs and fits the places where we work.
The Service is a relatively small agency, but our reach is large due to
the strength of our partnerships with other federal agencies, states,
Tribes, foreign governments, landowners, scientists, hunters, anglers,
nongovernmental organizations, industry, and the public. However,
building and sustaining those partnerships takes people and resources.
Over the past twenty years the Service's capacity has eroded
significantly, while at the same time costs and workloads have
increased, and challenges to wildlife conservation have become more
complex. In this challenging budget environment, the Service has been
forced to adapt. We are expanding our partnerships, seeking
reimbursable agreements to support our staffing needs, establishing
refuge complexes for management efficiencies, and establishing cross-
programmatic teams to share expertise. The Service continually strives
to be efficient and innovative with the resources Congress provides to
us. For example, we continue to enhance our Information for Planning
and Consultation (IPaC) decision support system to streamline the
environmental review process. We similarly work to enhance our ePermits
system to improve electronic permitting for a variety of stakeholders
and the public. We have also sought good neighbor authority and
stewardship contracting authority to enable the Service to partner with
states, Tribes, and counties to conduct ecosystem restoration projects
on Service lands. While we have found opportunities to adapt and be
more efficient with the resources we have, these challenging budgets
have required us to pull back on important partnerships and
conservation work.
The Service's FY 2025 budget request seeks to address our needs to
deliver our mission now and how to build towards the future. Through
strategic investments like the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act,
commonly referred to as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL), the
Service has shown that when given the resources to accomplish our
mission, we, together with our partners, can do great things for
wildlife, local communities, and the economy. If funded, the Service's
FY 2025 budget request would help restore our capacity and invest in
key conservation partnerships. My testimony below discusses the
discretionary portion of our request in greater detail.

Ecological Services

For over 50 years, the Ecological Services Program has implemented
the Endangered Species Act (ESA), our country's most important law for
protecting imperiled fish, wildlife, and plants. The total request for
the Ecological Services Program for FY 2025 is $338.2 million, an
increase of $49.9 million above the FY 2024 enacted. The ESA is
extraordinarily effective at preventing species from going extinct and
has inspired action to collaboratively conserve at-risk species and
their habitat before they need to be listed as threatened or
endangered. Since it was signed into law in 1973, nearly all of the
species listed under the law are still with us today and many species
have recovered, been downlisted, or received the necessary conservation
to not require listing.
Preventing extinction and recovering listed species has always
been, and will continue to be, one of the Service's highest priorities.
Through close collaboration with our federal, state, and Tribal
partners, and range countries around the world, we have recovered
species from the brink of extinction, restored critical habitat, and
applied a balanced approach for building better natural and human
communities. For example, on January 25, 2023, we celebrated the
recovery and delisting of five species on the U.S. Navy-owned San
Clemente Island (San Clemente Island paintbrush, lotus, larkspur, and
bush-mallow plants and San Clemente Bell's sparrow). This conservation
success was due to four decades of partnership between the Service and
the Navy and shows how collaborative conservation can drive species
recovery. The FY 2025 budget proposes $126.4 million for recovery of
threatened and endangered species, a $15.9 million increase over the FY
2024 enacted level. This funding would allow the Service to reduce the
recovery plan backlog for listed species that do not yet have recovery
plans, conduct required 5-year reviews of listed species, and allow the
Service to propose or finalize an estimated 25 delisting or downlisting
rules. Additionally, funding would be used to catalyze and support high
priority recovery actions identified in Service recovery plans for
priority species.
The Service's work supports economic growth and job creation in the
U.S. through timely reviews of proposed infrastructure and development
projects that are consistent with statutory environmental requirements.
We provide expertise and technical assistance to applicants,
coordinating early whenever possible. We also continuously seek ways to
innovate and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our
environmental review and permitting of projects. A clear example of
this is the IPaC decision support system, a web-based application that
allows federal agencies and project proponents to instantly obtain
official species lists and recommended conservation measures. This
system was conceived proactively by Service biologists who saw an ever-
increasing consultation workload under flat and declining projected
budgets. This innovative solution enabled the Service to address rising
demand through greater efficiency. In the last 5 years, IPaC users
generated over 115,000 documents using determination keys (DKeys), and
over half required no further action on the part of the Service or the
IPaC user. DKeys typically result in a final document in less than 30
minutes and all administrative logging for Service project tracking is
completed automatically. This is a huge time savings and win-win for
the Service, consulting federal agencies, and project proponents.
However, between 2003 and 2023, our environmental review staff
decreased by 20 percent, while the number of species listed as
endangered or threatened under the ESA has risen by 39 percent. This
degradation of capacity has made it increasingly difficult to achieve
our mission and meet the needs of federal agencies and applicants in a
timely manner. To address the increasing needs for consultation in a
growing economy, the Service is requesting $146.6 million for planning
and consultation, a $28.4 million increase over the FY 2024 enacted
level.
Additionally, the Service is requesting $23.9 million for listing
activities, a $1.9 million increase over the FY 2024 enacted level. The
Service is requesting $41.2 million for conservation and restoration
activities, a $3.6 million increase over the FY 2024 enacted level.
These investments will put key staff on the ground to work with
partners and the public to carry out the essential mandates of the ESA
and facilitate important development projects.

National Wildlife Refuge System

The mission of the National Wildlife Refuge System (Refuge System)
is to administer a national network of lands and waters for the
conservation, management, and restoration of fish, wildlife, and plant
resources and their habitats within the United States for the benefit
of present and future generations of Americans. The Refuge System spans
all 50 States and 5 U.S. Territories, with more than 856 million acres
of lands and waters, and includes 571 national wildlife refuges, 38
wetland management districts, 48 coordination areas, seven National
Monuments, and 760 million acres in Marine National Monuments. In
addition to conservation, the Refuge System delivers outdoor recreation
and economic benefits to local communities. According to the Service's
2017 Banking on Nature report, the economic impact on local communities
from recreation visits totaled $3.2 billion, and the Refuge System
generates $1.1 billion in job income and over 41,000 jobs nationally.
In FY 2023, the Refuge System hosted a record-breaking 67 million
visits to national wildlife refuges, an increase of 46.6 percent since
FY 2011. This shows the growing importance of our national wildlife
refuges to the public. Without adequate staffing, our ability to safely
manage and welcome visitors is strained. To begin to address this
capacity need as well as on-the-ground conservation and public
engagement, the Service is requesting a total of $602.3 million for the
Refuge System, $75.3 million above the FY 2024 enacted level. This
requested additional funding will position the Refuge System to meet
expected increased demands for access, visitation, and ecological
functioning.
At current funding levels, the Service maintains 125 visitor
facilities, most of which are wholly volunteer-operated, have limited
hours of operation, or are staffed by administrative officers or refuge
managers as collateral duties. The FY 2025 budget request includes
$93.6 million for visitor services, an increase of $17.6 million over
the FY 2024 enacted level. The majority of this funding would be used
to ensure safer operations at existing facilities and contribute to
rebuilding the visitor services workforce, focusing on entry-level
positions to greet visitors, teach students, engage communities, and
coordinate volunteer programs.
Similarly, the Department of the Interior's (Department) Law
Enforcement Task Force found that Refuge System law enforcement has had
a 28 percent reduction from its 15-year high officer base, the highest
of all the Department's bureaus. To address this need, the Service's FY
2025 budget request includes $63.4 million for Refuge System law
enforcement, an increase of $17.9 million over the FY 2024 enacted
level. This funding would enable the Service to hire an additional 48
officers, bringing the Service closer to the International Associations
of Chiefs of Police recommended minimum number of officers and
enhancing the protection of the Refuge System and its visitors. It
would also support additional needs of Refuge System Law Enforcement.
The number of units in the Refuge System has increased over the
past ten years, changing staffing and expertise needed to fulfill the
Service's stewardship responsibilities. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request includes $280.4 million for wildlife and habitat management on
the Refuge System, an increase of $25.7 million over the FY 2024
enacted level. This funding would enable the Service to fill vacancies
in the Refuge System that support scientific studies, habitat
restoration and management, landscape conservation, and climate
resiliency, as well as implementation of the National Seed Strategy,
subsistence management and Tribal co-stewardship.
The Refuge System maintains over 44,000 assets representing over
$58 billion in public investments, including 6,400 buildings, 17,500
roads, bridges, and trails, 8,700 water management structures, and
11,400 other real property assets. A robust maintenance workforce is
required for responsible rehabilitation, maintenance, and construction
of Service infrastructure. The FY 2025 budget requests $160.1 million
for Refuge System maintenance, an increase of $12.1 million over the FY
2024 enacted level. This additional funding would be used to build
capacity in our infrastructure workforce and address deferred
maintenance as well as annual maintenance needs across the Refuge
System.
Additionally, the Service's FY 2025 budget request includes $68.1
million for the Partners for Fish and Wildlife (Partners) Program, a
$9.1 million increase over the FY 2024 enacted level. This voluntary,
community-based program supports important conservation initiatives for
wildlife and habitat on private lands. The program is emblematic of how
the Service carries out its mission through on-the-ground
implementation that leverages the capabilities of partners and is
tailored to fit the needs and aspects of the local community. Since
inception, the program has restored more than 7 million acres of
habitat while leveraging program funding with partner contributions at
a ratio of greater than 4:1. The Partners Program also yields
significant economic benefits for local communities. The Service's 2017
report titled ``Restoration Returns: The Contribution of Partners for
Fish and Wildlife Program and Coastal Program Restoration Projects to
Local U.S. Economies'' found that every dollar the Partners for Fish
and Wildlife Program invested in a project creates $6.15 in local
economic returns. Additionally, a recent report developed by the Jobs
Through Restoration and Resilience Sub-Team of the Service's National
America the Beautiful Team identified that every $1.0 million in FY
2022 spending under the Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program
supported 12.28 jobs.

Migratory Birds

The Migratory Bird Program is the premier federal leader in
migratory bird conservation and manages birds in the U.S. and
internationally through effective partnerships, applied science, and
innovative strategies. Migratory birds provide significant benefits to
our ecosystems and economy. They pollinate, control pests, and support
recreational opportunities. The 2022 National Survey of Fishing,
Hunting, and Wildlife Associated Recreation Report estimated that the
2.8 million migratory bird hunters and 96 million bird watchers in the
U.S. spent billions of dollars participating in these activities.
However, migratory birds are experiencing significant population
declines. In 2019, a report published in Science found that 3 billion
breeding birds have been lost since 1970 in North America. Habitat
loss, invasive species, climate change, disease and human-caused
mortality are among the leading drivers for bird declines. The mission
of the Migratory Bird Program is as relevant and important today as it
was at the inception of the Service: to ensure a legacy of healthy bird
populations for the American people. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request includes a total of $73.1 million for the Migratory Bird
Program, a $19.9 million increase over the FY 2024 enacted level.
The Migratory Bird Program provides expertise in the conservation
and management of over 1,100 species protected under the Migratory Bird
Treaty Act (MBTA) and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (Eagle
Act) and 269 species included in the Birds of Conservation Concern.
Migratory Bird Program staff develop decision-support tools and
guidance for energy, infrastructure, and other development projects to
avoid and minimize impacts to migratory birds. They also provide
technical assistance and implement bird conservation partnerships under
Partners in Flight and the U.S. Shorebird Conservation Partnership.
The Migratory Bird Program is also responsible for the continental-
wide monitoring of migratory bird species, including waterfowl banding,
aerial population surveys, and hunter harvest surveys. The Service's
six-decade history of migratory bird monitoring data provides a unique
perspective on shifting bird distributions and habitat conditions
across North America over time. These rich datasets allow the Service
to evaluate population shifts, migration chronology, and productivity,
and prioritize land acquisition for the Refuge System and population
goals for the North American Waterfowl Management Plan. Additionally,
this data is used to set and evaluate migratory bird hunting seasons.
Each year the Service conducts extensive migratory game bird
surveys and bird banding programs across North America that provide
valuable information about bird population, harvest, and habitat.
Results from these surveys provide the foundation for the establishment
of annual hunting seasons for migratory game birds. The Service is
struggling to maintain its critical role in monitoring migratory game
bird species abundance and establishing annual hunting regulations due
to funding and workforce constraints. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request includes $40.9 million for conservation and monitoring, a $10.5
million increase over the FY 2024 enacted level. A portion of this
funding will address capacity gaps and allow the Service to pursue
enhancements and efficiencies in its monitoring activities and current
harvest management processes. This increase will also provide targeted
investments in partner engagement, monitoring, technical assistance,
conservation planning, on-the-ground conservation delivery, and
promoting bird-friendly practices.
The Service's FY 2025 budget request also includes $13.4 million
for migratory birds permitting, an increase of $8.0 million over the FY
2024 enacted level. With increasing infrastructure and energy
development, the Service has also seen a rise in workload related to
permitting reviews under the MBTA and Eagle Act. This funding increase
would support capacity for migratory birds permitting staff, including
in the Service's regional offices. The FY 2025 budget request also
includes $1.1 million for the Federal Duck Stamp Program, an increase
of $547,000 over the FY 2024 enacted level. A portion of this increase
would be used to implement the new mandates of the Duck Stamp
Modernization Act of 2023, recently enacted by Congress.
Additionally, the Service's FY 2025 budget request includes $17.6
million for the North American Waterfowl Management Plan and Migratory
Bird Joint Ventures (JVs), an increase of $828,000 over the FY 2024
enacted level. JVs are another example of the Service creating
partnerships to further our mission in a way that fits regional needs
on behalf of the American people. Each JV is a network of regional,
self-directed partnerships involving federal, state, and local
governments; corporations; individuals; and non-governmental
organizations. JVs are a model for collaborative conservation in the
21st century, using state-of-the-art science and public and private
resources to ensure diverse habitat is available to sustain migratory
bird populations. The increased funding would achieve target funding
levels for all 21 JVs across the country.

Fish and Aquatic Conservation

The world's rivers and lakes once teemed with abundant and diverse
communities of fish, invertebrates, and plants. However, aquatic
species now represent some of the most imperiled organisms on the
planet. Increasing impacts from habitat loss, fragmentation, aquatic
invasive species, pollution, and climate change threaten America's
freshwater ecosystems and native fish populations, which provide
important benefits to communities, local economies, and the broader
environment. The Service's Fish and Aquatic Conservation Program
addresses these challenges by collaborating with states, Tribes,
landowners, federal agencies, and other partners to conserve aquatic
species and ecosystems. This includes conservation work through our
National Fish Hatchery System (Hatchery System), population
assessments, habitat restoration and connectivity, and aquatic invasive
species control. As the threats to freshwater ecosystems and native
fish species have increased and changed, so must our tools, expertise,
partnerships, and strategies. For FY 2025, the Service is seeking to
increase and enhance actions to conserve native aquatic species and
their habitats with a total request of $239.3 million for the Fish and
Aquatic Conservation Program, an increase of $12.6 million above the FY
2024 enacted level.
The work of the Fish and Aquatic Conservation Program not only
benefits aquatic ecosystems, it also creates and maintains outdoor
recreation opportunities, yielding benefits for local economies.
Fishing and other aquatic-based recreational opportunities are multi-
cultural, multi-generational experiences that improve the quality of
life for American families from all facets of our diverse society, and
generate substantial economic returns for local communities. The 2022
National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation
reports nearly 40 million anglers, age 16 or older, went fishing in
2022, spending a combined $99.4 billion, with the average angler
spending $2,490 per year. And according to the Recreational Boating and
Fishing Foundation's special report on fishing activities, roughly 54.5
million Americans went fishing in 2023.
For over 150 years, the Hatchery System has served communities
across the U.S. Today, the Hatchery System consists of 71 National Fish
Hatcheries, one historic National Fish Hatchery, six Fish Health
Centers (Health Centers), seven Fish Technology Centers (Tech Centers),
and the Aquatic Animal Drug Approval Partnership Program. The Service's
captive rearing facilities produce over 150 million fish and other
aquatic organisms each year to aid in the recovery of threatened and
endangered species, restore imperiled species, mitigate the impact of
federal water development projects on fish populations, meet Tribal
trust responsibilities, and enhance recreational and commercial fishing
opportunities. The Service's FY 2025 budget request includes $80.3
million for fish hatchery operations, an increase of $5.2 million over
the FY 2024 enacted level. This funding will focus on propagating fish
and other aquatic species to carry out Tribal trust responsibilities
and sustain wild populations, including actions to help prevent the
further decline of at-risk species and reduce the need for listings
under the ESA. The FY 2025 request also includes $31.6 million for
Hatchery System maintenance, a $7 million increase over the FY 2024
enacted level. This funding would help address the annual and deferred
maintenance needs of the Hatchery System.
Across the nation, millions of barriers to fish passage and aquatic
connectivity have compromised the ability of waterways to sustain
healthy fish populations and ecosystems. Barriers like old culverts,
dams, and levees, can also lead to public safety hazards, water quality
degradation, and higher water treatment costs. Utilizing its national
network of fish biologists and engineers, the Service works with
partners to restore natural flows to streams, rivers, floodplains, and
tidal areas, restore riparian areas and wetlands, remove barriers to
fish passage and aquatic connectivity, and improve water quality. The
investments in this work will pay valuable benefits far into the future
as natural systems improve in health year after year once aquatic
connectivity is restored.
This is another example of the Service working on the ground to
deliver our conservation mission on behalf of the American people, in
ways that fit the local circumstances. In addition to the lasting
benefits to fish and wildlife, the Service's work to restore degraded
habitats benefits local communities through development of more
resilient infrastructure, reduced public safety hazards, and improved
recreational opportunities. The Service's FY 2025 budget request
includes $18.6 million for fish passage improvements, an increase of
$3.6 million over the FY 2024 enacted level. The Service will also
continue to implement BIL funding for fish passage in FY 2025, building
on our success and collaborative work with partners on priority
projects.
Invasive species are a significant threat to human, animal, and
plant health, infrastructure, the economy, and cultural resources. The
Service plays a critical role in safeguarding the Nation's waters from
aquatic invasive species by preventing introduction, detecting and
responding to new invasions, and suppressing populations of existing
invasive plants and animals. In FY 2025, the Service will prioritize
prevention efforts, which are the most cost-effective strategy to
minimize the long-term risk and impacts of invasive species. The FY
2025 budget request includes $10.4 million for prevention, an increase
of $7.7 million over the FY 2024 enacted level. Funding would be used
to establish a pilot Aquatic Invasive Species Rapid Response Fund and
to build capacity in the Fish and Aquatic Conservation Program to
conduct early detection surveillance within invasion hotspots and
points of entry into the U.S. as part of a nationally coordinated Early
Detection and Rapid Response Framework developed under BIL.

Science Applications

The Science Applications Program works across the Service's
programs and with partners to addresses complex conservation challenges
through voluntary, landscape-level partnerships and the innovative
application of science and data management. The Service's FY 2025
request includes a total of $37.9 million for the Science Applications
Program, an increase of $4.1 million over the FY 2024 enacted level.
Collaborative conservation is among the most effective methods to
meet the enormous and diverse conservation challenges facing our
nation. For more than a decade, the Service's Science Applications'
Science Partnerships program has built trust with partners,
successfully fostering regional, national, and international
collaborations to identify shared conservation goals and deliver
conservation actions. For example, the Science Partnerships program
plays a central leadership, collaboration, and technical assistance
role for the Center for Pollinator Conservation, which is conducting
pollinator inventory and monitoring with the Refuge System and milkweed
distribution analysis with the Monarch Joint Venture. Science
Partnerships is also supporting implementation of the 2023 memorandum
of understanding between the Service, National Alliance of Forest
Owners, and National Council for Air and Stream Improvement through
collaborative science and technical project management. The Service's
FY 2025 budget request includes $27.3 million for Science Partnerships,
an increase of $2.3 million over the FY 2024 enacted level. This
funding would be used to further support partnership conservation
initiatives and build capacity, including for data managers and
geospatial mapping technicians to better incorporate information in
collaboration with our partners.

Office of Law Enforcement

There is a significant amount of trade involving wildlife that
occurs globally and within our nation's borders. The legal trade of
wildlife into and out of the U.S. alone is valued at several billion
dollars a year. This trade provides great benefits to Americans, but
the high market value for wildlife creates incentives for bad actors to
circumvent wildlife laws for ill-gotten financial gain. The Office of
Law Enforcement is the investigative arm of the Service tasked with
enforcing our wildlife laws. Our special agents, attaches, wildlife
inspectors, intelligence analysts, forensic scientists, and other staff
serve on the front lines to regulate the wildlife trade, investigate
wildlife crimes, prevent the introduction of invasive species, and
partner with international, Tribal, federal, and state counterparts to
conserve and protect wildlife resources. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request includes a total of $110.8 million for the Office of Law
Enforcement, a $18.9 million increase over the FY 2024 level.
The ever-changing nature and growing complexity of wildlife crime
has required the Office of Law Enforcement to adapt, develop innovative
techniques, and expand our partnerships and our presence across the
globe. Many wildlife crimes were once predominantly crimes of
opportunity committed by individuals or small groups. Today, wildlife
trafficking is largely carried out by transnational criminal
organizations that are sophisticated, violent, and capable of illegally
moving large commercial volumes of wildlife and laundering its
proceeds. These transnational criminal organizations also traffic in
people, weapons, narcotics, and other contraband.
In addition to our domestic special agents, the Service also has 11
personnel (10 attaches and one intelligence analyst) stationed
internationally. Our attaches partner with foreign governments, share
and coordinate intelligence, support and assist with investigations,
and provide training. The Service also manages the National Fish and
Wildlife Forensics Laboratory, the world's only full-service crime
laboratory devoted exclusively to supporting wildlife law enforcement.
Additionally, the Service manages the Digital Evidence Recovery and
Technical Support Unit, which supports the retrieval and analysis of
computer-based records and advanced digital surveillance techniques,
which is critical as wildlife crime has moved increasingly online. The
Service's domestic agents, attaches, intelligence analysts, forensic
scientists, and inspection teams work together to combat the illegal
wildlife trade. In FY 2023, the Service conducted over 9,600 wildlife
crime investigations, which resulted in ordered restitution of $1.9
million in fines, $1.0 million in civil penalties, 64 years in prison,
and 222 years of probation. Wildlife trafficking remains a serious
threat to conservation, national security, economic prosperity, global
health, and community stability. The Service's FY 2025 budget request
includes an increase of $8.9 million over the FY 2024 enacted level to
support, equip, and expand the capacity of our law enforcement
workforce and to implement the Department's Law Enforcement Task Force
priorities.
The U.S. remains one of the world's largest markets for wildlife
and wildlife products, both legal and illegal. The Service's Wildlife
Inspection Program is based at U.S. ports of entry and monitors the
wildlife trade, processes legal shipments, intercepts wildlife
contraband, prevents the introduction of invasive species, and works
with special agents to support wildlife trafficking investigations. In
FY 2023, the Service's wildlife inspectors processed nearly 175,000
declared wildlife shipments and facilitated legal trade valued at over
$4.6 billion. The Wildlife Inspection Program faces a critical juncture
as international wildlife trade expands in complexity, and
responsibilities have evolved beyond facilitating legal imports and
exports. Funding for the Service's wildlife inspectors is based on user
fees, which have not increased since 2012. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request includes an increase of $10.0 million over the FY 2024 enacted
level to support the Wildlife Inspection Program. This increase would
enable the Service to modernize technology to enhance risk analysis and
inspection efficiency, increase special operations nationally to target
high-risk trade routes, bolster biosafety measures, increase capacity
at ports of entry, and strategically deploy K9 interdiction teams.

International Affairs

Global biodiversity faces ever-growing and evolving threats,
including climate change, wildlife trafficking, rapid habitat loss, and
disease, which are pushing species to extinction and threatening human
well-being in many parts of the world. The Service has engaged in
international conservation for more than a century, starting with the
1916 Migratory Bird Treaty with Canada. The Service's International
Affairs Program has a long history of implementing global treaties and
agreements, diplomatic engagement with foreign nations, collaborating
with global partners to implement on-the-ground conservation, and
supporting research and trainings abroad. The work of the International
Affairs Program is critical to stemming global biodiversity loss and
conserving some of the world's most iconic wildlife species, including
African and Asian elephants, tigers, rhinoceros, great apes, sea
turtles, scarlet macaws, and cheetahs. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request includes $24.0 million for the International Affairs Program,
an increase of $2.9 million over the FY 2024 enacted level. The Service
is also requesting to move funding for the ePermits system into its own
line to reflect the cross-bureau nature of that effort.
For over 50 years, the Service's International Affairs Program has
served as the implementing body for the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) through the
Divisions of Management and Scientific Authorities. CITES provides a
global framework to ensure scientific integrity and international
cooperation to facilitate legal, sustainable trade of the over 37,000
species listed in the CITES Appendices, and to combat wildlife
trafficking. The International Affairs Program implements CITES by
leading U.S. engagement at CITES meetings, ensuring that U.S. exports
and imports comply with CITES requirements, and supporting CITES
capacity-building efforts around the world. The Service's FY 2025
budget request would support the Service's preparations for the 20th
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to CITES, which will take
place in mid-2025. It will also help address the Service's CITES permit
workload through greater efficiencies.
The Service's International Affairs Program also implements the
Pelly Amendment to the Fishermen's Protective Act (Pelly), which
authorizes the President to prohibit import of products from nations
whose nationals are determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
Commerce to be engaging in trade or take that undermines the
effectiveness of any international treaty or convention for the
protection of endangered or threatened species. In 2023, the Secretary
of the Interior, in consultation with the Department of State, issued
two Pelly certifications to the President, finding that nationals of
Mexico and the People's Republic of China (PRC), directly or
indirectly, engaged in harvest or trade that diminishes the
effectiveness of CITES. In Mexico, the concern is illegal fishing for
and illegal trade in the totoaba, which is causing the imminent
extinction of the vaquita, the world's smallest and most endangered
marine mammal, with fewer than 10 individuals remaining. In the PRC,
the concern is the illegal trade in pangolins, the most trafficked
mammal in the world. The Service's FY 2025 budget request would support
implementation of Pelly, including ongoing efforts regarding the
certifications of Mexico and the PRC.
The International Affairs Program supports on-the-ground
conservation for priority species and habitats across the globe,
including through the Multinational Species Conservation Funds (Species
Funds). The Species Funds support strategic on-the-ground conservation
projects for African elephants, Asian elephants, rhinoceros, tigers,
great apes, marine turtles, and freshwater turtles and tortoises. From
2015 to 2022, the Species Funds provided $92.5 million in grants and
cooperative agreements and leveraged nearly $200 million in additional
funds towards conserving these species. The Service's FY 2025 budget
request also includes $21.0 million for the Species Funds, a $500,000
increase over the FY 2024 enacted level. This increase would enable the
Service to support additional conservation needs for priority species
and their habitats.

Legislative Proposals

The Service's FY 2025 budget request includes a legislative
proposal to provide the Service with good neighbor and stewardship
contracting authorities. The good neighbor authority allows states,
counties, and Tribes to enter into a Good Neighbor Agreement to perform
forest, rangeland, and watershed restoration work on Service lands.
Authorized restoration services include treating insect- and disease-
infested trees, reducing hazardous fuels, and any other activities to
restore or improve ecosystem health, including fish and wildlife
habitat. Stewardship contracting authority will allow the Service to
trade forest products for land management and ecosystem restoration
services. While the Service was provided good neighbor authority in the
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2024, we would appreciate the
opportunity to continue working with the Chairman and Subcommittee on
further technical assistance to meet the needs of the Service and
provide stewardship contracting authority as well.
The FY 2025 budget request also includes a legislative proposal to
allow persons responsible for harm to Service assets--not taxpayers--to
pay for any injury they cause. Under current law, when Service
resources are injured or destroyed, the costs of repair and restoration
falls upon the appropriated budget for the affected field station or
office. This is the case even when parties are ordered to pay
restitution. Unlike some other land management agencies, the Service
only has criminal penalties (fines) for those injuries occurring on
Service property. In most cases, the injuries far exceed any fines
recovered by the U.S. Government. With this authority, the recovery of
damages for injury to Service resources would be used to reimburse
assessment costs, prevent or minimize the risk of loss, monitor ongoing
effects, and/or use those funds to restore, replace, or acquire
resources equivalent to those injured or destroyed.
The Service's FY 2025 budget request also supports revising
administrative amounts for both the North American Wetlands
Conservation Act (NAWCA) and Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation
Act (NMBCA) to better keep pace with administrative needs. For NAWCA,
this would mean increasing the administrative cap from four percent to
seven percent to address increased administrative requirements and help
our partners address threats to wetland dependent species and recover
populations. For NMBCA, this would mean increasing the administrative
cap from three percent to five percent and further lower match
requirements passed in the Migratory Birds of the Americas Conservation
Enhancements Act of 2023 from 2:1 to 1:1 to encourage a wider variety
of bird conservation partners.
The FY 2025 budget request also includes a proposal to grant
authority for federal agencies to transfer funding provided under BIL
to the Service to meet the consultation and environmental review
workload for BIL projects. The Service appreciates Congress' inclusion
of this authority in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2024. The
Service is currently working to implement this newly provided
authority.

Conclusion

The Service's FY 2025 budget request invests in America and
prioritizes key conservation initiatives while following the Fiscal
Responsibility Act of 2023. The Service strives to be efficient and
innovative with the limited resources we have. However, over the past
twenty years the Service's capacity has declined, while costs and
workloads have increased, and wildlife conservation challenges have
become more complex. The Service is in a moment where our decreased
capacity is eroding our on-the ground conservation efforts.
If funded, the Service's FY 2025 budget request would help restore
our capacity and invest in key conservation partnerships. The Service
would maximize the budget's investments by building upon our experience
in developing partnerships, leveraging the capacity of our partners,
and tailoring the implementation of our mission to meet the conditions
and needs of local situations.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before you today. I
would be pleased to answer any questions that you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Honorable Martha Williams,
Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

The Hon. Martha Williams did not submit responses to the Committee by
the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. September 2023 the White House published the Memorandum
on Restoring Healthy and Abundant Salmon, Steelhead, and Other Native
Fish Populations in the Columbia River Basin. Among other things, the
memo directed ``all agencies with applicable authorities and
responsibilities'' to provide the Office of Management and Budget''an
assessment of the agency's programs that can advance the policy
established in section 1 of this memorandum.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Healthy and Abundant Memo. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2023/09/27/memorandum-on-restoring-healthy-
and-abundant-salmon-steelhead-and-other-native-fish-populations-in-the-
columhia-river-basin/#::text=In%20recognition%20of%20these%20
priorities.abundant%20salmon%2C%20steelhead%2C%20and%20other

1a) What authorities or programs did the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service provide to the Office of Management and Budget to carry out the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
policy established in this memorandum?

Question 2. With regard to the Northeast Canyons and Seamounts
Marine National Monument, in March 2021, a 1-hour conference call was
conducted in which affected members of the fishing industry were given
less than 5 minutes each to explain their reasons for opposing a
reimposition of the commercial fishing ban to DOI staff. One of the
more severely affected groups, the swordfish and tuna harvesters,
reached out to DOI repeatedly via phone, letters and email, requesting
a meeting so that members of the swordfish and tuna longline industry
could explain why analyses funded by environmental interests claiming
that the commercial fishing ban had no negative effect on their
fisheries were inaccurate.

Their correspondence was acknowledged upon receipt by Shantha Ready
Alonso, Director of the Office of Intergovernmental and External
Affairs (OIEA), but despite numerous follow-up calls and emails, they
received no response to their request. In December 2021, they received
a form letter from Martha Williams of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service stating that two months earlier, President Biden signed
Presidential Proclamation 10287 ``Northeast Canyons and Seamounts
Marine National Monument'' reimposing the prohibition on commercial
fishing.

Did you or your staff meet with any fishing interests affected by
the commercial fishing prohibition in the Northeast Canyons and
Seamounts Marine National Monument before President Biden signed
Presidential Proclamation 10287?

2a) If so, with whom did you meet?

2b) If so, were any of the groups with whom you or your staff met
organizations that accept support, financial or otherwise, from
environmental or conservation organizations or their funding sources?

Question 3. The U.S. Department of the Interior press release on
several monuments issued on October 7, 2021, referenced ``rare and
endangered marine life,'' specifically mentioning deep-sea corals.
Deep-sea corals in the Northeast Canyons and Seamounts Marine National
Monument were already protected through previous actions taken by the
New England and Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Councils and approved
by National Marine Fisheries Service, which protected those important
species without hindering the ability of fisheries operating in the
region from operating sustainably under the Magnuson-Stevens Act.

3a) What additional protection is afforded by prohibiting
commercial fishing activity in the water column above the bottom
habitat of those species?

Questions Submitted by Representative Carl

Question 1. Director Williams, adequate funding for the management
of migratory birds and their habitat is critically important, wouldn't
you agree? As you are likely aware, state fish and wildlife agencies
rely on the valuable data derived from USFWS surveys and science to
justify seasons, monitor trends, and weigh management decisions. As
such I am deeply concerned that the proposed presidential FY25 budget
for aspects of the Service's Migratory Bird Management (MBM) program
hasn't risen to the level of need identified for some of the MBM
program's most critical needs.

Specifically I'd like to point to the Conservation and Monitoring
Account, which is proposed to be funded at $40.8M, that falls grossly
short of what states and partners have identified ($53 million) as what
is needed to support key needs for population monitoring and surveys,
research, technical assistance and guidance, and species conflict
reduction.

1a) Coupled with the significant cut to NAWCA and I worry about the
message that is being sent about Federal waterfowl and wetland habitat
efforts. Can you please outline for me how the Service intends to meet
the critical needs for waterfowl monitoring at the requested funding
level?

1b) So if the need is higher than the request, what is a higher
priority for the Service that these important surveys and NAWCA cannot
be adequately funded?

Question 2. BIDEH--Director Williams, we have heard on multiple
occasions about the need for more funding for the National Wildlife
Refuge System (NWRS). If the need is as great as you have suggested,
why would the Service advance a rule. and I am referring to the BIDEH
rule, that has the potential to significantly restrict cooperative
conservation efforts on the NWRS, not to mention add significant
administrative burden and costs to a system you believe is not
adequately funded?

To expand refuge boundaries (as you have recently proposed), to add
administrative burden on your refuge staff, and then prohibit practices
like cooperative agriculture just doesn't add up. I hope you are giving
serious thought to rescinding or significantly retooling your proposed
BIDEH rule.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In March, you issued a report, the 2019 National
Wetlands Status and Trends report that found that 221 million acres of
wetlands were destroyed between 2009 and 2019. Most of that loss was
from vegetated wetlands like marshes and swamps, which shrank by
670,000 acres, an area roughly the size of Rhode Island.

That same month, the Service budget proposed a significant 35
percent reduction in one of the most popular and effective wetland
programs in our country, one that has had strong bipartisan support and
is up for reauthorization this year. That $17M reduction is more than a
haircut.

Under NAWCA, that $17M cut would leverage more than $17M in
additional partner contributions under the program's match requirements
and we often see more than that in private support. In fact, since
1991, NAWCA grants totaling over $2 billion have leveraged almost $5.6
billion in contributions from partners. This funding has vastly
exceeded match requirements, enabling the successful restoration of
more than 32 million acres of wetlands and associated uplands in North
America.

So, you ring the alarm that we have a problem and then purposely
cut funding to address the problem. What message are you trying to
send? How do you justify this troubling cut to NAWCA?

Question 2. In testimony given to this subcommittee last month, the
Services Deputy Director for Policy Steve Guertin stated ``my
understanding is that all of our staffed refuges have at least one
biologist.'' When pressed further, Mr. Guertin stated that he didn't
believe there were any refuges without a biologist. We tried to follow
up to clarify the inconsistencies in his responses through questions
for the record, but we've yet to hear back from the Department.

Which is it--do all staffed refuges have a biologist, or does every
refuge have a biologist?

Question 3. The U.S. is a party to the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Flora and Fauna. As you know, CITES is
the international treaty that controls the international trade of
threatened and endangered species. When countries attend CITES meetings
and vote to uplist or downlist certain species, those decisions are to
be based on sound science. In some cases, the United States has voted
to not uplist a species only to return home and begin regulations to
list under the ESA that very species. In other cases, the science is
clear that the species is not worthy of uplisting based on CITES
requirements, yet the Service has voted to uplist it. At one point, a
US attendee even asked an official from the Department how these
decisions are made, and the official responded by saying, ``We fly by
the seat of our pants.'' Do you agree that these decisions should be
based on science and not politics? How can Service improve their
decision-making process to be more transparent and base decisions on
science?

Question 4. CITES requires a notification to range states of
stricter domestic measures than agreed to by CITES. Have these
notifications been made to the range states that manage African
Elephants or hippos? How have they been provided?

Question 5. When the Service decides to make a rulemaking on a
species that does not reside in the US, the Service is supposed to
consult with the countries that do manage these species--yet many times
that does not happen in any meaningful way. How can the US write a rule
for a species in another country, not consult with that country, and
expect the rule to be effective? I know you will say that these
countries may comment during the public comment period, but wouldn't it
be more prudent and waste less time to put out a draft rule where
consultation has already occurred with the other management authority
tasked with managing these animals every day? Does the Service send any
employees to range states that must manage populations for which the US
is proposing restrictions under ESA?

Question 6. Has the Service consulted with foreign management
authorities on the development and implementation of regulations under
the Endangered Species Act? If so, please provide a list. In what
format have these consultations occurred? Does the Service have
designated personnel to liaise with foreign management authorities on
Endangered Species Act implementation issues?

Question 7. The Secretary has talked at great lengths about
including tribes and Indigenous peoples in the work that they do
domestically--and tribes should be included. Why then are Indigenous
peoples abroad not considered in rulemakings that will impact them? Do
you reach out to Indigenous communities before writing a rule in a
foreign country that will impact them and the animals they live with
every day?

Question 8. Service's e-Permit system launched in 2020 continues to
fail to accept applicant information and deliver permits in a timely
manner; however, permit fees are deposited quickly. Federal agencies
and the regulated public are frustrated and worried when permits expire
and a renewal is not delivered for months after expiration. What
actions is the Service taking to rectify this problem? When will the
system begin to work properly?

Question 9. Populations of double-crested cormorants are increasing
and establishing new breeding colonies. However, the national take
allocation of 121,504 birds established by a 2020 Final Environmental
Impact Statement for the Management of Conflicts Associated with
Double-crested Cormorants for Federal, state and public entities
through bird depredation permits has riot been revised to reflect the
growing challenges for agencies, tribes, and farms. Is the Service
aware of the growing bird populations? Is there a periodic reassessment
of the Population Take Model and re-allocation to permit holders as
provided within the 2020 EIS? If not, when will the Service reassess
and reallocate?

Question 10. Congress authorized the Department of Interior to list
species through the Endangered Species Act, Section 4(c)(1), specifying
``. . . with respect to each such species over what portion of its
range it is endangered or threatened . . .'' However, within the Code
of Federal Regulations the majority of threatened and endangered
species are listed as ``wherever found.'' Why, how, and when did the
Department decide to ignore Congressional direction?

Question 11. The Endangered Species Act authorizes the United
States as a party to the CITES. This authorization includes explicit
language that the United States ``. . . has pledged itself as a
sovereign state in the international community . . .'' to implement
actions to control import and export of CITES listed species. However,
the Department of Interior continues to list foreign species under the
ESA that are also protected by CITES trade restrictions. Is the ESA
listing of these species an implicit admission by the Department there
is a failure by the United States to implement CITES provisions? How
does an ESA listing increase protections that are globally negotiated
and are essentially duplicative in preventing or restricting trade? Is
CITES a failure?

Question 12. Recently, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service halted
all imports or re-exports of non human primates (NHPs), or research
samples derived from NHPs imported from Cambodia, forcing American
biotech companies to scramble for new sources. The Service's stated
reason for suspending permits involved an enforcement action which has
now been rejected in a US court by both judge and jury. Is the Service
committed to re-opening trade in purpose bred Cambodian NHPs?

Question 13. Has the Service taken steps to expedite the processing
of permits that were put on hold during the unsuccessful enforcement
action, especially for time sensitive re-exports?

Question 14. Going forward, is the Service reviewing its protocols
for suspending vital research related permits to allow for stakeholder
input and more narrowly tailored approaches that do not drive American
biotech into the arms of our Chinese competitors?

Question 15. In 2019, the Service revised its approach to the
application of the ESA section 9 prohibitions to threatened species.
Specifically, to be consistent with NMFS, FWS rescinded its ``blanket
4(d) rule'' and applied the prohibitions on a species-by-species basis.
This allows prohibitions to be applied as warranted and, in a manner,
tailored to the conservation needs of each threatened species. In a
final rule published this year, the Service reversed this decision and
returned to its pre-2019 manner of implementation. Can you explain how
this promotes consistent implementation of the ESA across agencies?

Question 16. Earlier this year, the Services finalized three
rulemakings related to the implementation of the ESA. The finalized
Section 7 consultation regulation incorporates new potential
requirements for developing the Reasonable and Prudent Measures (RPMs)
necessary for an action agency or entity seeking a Federal permit to
employ in order to minimize the impacts of incidental take. In this
final rule, the Services can consider and include measures in an RPM
that offset any remaining impacts of incidental take that cannot be
avoided. These measures to offset impacts can be required inside or
outside the action area. These are significant changes, and the Section
7 Consultation handbook needs to be updated in order for action
agencies and permit seekers to understand how this new process works.
When will the handbook be updated, and will that process include public
notice and comment so that the regulated community--and your fellow
Federal agencies--can provide input on the practical impacts?

Question 17. There is a lot of discussion of mitigation in the new
ESA implementation rules. How many species ``mitigation banks'' are
there in the country? Are there banks for all listed species? Can you
explain what an ``in lieu fee'' mitigation offset is? How are any of
these kinds of offsets reviewed and approved by the Service?

Question 18. The new ESA Section 7 consultation rule just went into
effect, and the Service has said that all consultations not yet
completed will have to comply with them. How many ongoing consultations
will now be delayed or have to be redone because of the new rules?

Question 19. In a departure from their long-standing
interpretation, the final rule allows the Services to require
minimization and mitigation measures as reasonable and prudent measures
when authorizing incidental take of species. The relevant statutory
authorization (ESA Section 7(b)(4)(C)(ii)) only allows the Services to
``minimize'' the impact of incidental take. The Services have never
interpreted this provision as allowing for mitigation of take. What is
the statutory legal authority that allows the Services to now impose
``mitigation,'' including compensatory mitigation that would fully
offset all potential impacts or require restoration/protection of
habitat, when it is not clearly authorized by the ESA?

Question 20. The final rule deletes the regulatory provisions at 50
CFR 402.17. These were added in 2019 to establish when an activity is
reasonably certain to occur and what consequences are caused by a
proposed action for purposes of determining the effects of an action
for consultation. The Services recognize that these criteria are
relevant and applicable considerations. Why are the Services removing
them from the regulations?

Question 21. The ESA Consultation Handbook that the Services rely
on for guidance was last published in 1998. The Services state that
they are planning to update the Handbook to provide additional guidance
on the ESA section 7 process. What is the timing for the new Handbook
and what public review and comment process will be provided?

Question 22. Can you please explain how the new ESA Section 4
regulations comply with the Supreme Court's decision in Weyerhaeuser v
US FWS?

Question 23. In the 2024 final rule, the Services removed the more
robust and detailed procedures for the designation of unoccupied areas
as critical habitat that had been implemented in 2019. That 2019 final
rule provided important standards detailing when property could be
designated as critical habitat because it is essential to the
conservation of species that do not currently occur on those lands or
waters. How do the Services intend to designate unoccupied critical
habitat going forward given their prior difficulties applying the
relevant ESA statutory criteria and when there is no agreed upon
regulatory definition of what is ``habitat'' for a species?

Question 24. The courts have said that it is the five criteria in
ESA Section 4(a)(1) that dictate the status of the species and whether
it should be listed, delisted, or downlisted. The courts have also said
that recovery plans and recovery criteria are not binding and do not
have to be satisfied before a species is delisted. The final rule adds
a ``recovery'' component to delisting/downlisting considerations. Can
you explain how the Services intend to apply this new standard given
that it seems contrary to the statute and case law?

Questions Submitted by Representative Newhouse

Question 1. Please provide an exact dollar amount that is requested
in the FY25 budget for grizzly bear introduction.

Question 2. Please provide a timeline, including dates, for planned
grizzly bear introduction into the North Cascades Ecosystem.

Question 3. Please provide a detailed explanation for the increase
in administrative fees for the Partners for Fish and Wildlife program
in Washington State.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Director Williams. I now recognize
Administrator Spinrad for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT  OF  THE  HON.  RICHARD  SPINRAD,   UNDER
SECRETARY  OF  COMMERCE  FOR  OCEANS  AND  ATMOS-
PHERE AND NATIONAL OCEANIC & ATMOSPHERIC ADMINIS-
TRATION  ADMINISTRATOR,  DEPARTMENT  OF COMMERCE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Dr. Spinrad. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman,
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify about NOAA's Fiscal Year 2025 budget. We really
appreciate the continued support of Congress, the
Administration, and our broad and diverse set of stakeholders.
For Fiscal Year 2025, NOAA's budget request proposes $6.6
billion in discretionary appropriations, an increase of $224
million from the Fiscal Year 2024 enacted level. The Fiscal
Year 2025 request will prioritize investments in critical
operational and infrastructure activities that support NOAA's
ability to carry out our mission across five thematic areas.
First, NOAA will address the climate crisis and strengthen
resilience. Specifically, NOAA will invest in increasing
conservation and protection in an expanded sanctuary system by
training the next generation of marine-protected area
professionals and expanding technology use to support
management priorities.
Second, NOAA will continue to provide critical science and
data to inform economic development. Notably, NOAA will
continue to work closely with the Department of the Interior's
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and others to maximize the
benefits of offshore wind.
Third, NOAA will invest in the next generation of
environmental satellites in order to provide significant
improvements in data and products to meet the security, safety,
and prosperity needs of the nation. NOAA uses industry's
standard acquisition procedures to ensure that we invest
appropriately and effectively.
Fourth, NOAA will integrate equity across the organization
by improving knowledge-sharing capabilities and service
delivery in tribal, rural, and urban communities.
And finally, NOAA will continue to reduce the deferred
maintenance and repair backlog across our facilities in order
to maintain operations, address safety issues, and ensure
mission capability.
This Fiscal Year 2025 budget builds on investments from the
Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
I am proud to share that as of the end of Fiscal Year 2023,
NOAA has awarded a total of $1.1 billion in IRA and BIL grants
and contracts. Demand for funding to prepare for and adapt to
climate change is extraordinarily high. In fact, some of our
programs have seen 28 times more demand, which equals about $16
billion more than we have in available funding, demonstrating
the strong need for these types of opportunities.
Additionally, NOAA is continuing to invest in a few other
notable areas. We are prioritizing funding for North Atlantic
right whale conservation through $48 million in the Fiscal Year
2025 request, which will build on resources provided in the
Inflation Reduction Act. Human-caused mortality continues to
threaten the survival of this species. Notably, since January
of this year, there have been four confirmed right whale
mortalities in U.S. waters attributable to vessel strikes and
entanglement in fishing gear.
We must do more to protect and recover this species, and
that is why NOAA is working on the Vessel Strike Reduction Rule
and investing in on-demand fishing gear and collision avoidance
technologies. We remain hopeful and look forward to working
closely with our partners on finding durable solutions.
The Administration, the Department of Commerce, and NOAA
are committed to combating Illegal, Unreported, and
Unregulated, or IUU, fishing, seafood fraud, and forced labor.
NOAA appreciates the increased funding in Fiscal Year 2023 for
its Seafood Import Monitoring Program, or SIMP, and the Fiscal
Year 2025 budget request maintains this level of support. We
are hard at work reviewing SIMP to ensure it works as
effectively and efficiently as possible.
Since November of this past year, we have met with 15
Federal agencies, reached out to more than 3,000 stakeholders,
engaged with 20 NGOs and 100 businesses, and consulted with 10
foreign nations to solicit feedback on ways to improve the
program. We are committed to using every tool at our disposal
to enhance efforts in the fight against IUU fishing and seafood
fraud, and we look forward to working more with you and other
leaders in Congress on this important issue.
Lastly, we continue to invest in Pacific salmon
conservation. The Fiscal Year 2025 budget request, a $10
million increase for Mitchell Act hatchery programs. This
funding will support hatchery salmon production to fulfill our
recovery goals, as well as support tribal fisheries in the
Columbia River.
Overall, with this Fiscal Year 2025 budget request, NOAA
will be well positioned to help support the communities we
serve, particularly those most vulnerable to climate change and
its impacts. I look forward to working closely with you on each
of these initiatives and to discussing NOAA's mission more with
you today. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Dr. Spinrad follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Richard W. Spinrad, Under Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify about the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fiscal Year (FY)
2025 budget. NOAA appreciates the continued support of Congress, the
Administration, and our broad and diverse base of stakeholders.
For FY 2025, NOAA's budget request proposes $6.6 billion in
discretionary appropriations, an increase of $224.8 million from the FY
2024 enacted level. The FY 2025 budget builds on investments from the
Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) (P.L. 117-169) and Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law (BIL) (P.L. 117-58) for climate resilience, climate
science, data and services, environmental observations, and fisheries
and protected resources.

The FY 2025 request will prioritize investments in the critical
operational and infrastructure activities that support NOAA's ability
to carry out its mission. These substantial investments, along with
other targeted increases, reflect my priorities as Administrator, which
are to:

1.  Build on NOAA's long history of success, and meet the needs of
the future by expanding, diversifying, and enhancing
climate products and services for all Americans.

2.  Ensure that NOAA builds economic opportunities in the new blue
economy and upholds our critical role of environmental
stewardship.

3.  Integrate equity across NOAA by improving capabilities and
knowledge sharing, and honing product development and
service delivery in Tribal and underserved communities and
taking an aggressive and active role in diversifying the
Federal workforce, in a just, equitable, and inclusive
manner.

Invest in Critical Satellites

NOAA satellites are critical for NOAA's mission, as well as the
security, safety, and prosperity of the Nation. Data from these
satellites provide essential support to all segments of the U.S.
economy. In FY 2025, NOAA requests an additional $605.7 million for
significant investments in NOAA's observational infrastructure,
underscoring NOAA's commitment to making crucial, time-sensitive, and
cost-effective investments to ensure that the Nation's next-generation
satellite systems expand delivery of essential earth system
observations to meet the evolving needs of the American public. The FY
2025 budget will help NOAA better forecast weather events, issue
accurate warnings, and observe environmental phenomena connected to
climate change-related impacts and patterns, and deliver products,
information, and climate services to inform decision makers.
NOAA's current satellite constellation has proven its worth and
will continue to do so into the 2030s. However, NOAA must concurrently
invest in the next generation of environmental satellites with the
needs of user communities in mind. FY 2025 funding for future
geostationary, low earth orbit, and space weather observations will
ensure critical data continuity from legacy systems, while providing
significant improvements in data and products to meet the complex
societal and environmental needs of the Nation. In FY 2025, NOAA will
continue the development of the GeoXO satellite program, which will
provide improved weather forecasting, real-time monitoring of air
quality conditions, and improved ocean forecasting and fisheries
management yielded from geostationary orbit observations.
The value of NOAA's world-class data is enhanced by NOAA
applications and accessibility for users. The FY 2025 budget supports
much-needed improvements to NOAA's data infrastructure. For example,
the request includes funding to transition NOAA data from on-premise
systems to a cloud-based environment for data ingest, processing,
dissemination, and archiving, which will expand the size and diversity
of NOAA user communities and data applications.

Expand Climate Products and Services to Build Climate Resilience

The FY 2025 budget in conjunction with investments in BIL and IRA
and in collaboration with other Federal agencies will address the
climate crisis and strengthen resilience. In FY 2025, NOAA requests an
additional $155.5 million to contribute to implementing Executive Order
(EO) 14008 on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad.
Establishing an end-to-end value chain for climate and weather data and
services starts with investing in observational infrastructure and
culminates in delivering services to meet a diverse set of missions.
Therefore, NOAA will support observational infrastructure, decision
support tools, service delivery, and conservation.
NOAA provides timely and actionable environmental observations on
global, national, and regional scales from satellites, radar, surface
systems, atmospheric greenhouse gas sampling stations, ocean buoys,
uncrewed systems, aircraft, and ships. With the funding requested in FY
2025, in addition to the funding provided through IRA, NOAA will
finalize the acquisition of a second G-550 for its high-altitude jet
program. Additionally, NOAA will invest in Days at Sea and Flight Hours
to support critical mission priorities, and the NOAA Corps officers
needed to safely and effectively operate ships and aircraft.
NOAA's weather forecasts and climate projections and information
must be reliably delivered to users to inform decision making. Forty
percent of the U.S. population lives and works in coastal counties,
making a disproportionate segment of our society and economy at
increasing risk to hazards such as hurricanes and coastal inundation.
The National Weather Service will provide more Impact-based Decision
Support Services, and NOAA is expanding its service delivery with more
products and services to more communities across the country. The
foundation for expanded service delivery is the Advanced Weather
Interactive Processing System (AWIPS) in the cloud. AWIPS in the cloud
will allow for more products across NOAA to use this dissemination
system and reach local offices across the country. As a result, AWIPS
in the cloud will push out a greater amount of information to reach a
larger number of communities to provide greater decision support
services. Therefore, the FY 2025 request will transform AWIPS into a
modern, extensible cloud-based framework.
Planners and decision makers face challenges when seeking Federal
data to support resilience-building efforts. In FY 2025, NOAA will
enhance the accessibility and usability of Federal climate data through
the Climate Resilience Information System and Climate Mapping for
Resilience and Adaptation, a publicly accessible, interoperable
architecture that makes it easy for people to find and use Federal
agencies' decision-relevant data to support climate adaptation and
mitigation planning. NOAA will support this enhancement and expansion
to include information specific to additional environmental hazards,
integrate stakeholder feedback, and improve the systems' functionality.
NOAA will also invest in increasing conservation and protection in
an expanded sanctuary system, which is an integral part of NOAA's
contribution to implementation of the America the Beautiful initiative
that includes the goal to conserve at least 30 percent of U.S. lands
and waters by 2030. NOAA's FY 2025 request will enhance NOAA's
sanctuary management capacity as new sanctuaries are designated. NOAA
will work to identify gaps in marine protection, train the next
generation of Marine Protected Area professionals, and expand
technology use in sanctuaries to support management priorities.

Provide Science and Data to Inform Economic Development

NOAA will continue to foster environmental stewardship and optimize
advances in science and technology, with a particular focus on the New
Blue Economy: supporting development framed around an information and
knowledge-based approach to support fisheries, transportation,
shipping, renewable energy, recreation, and livelihoods. In 2023, the
Bureau of Economic Analysis, in partnership with NOAA, released the
official Marine Economy statistics that the U.S. marine economy
contributed about $432.4 billion, or 1.9 percent, to the Nation's gross
domestic product, an increase from 1.7 percent, or $363.2 billion \1\
and supports 2.3 million jobs annually.\2\ In FY 2025, NOAA requests an
additional $55.1 million in support of the expansion of offshore wind
energy, salmon populations of the Columbia River basin and beyond, and
improvements in our tsunami and space regulatory infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Bureau of Economic Analysis, Marine Economy Satellite Account,
2021, https://www.bea.gov/news/2023/marine-economy-satellite-account-
2021 (accessed January 22, 2024)
\2\ Bureau of Economic Analysis and NOAA, Marine Economy, https://
coast.noaa.gov/states/fast-facts/marine-economy.html (accessed January
25, 2024)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA is an important Federal collaborator in support of the
Administration's goal to responsibly deploy 30 gigawatts (GW) of
offshore wind energy by 2030. In FY 2025, NOAA will continue to work
closely with the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management (BOEM), the lead Federal agency for offshore wind siting,
leasing, and permitting, and others to maximize the benefits of
offshore wind; minimize the effects of offshore energy projects on
protected marine resources, fisheries, and important habitats; and
mitigate impacts to NOAA assets, fisheries surveys, and other
activities.
NOAA will continue supporting the production of 42 million hatchery
fish, which represents about 30 percent of the total hatchery salmon
and steelhead released in the Columbia River Basin, as well as their
associated monitoring programs. Salmon smolts from hatchery programs
funded through the Mitchell Act translate into the harvest of about
250,000 fish that add to commercial, recreational, and Tribal
fisheries. Fish from the Columbia River Basin also reflect an important
component of Canadian and Alaskan ocean fisheries. These funds will
complement the $60 million in IRA funds for Mitchell Act hatchery
deferred maintenance, repair, and modernization.
To further address tsunamis' unpredictability and potentially
disastrous consequences to life and property along vulnerable U.S.
coastlines, NOAA will provide a common framework that supports the
National Tsunami Warning Center, located in Alaska, and Pacific Tsunami
Warning Center, located in Hawai'i. Funding will ensure continuity of
operations by eliminating discontinuities within existing systems, and
providing consistent guidance to all users, independent of location.
NOAA will foster the conditions for the economic growth and
technological advancement of the U.S. commercial space industry. This
request will allow the Office of Space Commerce to develop and maintain
a new online information system to enhance commercial space companies'
experience obtaining regulatory approvals and facilitating streamlined
Department of Commerce consultation with interagency partners to
establish and maintain an inventory of non-governmental space
operations. The information system will also provide a simple method to
disseminate information regarding U.S. space activity regulation,
standards, and best practices. NOAA will provide necessary staffing to
implement Department of Commerce responsibilities under the U.S. Novel
Space Activities Authorization and Supervision Framework (December
2023) and legislative reforms proposed by the Biden Administration. The
personnel will implement an expanded regulatory program beyond remote
sensing for licensing and monitoring compliance of in-space activities.
Providing necessary resources for the Office's expanded roles is
critical to meeting U.S. international obligations, ensuring U.S.
economic competitiveness in commercial space, and maintaining space
sustainability.

Bolster Equity

NOAA will continue to support Executive Order 13985 on Advancing
Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government and Executive Order 14091 on Further Advancing
Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the
Federal Government. NOAA will integrate equity across the organization
by improving capabilities and knowledge sharing, and honing product
development and service delivery in Tribal and underserved communities.

Update and Maintain Crucial Facilities

Safe and modern facilities are vital to support NOAA's mission of
science, service and stewardship. In FY 2025, NOAA requests an
additional $26 million to reduce the deferred maintenance and repair
(DM&R) backlog in order to maintain operations, address safety issues,
and ensure mission capability. Funding will also support design needs
for facilities such as science centers and laboratories which will
support future new construction and renovation projects.

Summary

NOAA is working hand-in-hand with Federal and non-Federal partners
locally and sharing best practices globally. People know they can turn
to NOAA for reliable climate and extreme weather information to help
make informed decisions that help save lives and livelihoods. In FY
2025, NOAA will invest in its world class satellite program; expand
Federal climate products and services to improve climate resilience;
foster environmental stewardship and economic development by optimizing
advances in science and technology with a focus on the New Blue
Economy; integrate equity across the organization and in our work; and
support ongoing investments in NOAA's aircraft, ships, and facilities.
NOAA will be well-positioned to help support the communities we serve,
particularly those most vulnerable to climate change and its impacts.
Through this budget, NOAA will support the whole-of-government effort
to address the climate crisis, boost resilience, and promote economic
growth.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Honorable Richard Spinrad,
Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere &
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Administrator

The Hon. Richard Spinrad did not submit responses to the Committee by
the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. At our hearing I asked you about the Lower Snake River
Dams and you stated that ``it's our agency's view that we can identify
what the impacts are on the salmon population. We don't express an
opinion on whether the dams should go in or go out, and that authority
actually resides with Congress.'' However, at a hearing of the House
Committee on Energy and Commerce in January, the Assistant
Administrator of the National Marine Fisheries Service, Janet Coit,
stated that ``our report concludes that in order to give the best
possible chance of restoring salmon, we would need to breach the Lower
Snake River Dams, and that is to achieve the healthy and harvestable
goal.''

1a) Does this represent a change in policy at NOAA?

1b) Can you state for the record whether NOAA believes that the
Lower Snake River Dams should be removed?

Question 2. On September 30, 2022, the National Marine Fisheries
Service released a draft report, ``Rebuilding Interior Columbia Basin
Salmon and Steelhead.'' \1\ The Report seemed to represent a shift in
how NOAA views the Federal Columbia River Power System and the Lower
Snake River Dams. For example, the 2020 Record of Decision for the
Columbia River Power System stated operation of the dams with
mitigation and conservation measures ``will not jeopardize listed
species or adversely modify or destroy critical habitat.'' \2\ However,
the 2022 Rebuilding Report found that ``for Snake River stocks, the
centerpiece action is restoring the lower Snake River via dam
breaching.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/s3//2022-09/rebuilding-interior-
columbia-basin-salmon-steelhead.pdf
\2\ Record of Decision. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-
2020-10-08/pdf/2020-22147.pdf
\3\ Rebuilding Report. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/s3//2022-09/
rebuilding-interior-columbia-basin-salmon-steelhead.pdf

2a) Can you explain what changed NOAA's shift in thinking over the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
course of 2 years?

2b) What studies or experts did NOAA consult with in releasing the
2022 Rebuilding Report?

Question 3. In September 2023 the White House published the
Memorandum on Restoring Healthy and Abundant Salmon, Steelhead, and
Other Native Fish Populations in the Columbia River Basin. Among other
things, the memo directed ``all agencies with applicable authorities
and responsibilities'' to provide the Office of Management and Budget
``an assessment of the agency's programs that can advance the policy
established in section 1 of this memorandum.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Healthy and Abundant Memo. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2023/09/27/memorandum-on-restoring-healthy-
and-abundant-salmon-steelhead-and-other-native-fish-populations-in-the-
columhia-river-basin/#::text=In%20recognition%20of%20these%20
priorities.abundant%20salmon%2C%20steelhead%2C%20and%20other

3a) What authorities or programs did NOAA provide to the Office of
Management and Budget to carry out the policy established in this
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
memorandum?

Question 4. In contrast with the 2022 Rebuilding Report, the 2020
Environmental Impact Statement and Record of Decision were heralded by
Senator Patty Murray and Governor Jay Inslee as being ``developed over
four years costing $50 million and involved technical experts,
scientific models, the input of thousands of individuals via public
comment and meetings, and detailed economic analyses.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://governor.wa.gov/sites/default/files/2022-11/
LSRD%20Benefit%20Replacement%20 Final%20Report_August%202022.pdf

4a) Is it fair to say that the process to develop the 2020 ROD and
EIS was a more thorough and public process than the one that led to the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2022 Rebuilding Report?

Question 5. Leading up to and after this U.S. Government agreement
was announced in late 2023, a diverse group of regional stakeholders
and Members of Congress raised a number of concerns about a NOAA report
entitled, ``Rebuilding Interior Columbia Basin Salmon and Steelhead,''
which was used as a basis for the U.S. Government commitments and
actions. That report was out of character for NOAA Fisheries and not
consistent with the agency's historical practices.

5a) What are NOAA's specific plans to address this recent report
that stands in contrast to decades of analysis and reports that draw
vastly different conclusions?

Question 6. In June 2022 the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
released Guidelines for Mitigating Impacts to Commercial and
Recreational Fisheries on the Outer Continental Shelf.\6\ In comments
on these draft guidelines, the New England, Mid-Atlantic, and South
Atlantic Fishery Management Councils all stated their belief that the
offshore wind industry ``should be required to monitor changes in
composition and abundance of aquatic species, habitats, and ecosystems
at the project and regional scales.'' \7\ They also stated that
monitoring efforts should include ``potential impacts to the fishery,
the affected community, and to habitats upon which managed fish species
depend.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/documents/renewable-
energy/DRAFT%20Fisheries %20Mitigation%20Guidance%2006232022_0.pdf
\7\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/BOEM-2022-0033-0045
\8\ Id.

6a) Do you agree that the offshore wind industry should work
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
proactively with fisheries on these sorts of efforts?

Question 7. In their comments, the Councils also raised concerns
with how state and Federal agencies, the offshore wind industry, and
the fishing industry work to develop guidelines for socioeconomic
impacts. They said that limitations on data will make it difficult to
``fully assess socioeconomic impacts for all impacted individuals,''
including captains, crews, and anglers, along with support industries
related to processing, packing, and bait and tackle shops.

7a) What sort of work does NOAA intend to do to help assist with
these efforts?

Question 8. NOAA states in its FY 2025 Budget Request that it will
continue its work with BOEM on offshore wind and will ``minimize the
effects of offshore energy projects on protected marine resources,
fisheries, and important habitats.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Pg. 10. https://www.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/2024-04/
NOAA_Blue_Book_FY25_Budget_ Summary.pdf

8a) What specific steps or actions has NOAA taken to work with
fishing communities across the United States as offshore wind energy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
projects have advanced?

Question 9. A puzzling aspect of this budget request is its
apparent focus on offshore wind while seeking reductions in areas like
fisheries management and data collection, along with zeroing out the
collaborative research program.

9a) At a time where the seafood sector in the United States faces
so many challenges, what message does cutting funding for these
important programs send to the United States' fishing sector?

Question 10. Administrator Spinrad, subsea cables are critical
telecommunications infrastructure that enable our global connectivity
and are integral to our national and economic security. In the proposed
Chumash Heritage National Marine Sanctuary off the coast of California,
there are existing and planned subsea cables that should be
accommodated without additional regulatory and permitting requirements.

10a) Does NOAA have a plan for subsea cables within the sanctuary?

10b) Can you ensure that any Special Use Permit (SUP) or
requirements imposed on these cables will align with the existing
regulatory and permitting requirements? Compliance with the robust
existing requirements should be more than adequate for qualifying for a
SUP.

Question 11. All eight Regional Fishery Management Councils
supported the removal of the commercial fishing bans from all marine
national monument designations, stating that they ``hinder the
councils' ability to sustainably manage fisheries throughout their
range, and they restrict the councils and the National Marine Fisheries
Service from acquiring invaluable knowledge about the stocks and the
marine ecosystem made available through catch-and-effort and observer
data.''

11a) Do you disagree with all eight councils that commercial
fishing bans in the monuments hinder their ability to perform their
statutory duties under the Magnuson-Stevens Act?

Question 12. All eight Regional Fishery Management Councils stated
publicly that ``there is no peer-reviewed literature that demonstrates
conservation benefit of the monument fishing restrictions to the highly
migratory stocks that are targeted.''

12a) What peer-reviewed data did your office assess before
determining that a commercial fishing ban should be reimposed?

12b) To what peer review data did you have access that the councils
overlooked in making their determination?

Question 13. In 2023, the Department of Commerce, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service
released its National Seafood Strategy which, among other things,
identifies as its Number One objective to: maximize fishing
opportunities and sustainable seafood production while ensuring the
sustainability of fisheries through effective and efficient management.

13a) How does closing all U.S. waters around the U.S. Pacific
Remote Island Area (PRIA), which historically have been important to
the U.S. purse seine fleet and the Hawaii longline fleet, and
displacing these fleets to fish on the high seas among foreign
subsidized vessels, support NOAA's National Seafood Strategy?

13b) How does closing U.S. waters to commercial fishing in the
Northeast Canyons and Seamounts Marine National Monument, which
historically have been important to the U.S. swordfish and tuna
longline fleet, support NOAA's National Seafood Strategy?

Questions Submitted by Representative Radewagen

Question 1. On February 20 during a meeting at the Marriot hotel
with Governor Lemanu and Congresswoman Radewagen, Assistant Secretary
Bavishi agreed there was an ``unusual process here'' as to the rapidity
of this PRIMNM/Sanctuary designation process being conducted; do you
agree with the Assistant Secretary's observation that this PRIMNM
Sanctuary designation has been an ``unusual process here''?

Question 2. Members of The Pacific Remote Islands Coalition stated
in meetings March 7 with my Congressional staff that their clear goal
is to kill all purse seine fishing and shutdown the cannery in American
Samoa in pushing for the PRIMNM/Sanctuary designation they have been
lead sponsor for, do you agree with the Pacific Remote Islands
Coalitions sponsors goals to shut down our cannery in American Samoa?

Question 3. The CEQ, under the Executive Office of the President is
the policy agency for environmental impact statements which drive most
decisions made by the Executive branch. I understand the 2nd draft EIS
for the PRI Sanctuary has been written and is being reviewed by NMFS
and other agencies. When will the draft be made public and does it
include options for commercial fishing?

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Earlier this year, the Services finalized three
rulemakings related to the implementation of the ESA. The finalized
Section 7 consultation regulation incorporates new potential
requirements for developing the Reasonable and Prudent Measures (RPMs)
necessary for an action agency or entity seeking a Federal permit to
employ in order to minimize the impacts of incidental take. In this
final rule, the Services can consider and include measures in an RPM
that offset any remaining impacts of incidental take that cannot be
avoided. These measures to offset impacts can be required inside or
outside the action area. These are significant changes, and the Section
7 Consultation handbook needs to be updated in order for action
agencies and permit seekers to understand how this new process works.
When will the handbook be updated, and will that process include public
notice and comment so that the regulated community--and your fellow
Federal agencies--can provide input on the practical impacts?

Question 2. There is a lot of discussion of mitigation in the new
ESA implementation rules. How many species ``mitigation banks'' are
there in the country? Are there banks for all listed species? Can you
explain what an ``in lieu fee'' mitigation offset is? How are any of
these kinds of offsets reviewed and approved by the Service?

Question 3. The new ESA Section 7 consultation rule just went into
effect, and the Service has said that all consultations not yet
completed will have to comply with them. How many ongoing consultations
will now be delayed or have to be redone because of the new rules?

Question 4. In a departure from their long-standing interpretation,
the final rule allows the Services to require minimization and
mitigation measures as reasonable and prudent measures when authorizing
incidental take of species. The relevant statutory authorization (ESA
Section 7(b)(4)(C)(ii)) only allows the Services to ``minimize'' the
impact of incidental take. The Services have never interpreted this
provision as allowing for mitigation of take. What is the statutory
legal authority that allows the Services to now impose ``mitigation,''
including compensatory mitigation that would fully offset all potential
impacts or require restoration/protection of habitat, when it is not
clearly authorized by the ESA?

Question 5. The final rule deletes the regulatory provisions at 50
CFR 402.17. These were added in 2019 to establish when an activity is
reasonably certain to occur and what consequences are caused by a
proposed action for purposes of determining the effects of an action
for consultation. The Services recognize that these criteria are
relevant and applicable considerations. Why are the Services removing
them from the regulations?

Question 6. The ESA Consultation Handbook that the Services rely on
for guidance was last published in 1998. The Services state that they
are planning to update the Handbook to provide additional guidance on
the ESA section 7 process. What is the timing for the new Handbook and
what public review and comment process will be provided?

Question 7. Can you please explain how the new ESA Section 4
regulations comply with the Supreme Court's decision in Weyerhaeuser v
US FWS?

Question 8. In the 2024 final rule, the Services removed the more
robust and detailed procedures for the designation of unoccupied areas
as critical habitat that had been implemented in 2019. That 2019 final
rule provided important standards detailing when property could be
designated as critical habitat because it is essential to the
conservation of species that do not currently occur on those lands or
waters. How do the Services intend to designate unoccupied critical
habitat going forward given their prior difficulties applying the
relevant ESA statutory criteria and when there is no agreed upon
regulatory definition of what is ``habitat'' for a species?

Question 9. The courts have said that it is the five criteria in
ESA Section 4(a)(l) that dictate the status of the species and whether
it should be listed, delisted, or downlisted. The courts have also said
that recovery plans and recovery criteria are not binding and do not
have to be satisfied before a species is delisted. The final rule adds
a ``recovery'' component to delisting/downlisting considerations. Can
you explain how the Services intend to apply this new standard given
that it seems contrary to the statute and case law?

Question 10. The Department of the Interior (DOI) requires that
lessees and owners of operating rights decommission their facilities,
pipelines and other equipment, in accordance with the governing DOI
regulations and lease conditions. DOI has a robust review and approval
process in place for the decommissioning of offshore platforms and
facilities and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
(BSEE) published its Record of Decision (ROD) in December 2023 to kick
off this robust process for the first ever decommissioning of offshore
platforms in the Pacific Ocean. At the same time, NOAA has proposed the
Chumash Heritage National Marine Sanctuary in the Pacific Ocean along
the south-Central California coastline, which includes the same region
of the Pacific where some of these platforms are located offshore.
While the proposal allows for the continued production of oil and gas
in the Sanctuary, it does not allow for the decommissioning of oil and
gas platforms and facilities. Given the robust permitting process that
DOI is already undertaking to decommission these platforms and
facilities in the Pacific, does it make sense to create an additional
NOAA permitting process which could further delay or hinder the ability
for companies to fulfill their obligation with DOI to decommission in
the Pacific? Has NOAA considered making the decommissioning of oil and
gas platforms and facilities an allowed activfry in the Chumash
Heritage National Marine Sanctuary once it's finalized?

Questions Submitted by Representative D'Esposito

Question 1. Mr. Spinrad, could you briefly explain NOAA's current
efforts regarding surveying and mapping of coastal and Federal
waterways?

Question 2. Is there a need for NOAA to work with the private
sector to deploy advanced technologies and more effectively conduct
these activities?

Question 3. Within NOAA's Budget Estimates report for FY25 and its
justification of program and performance it states, ``Complete and up-
to-date hydrographic data is central to developing accurate nautical
charts and ensuring the safety of life at sea, and promoting efficient
maritime commerce.''

Question 4. Do you believe this information is readily available
for commercial anglers, recreational fishers, boaters, maritime
vessels, and others who enjoy our coastal waters?

Question 5. My colleague Representative Mike Levin and I introduced
the MAPOceans Act, which would provide for the standardization,
publication, and accessibility of data for Federal waterway regulations
and fishing restrictions along our coasts. This bill would require the
Secretary of Commerce and relevant agencies, such as NOAA to partner
with non-Federal and third-party providers, including the private
sector to carry out this act. Do you agree that standardizing such
information and making it publicly accessible would be beneficial for
coastal economies and the multiple users of our coastal and Federal
waterways?

Questions Submitted by Representative Hoyle

Question 1. The Fiscal Year 2025 (FY25) budget proposes significant
cuts for the Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS), which would have
severe consequences for my district. I appreciate that developing the
President's Budget requires trade-offs, especially in light of the
Fiscal Responsibility Act's requirements. However, I am concerned about
potential ripple effects of the proposed budget cuts.

1a) How do you plan to prioritize remaining funds to ensure that
critical functions of IOOS are maintained, and what criteria will guide
these decisions?

1b) How would the proposed cuts impact both programmatic core
funding as well as Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation
Reduction Act funding?

1c) Can you outline the potential direct and indirect impacts of
the proposed cuts to programs, communities, or international
partnerships that rely on the data and infrastructure supported by
IOOS?

Question 2. It is my understanding that there have been ongoing
issues with new business and awards systems (BAS and eRA Commons)
implemented by NOAA last fall which have made NOAA unable to send
funding or handle proposals for Cooperative Institutes. For example,
the Cooperative Institute for Marine Ecosystem and Resources at Oregon
State University has received no funding since the switchover, cannot
process proposals, and is barreling toward a funding cliff this fall.
I'm very concerned about the potential impact on researchers in my
district and, more broadly, damage to NOAA's partnerships across the
country. What is NOAA doing to address this issue, and what are the
expectations for getting it resolved?

Questions Submitted by Representative Dingell

Question 1. Dr. Spinrad, the President's budget only proposes $10
million for the Integrated Ocean Observing System which is a 76 percent
reduction from fiscal years 2023 and 2024. I'm concerned this cut would
drastically affect the IOOS's ability to work with its regional
partners like the Great Lakes Observing System to generate and deliver
continuous data on our coastal waters, oceans, and Great Lakes. Dr.
Spinrad, do you share these concerns, and can you elaborate on how you
arrived at this funding level?

Question 2. Great Lakes researchers heavily rely on their
partnership and use of the NOAA research vessel the Laurentian to
better understand our Great Lakes, but the vessel is currently 50 years
old. Dr. Spinrad, given its age and how important the work this vessel
does, are there any plans in place to replace it?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Administrator
Hairston for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN HAIRSTON, ADMINISTRATOR AND CEO,
BONNEVILLE POWER  ADMINISTRATION,  DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY, PORTLAND, OREGON

Mr. Hairston. Good afternoon, Chairman Bentz and members of
the Subcommittee. My name is John Hairston. I am the
Administrator and CEO of the Bonneville Power Administration,
based in Portland, Oregon.
The Bonneville markets wholesale power from 31 Federal dams
in the Pacific Northwest and operates over 15,000 miles of
high-voltage transmission lines, which are the backbone of the
region's transmission grid.
I ask that my written testimony be submitted for the
record, and I will briefly touch on key initiatives and
challenges.
First, I want to emphasize that Bonneville is in sound
financial condition. In the last Fiscal Year, Bonneville
excelled in difficult market and operational conditions. The
2023 water year was the 13th driest on record, requiring
Bonneville to make significant power purchases, which drove up
our expenses. Our power services organization combined
strategic forecasting, planning, and marketing approaches to
partially offset those high power purchase costs. Our
transmission service business organization expertly managed the
Federal grid to ensure reliability and maximize capacity and
sales, which further offset increased costs.
Demonstrating our sound financial condition, Bonneville
made its annual payment to the United States Treasury for the
40th consecutive year, on time and in full, a payment of just
over $1 billion. And I am very pleased to report that in March,
Bonneville achieved a significant milestone for our commitment
to remain the region's low-cost power provider beyond 2028,
when our current long-term contracts expire.
Bonneville released its final provider of choice policy,
laying out the foundation of our future long-term contracts.
Bonneville will offer to execute new contracts with customers
in late 2025, and power sale deliveries for those contracts
will begin in October 2028. The provider of choice policy was
developed over several years of close discussions in a public
process with our customers and other interested parties.
Bonneville is now in a 2-year period for its power and
transmission rates, which run through October 2025. In the
current rate period, our power and transmission rates are flat
compared to the last rate period. Our ability to maintain these
levels of rates reflect execution of our financial plan and
disciplined cost management.
Now, Bonneville is beginning a public review of our
forecasted program costs for the next rate period, which will
cover the next 3 years beginning in October 2025. This will
coincide with the last 3 years of our current power sales
contracts.
Among other strategic priorities is Bonneville's engagement
in developing Western electricity markets, as well as extensive
collaboration across the Pacific Northwest and beyond for
electric system reliability and evolving transmission needs.
New markets present opportunities to enhance the delivery of
reliable, affordable, and carbon-free hydropower to our
customers. We are basing our evaluation of market opportunities
on principles to determine if Bonneville's participation will
be consistent with our statutory obligations and support our
customers' needs and interests.
In 2022, Bonneville joined the Western Energy Imbalance
Market, operated by the California Independent System Operator.
Now, we decided to join the real-time market with the
confirmation that it is voluntary and that we could participate
consistent with our statutory obligations. Building on that
experience, Bonneville is participating now in the development
of two alternative day-ahead initiatives, one that would be
operated by the California Independent System Operator and the
other by the Southwest Power Pool.
We released a staff recommendation in April for public
comment, which stated a preference for the option proposed by
the Southwest Power Pool. The recommendation noted the
importance of the Southwest Power Pool market's independent
governance. We will continue to hold public discussions with
regional parties for my consideration and final decision in
late November.
Due to growing power demands, the need to bolster
reliability and integrating clean energy across the Pacific
Northwest, Bonneville is engaged in several initiatives to meet
regional transmission needs. In July 2023, Bonneville announced
it was moving forward with proposals for more than $2 billion
in transmission substation and line projects. Bonneville is
also participating in a transmission planning initiative to
draw together diverse participants from across the Western
Interconnection. The initiative, called the Western
Transmission Expansion Coalition, aims to develop transmission
plans over a larger footprint and a longer time horizon
compared to others.
In January, Bonneville announced the adoption of reforms to
our open access transmission tariff to more efficiently connect
new large generators onto the Federal grid. Bonneville
currently has over 400 requests, representing over 120
gigawatts of potential new generation, making these reforms
essential to the region's clean energy future.
These initiatives and our continued sound financial
performance represent the engagement and commitment of
Bonneville employees, and I am proud to represent them here
today.
That concludes my testimony, Mr. Chairman, and I would be
happy to respond to questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Hairston follows:]

Prepared Statement of John Hairston, Administrator and Chief Executive
Officer, Bonneville Power Administration

Good afternoon, Chairman Bentz and members of the Subcommittee. My
name is John Hairston and I am the Administrator and Chief Executive
Officer of the Bonneville Power Administration (Bonneville). I am
pleased to be here today to discuss Bonneville's budget submission for
Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 and to discuss Bonneville's current initiatives.

Role of the Bonneville Power Administration

Bonneville is a Federal Power Marketing Administration
headquartered in Portland, Oregon. It serves a 300,000 square mile area
that includes Oregon, Washington, Idaho, western Montana, and parts of
northern California, Nevada, Utah, and Wyoming.
Bonneville markets electric power, provides transmission, and
supports development of energy conservation throughout the region.
Bonneville markets the electric power produced from 31 Federal
hydroelectric projects operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(Corps) and the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation). Together, the 31
Federal hydro projects produce a total of 8,593 average megawatts in an
average water year. Bonneville also acquires non-Federal power,
including the power from one nuclear power plant, the Columbia
Generating Station, to meet the needs of its customer utilities.
Bonneville maintains and operates over 15,000 circuit miles of
transmission lines and associated facilities over which this electric
power is delivered. Bonneville's system is a substantial majority of
the Northwest's high-voltage electric grid. It is Bonneville's
responsibility to plan for and fund the development, operations and
maintenance of this system, while also preserving and enhancing
physical security, cyber-security, and overall system resilience.
Bonneville is fully self-financed, issues bonds directly to the
U.S. Treasury, and receives no direct annual appropriations for
operations. Bonneville's power rates and transmission rates are set to
recover its costs. Bonneville is currently authorized by the U.S.
Congress to have outstanding at any time up to $13.7 billion of U.S.
Treasury bonds through fiscal year 2027. Beginning in fiscal year 2028,
an additional $4 billion will become available to have outstanding for
a total of $17.7 billion of borrowing authority.
Bonneville also funds the protection, mitigation, and enhancement
of fish and wildlife affected by the development and operation of the
hydropower system as part of its efforts to preserve and balance the
economic and environmental benefits of the Federal Columbia River Power
System (FCRPS).

Financial Performance

In the last fiscal year, Bonneville excelled in difficult market
and operational conditions. Bonneville's accomplishments proved the
value of resilience in navigating the variability and uncertainty of
operating a hydro-based power system and an open-access transmission
grid across a large geographic footprint. It was the 13th driest year
on record, requiring Bonneville to make significant power purchases,
driving up expenses. Strategic forecasting, planning, and marketing
approaches, combined with actions to preserve liquidity, allowed Power
Services to partially offset the power purchase costs. In addition,
Transmission Services expertly managed the Federal grid to ensure
reliability and maximize capacity, enabling increased sales. Despite
the dry year, Bonneville exceeded its agency net revenue target of
negative $332 million by $75 million.
Both Power Services and Transmission Services ended the year above
their thresholds for financial reserves, triggering their reserves
distribution clauses (RDC). The RDC amounts of $285 million for Power
and $130 million for Transmission will be used to reduce customer
rates, reduce debt, support transmission system investment, and the
Power RDC can be used to fund specific fish and wildlife investments.

Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Overview

Bonneville is in sound financial condition. Its Fiscal Year 2025
Budget proposes estimated accrued (self-financed) expenditures of
$2,999 million for operating expenses, $55 million for projects funded
in advance by customers and $1,093 million for capital investments.
Bonneville funds its approximate $4.2 billion in annual cost of
operations and investments primarily through power and transmission
revenues and borrowing from the U.S. Treasury at market determined
interest rates.

Debt Repayment and Credit Ratings

Bonneville made its annual payment to the U.S. Treasury for the
40th consecutive year, on time and in full, totaling $1.02 billion for
FY 2023. This demonstrated Bonneville's ability to meet all of its
financial commitments. Bonneville expects to make its 41st consecutive
Bonneville payment to the U.S. Treasury, currently estimated at $915
million, at the end of this fiscal year, on time and in full.
Leading credit ratings agencies have taken note of Bonneville's
solid financial footing. Fitch's rating for Bonneville-backed debt is
AA, stable; Moody's is Aa1, negative; and S&P is AA-, stable. These
ratings reflect that Bonneville's financial policies are working and
that Bonneville is well-positioned to lead the region toward a
prosperous clean energy future.

Financial Planning

Bonneville adopted an updated Financial Plan in 2022, focusing on
core objectives and metrics. These objectives include maintaining cost-
management discipline and execution of capital plans; maintaining
financial resiliency through adequate reserves, leverage U.S. Treasury
borrowing authority; and maintaining high investment-grade credit
ratings. These objectives demonstrate Bonneville's commitment to
deliver on its public responsibilities and to maintain its position as
the region's leading power and transmission provider.

Bonneville's Strategic Direction:

In January, Bonneville implemented its 2024-2028 Strategic Plan.
The plan charts a path forward guided by six strategic goals: invest in
people, enhance the value of products and services; sustain financial
strength; mature asset management; preserve safe and reliable system
operations; and modernize business systems and processes.

New Long-Term Power Sales Contracts:

In March, Bonneville achieved a significant milestone for its
commitment to remain the region's low-cost power provider beyond 2028
when current long-term power sales contracts expire. Bonneville
released its final Provider of Choice Policy and Record of Decision,
laying out the foundation for future long-term contracts. The Policy
was developed through a public process in close collaboration with
customers and other interested parties. Bonneville will offer to
execute Provider of Choice contracts with utilities in late 2025. Power
deliveries under these contracts will begin October 1, 2028.
At the heart of the Policy is Bonneville's decision to develop
contracts based on a tiered rate construct, which seeks to protect the
value of the existing Federal system from unbound acquisition costs,
and insulate customers from costs associated with other customers'
resource choices. The Policy maintains these key elements while
proposing additional flexibilities and options to help meet customers'
and Bonneville's evolving needs.
While the release of the Provider of Choice Policy signifies an
important milestone in the contract renewal process with Bonneville's
preference utility customers, much work remains. Bonneville has begun a
series of policy implementation and contract development workshops to
develop details about the products and services outlined in the Policy.

Rates:

To establish rates for FY 2024 and FY 2025, Bonneville concluded
the BP-24 rate proceeding in July 2023 by releasing the Administrator's
Final Record of Decision and Final Proposal. Rates went into effect on
Oct. 1, 2023, and will be effective through Sept. 30, 2025. The final
decision held wholesale power rates effectively flat for the two-year
period. Transmission rates are also maintained at their previous
levels.
In December, Bonneville announced that it will adopt a three-year
rate period for its next Power and Transmission rates process. This
rate period will run from FY 2026 through FY 2028 and coincide with the
expiration of Bonneville's current long-term power contracts on
September 30, 2028. Bonneville decided to close out the contract period
with a single three-year Power rate period and align the next
Transmission rate period for that same duration. Maintaining common
timing between Power and Transmission rate processes allows Bonneville
to align its Integrated Program Review (IPR) to show total agency costs
over that period. The common timing should also be more efficient with
customer time for engaging in rate case work. Bonneville has begun
workshops with customers and constituents to identify key issues for
the upcoming rates process.
Bonneville is initiating its IPR to discuss with customers and
constituents program cost forecasts for the next rate period.
Determining program cost forecasts will require important Bonneville
decisions to balance cost-management objectives against the need to
invest in areas that support the delivery of strategic goals.

Western Markets Engagement

New markets present opportunities to enhance the delivery of
reliable, affordable and carbon-free hydropower to Bonneville
customers. Bonneville evaluates market engagement from principles based
on determining if participation will be consistent with Bonneville's
statutory obligations and support its customers' needs and interests.
In 2022, Bonneville joined the Western Energy Imbalance Market (WEIM),
the real-time energy market operated by the California Independent
System Operator (CAISO). Prior to joining the WEIM, Bonneville
participated with other regional representatives to develop specific,
but limited, authorities for WEIM design and oversight by an
independent Governing Body.
Building on that experience, Bonneville is participating in the
development of two day-ahead market initiatives underway in the West--
the CAISO's Extended Day-Ahead Market and Southwest Power Pool's (SPP)
Markets Plus. In July 2023, Bonneville initiated a public process with
customers and the public on its decision to participate in either
market option.
In April, Bonneville released its staff recommendation and
preliminary legal assessment for day-ahead market participation. The
staff recommendation is for Bonneville to pursue participation in a
day-ahead market and they identified SPP's Markets Plus as the
preferred option. The recommendation is based on the current design of
both market alternatives and their governance features. Bonneville
invited additional comment on its staff assessment of market
opportunities and is continuing to host a series of public workshops.
Bonneville plans to issue a draft policy in August and the
Administrator's Record of Decision in November.

Transmission

The demand for serving growing loads, bolstering reliability, and
integrating clean energy across the Pacific Northwest is driving the
need for transmission expansion to deliver energy from geographically
dispersed resources to population centers where demand for electricity
is expected to grow. In July 2023, Bonneville announced it is moving
forward with proposals for more than $2 billion in multiple
transmission substation and line projects to reinforce the regional
grid and to respond to its customers' demands while supporting the
region's clean energy goals.
Bonneville is also participating in an initiative drawing together
regional participants from across the West to develop an approach for
regional and interregional transmission planning over a longer planning
time horizon. This initiative has formed as the Western Transmission
Expansion Coalition, or WestTEC, and is being facilitated by the
Western Power Pool. Bonneville is contributing financial support and
participating in the leadership and technical analysis of the
initiative.
In January, Bonneville announced its adoption of certain reforms to
its open access tariff to more efficiently process generation
interconnection requests to connect new large generators onto the
Federal transmission grid. These tariff modifications were developed
with customers and stakeholders through a collaborative process and
resulted in a settled tariff case. This important step came at a
critical time for the region where, currently, Bonneville's large
generator interconnection queue contains over 400 requests representing
over 120 gigawatts of potential new generation.
With the adopted tariff reforms, Bonneville will implement a first-
ready, first-served cluster study approach to processing
interconnection requests, replacing the previous first-come, first-
served serial study process. The new interconnection process included
new readiness criteria and the ability to study requests as a group, or
cluster, rather than individually in queue order. These improvements
will allow Bonneville to offer a more transparent and streamlined
process, and provide greater certainty regarding the cost and timing of
interconnections.

Energy Efficiency

For more than 40 years, Bonneville has catalyzed conservation as a
resource the Pacific Northwest in the development of conservation as a
resource to meet power load demands customers place on Bonneville.
Conservation, or energy efficiency, is Bonneville's priority resource
to address the growth in power load demands across the region. As of
last year, Bonneville's cumulative energy efficiency savings totaled
2,583 average megawatts since the passage of the Northwest Power Act in
1980.

Fish and Wildlife

The Federal Columbia and Snake River dams along with climate
change, ocean conditions, habitat degradation, predation, harvest, and
hatcheries have had adverse impacts on salmon, steelhead, and other
native fish populations in the Basin. These fish have tremendous value
to the region and to Tribal Nations in the Basin. As a result,
Bonneville, the Corps, and Reclamation have made extensive
modifications and operational changes to mitigate the impacts of the
system's construction and continued operation on fish and wildlife.
Since the 1980 Northwest Electric Power Planning and Conservation Act,
Bonneville has invested billions of dollars in improved configuration
and operation of the dams, as well as in offsite restoration efforts
for the benefit of fish and wildlife sponsored by Tribes, states, and
local communities. In the last year, Bonneville was a party to two
agreements to address long-standing litigation over challenges to the
Columbia River System Operations Environmental Impact Statement and
associated Endangered Species Act consultations.
Last September, Bonneville and other federal signatories entered
into a memorandum of understanding and settlement agreement with the
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, the Coeur d'Alene
Tribe, and the Spokane Tribe of Indians related to the blocked area
above Chief Joseph and Grand Coulee dams. Bonneville agreed to provide
$200 million over 20 years for these Tribes' second phase of studies to
assess reintroduction of specific non-federally protected salmonid
stocks above Chief Joseph and Grand Coulee dams in the upper Columbia
River Basin.
Subsequently, the Resilient Columbia Basin Agreement of December
14, 2023, was signed by the U.S. Government, including Bonneville,
along with the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation; the
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, the
Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon; the Nez
Perce Tribe; the State of Oregon; and the State of Washington--
collectively referred to as the ``Six Sovereigns,''--and a coalition of
environmental and fishing advocacy groups led by the National Wildlife
Federation.

Bonneville has already planned, through its fish and wildlife
program, to add at least an additional $20 million in combined capital
and expense funding in FY 2024 and FY 2025 for fish and wildlife
efforts throughout the Columbia River Basin on top of its annual
program funding and the September commitments to the upriver Columbia
River Tribes. In the December 14, 2023, agreement, Bonneville's
financial commitments include and are limited to:

$200 million over 10 years in additional capital funding
will be available to be directly funded by Bonneville to
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service for Lower Snake River
Compensation Plan hatchery modernization, upgrades, and
maintenance, as guided by the priorities of other fishery
managers including the Six Sovereigns.

An additional $100 million in funding over 10 years for
projects that contribute to the restoration of salmon and
other native fish populations. To implement this
commitment, Bonneville will provide an annual $10 million
payment to the Six Sovereigns in a manner to be agreed
upon, to distribute to specific projects, as prioritized by
the Six Sovereigns.

Workforce Competitiveness

This testimony has reviewed a number of accomplishments and
initiatives that demonstrate Bonneville's industry-leading technical
and policy capabilities. Bonneville has a highly talented and skilled
workforce, as demonstrated by this high performance. Bonneville
competes for talent within the electric power industry. Its employees
are subject to the federal General Schedule and government
classification standards.

Columbia River Treaty

The Columbia River Treaty is an agreement between the United States
and Canada, which provides a framework under which they jointly
coordinate water operations for flood risk management and hydropower
generation. In September 2024, the Treaty shifts to a less-defined
approach to flood risk management. The Treaty went into effect in 1964
and is an example of transboundary water resources cooperation.
The United States and Canada are discussing options to improve the
Columbia River Treaty regime to better reflect today's realities, and
thereby benefit both countries. Bonneville is working with other
affected Federal agencies to support the U.S. State Department in these
negotiations with Canada to achieve a modernized Columbia River Treaty
regime.

Willamette Valley System Power Deauthorization

While the Federal hydroelectric dams of the Columbia and Snake
Rivers are valuable clean energy assets for the Pacific Northwest,
Bonneville is concerned by the sharply declining value of Federal
hydroelectric generation from Oregon's Willamette Valley. The
Willamette Valley System was authorized by Congress primarily for flood
risk management, and the 11 dams in the system continue to provide
considerable benefits to downstream communities by reducing their flood
risk as well as supporting water supply and recreation. Eight of the
dams have power generating capability and Bonneville pays approximately
40 percent on average of the joint costs for those dams.
Some of the Willamette dams were built without fish passage
facilities, and the Corps is investigating structural measures and
implementing operations to provide fish passage at the power-producing
Willamette dams. In addition, in the draft Environmental Impact
Statement for the Willamette Valley System, the Corps proposed
indefinitely extending reservoir operations for fish passage that
reduce power generation by more than a third of recent levels of 171
average megawatts. These Willamette dams are among the highest cost
projects in Bonneville's hydro portfolio, and the estimated cost of
structural measures will add significantly to Bonneville's debt without
increasing its revenue or assets. These potential increases in capital
and associated repayment costs affect rates for Bonneville's power
customers.
In the FY 2020 Energy and Water Appropriations Act, the House
Committee report directed the Corps, Reclamation, and Bonneville to
report on methods to modernize allocation of project costs among
authorized purposes to reflect current benefits. For FY 2021, the House
Committee report directed the Corps and Bonneville to continue to work
to resolve their approaches to cost reallocation and provide quarterly
reports on their progress.
The 2020 Water Resources Development Act directed the Corps to
report within two years of passage on the impacts of deauthorizing the
power purposes at the Cougar and Detroit/Big Cliff projects of the
Willamette Valley System. The 2022 Water Resources Development Act
directed the Corps to conduct disposition studies for the power purpose
at the eight Willamette dams within 18 months of enactment.

Conclusion

Bonneville continues to deliver tremendous value to the communities
served by the Federal power system. Bonneville serves as a cornerstone
for the economy of the Pacific Northwest by both meeting its statutory
obligations and evolving to support the changing needs of its customers
and the region. I am proud of the accomplishments of our people and
their dedication to Bonneville's mission. This concludes my testimony,
Mr. Chairman, and I will be happy to respond to the Subcommittee's
questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to John Hairston, Administrator and
CEO, Bonneville Power Administration

Mr. Hairston did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Bentz

Question 1. In mid-January, the Pacific Northwest region
experienced an Arctic blast that led to extreme weather conditions--
inches of freezing rain and snow and sub-zero temperatures brought the
entire region to a standstill. While many electric utilities
experienced outages, the region itself never ran out of available
power. This is largely due to the reliability and dispatchability of
the Lower Snake River Dams. BPA indicated that the four Lower Snake
River Dams played a major role keeping the lights on. BPA noted in its
press release that ``The lower Snake River dams made major
contributions to BPA's efforts to keep the lights on during the cold
snap,'' finding that the four dams peaked at more than 1,000 aMW each
day.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.bpa.gov/about/newsroom/news-articles/20240131-
federal-hydro-system-powers-region-through-arctic-blast

1a) Can you talk about the importance of those four dams during
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
this intense period?

Question 2. Administrator Hairston, the Pacific Northwest Utilities
Conference Committee recently issued its 2024 Northwest Regional
Forecast,\2\ which helps to track shifts in energy demand and potential
resource changes to the power sector across the region. The Committee
projected, among other things, that electricity demand will increase
30% over the next 10 years.\3\ BPA will play a critical role in helping
to meet these demands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.pnucc.org/wp-content/uploads/2024-PNUCC-Northwest-
Regional-Forecast-final.pdf
\3\ Id.

2a) Can you offer any thoughts on how BPA is positioned to help the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
region meet this increase in demand?

Question 3. In your testimony in front of the Energy and Commerce
Committee in January of this year, you talked about some of the
challenges that salmon face due to BPA's operations, but you also noted
that ``each of the Mainstem Columbia and Snake River dams now achieve
96 to 99% survival rates.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  https://dldth6e8-4htgma.cloudfront.nct/
01_30_24_ENG_Testimony_Hairston_36dl5ee6ee.pdf

3a) Could you talk about how BPA has helped to improve salmon
recovery and fish passage efforts, particularly along the Snake River
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dams?

Question 4. Administrator Hairston, at our hearing Administrator
Spinrad stated that ``We don't express an opinion on whether the dams
should go in or go out, and that authority actually resides with
Congress.'' However, at a hearing of the House Committee on Energy and
Commerce in January, the Assistant Administrator of the National Marine
Fisheries Service, Janet Coit, stated that ``our report concludes that
in order to give the best possible chance of restoring salmon, we would
need to breach the Lower Snake River Dams, and that is to achieve the
healthy and harvestable goal.''

4a) Are you at all concerned with the approach that NOAA and the
Biden Administration have taken with respect to the Lower Snake River
Dams?

Question 5. There are key interests in the Northwest economy who
say the U.S. Government has been virtually silent on how it is
implementing the White House agreement and in fact critical dates
identified by the U.S. Government have been missed.

5a) Can BPA shed light on any efforts by the Administration to
share with the people of the Northwest what the status is for these
sweeping actions and commitments and where the implementation details
and specific responsible party points of contact can be found?

Question 6. Given that the announcement of the U.S. Government
agreement and related elements were made in haste at the end of 2023
and finalized in early 2024, reports had indicated at the time that BPA
had not been able to fully analyze the operational impacts that could
occur from changed river operations that the agreement committed to.

6a) Where is BPA on that more robust analysis front and how does
the analysis line up for a dry water year, which I understand the
region is facing for the remainder of 2024?

Question 7. To what extent is BPA receiving outreach from other
sovereign parties--such as Tribes, states or other special
jurisdictions--who are expressing interest in additional agreements
that may cost BPA ratepayers funds similar to the $300 million or more
in ``actions and commitments'' the U.S. Government and BPA recently
signed on to?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Administrator LeBeau
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TRACEY LeBEAU, ADMINISTRATOR AND CEO,
WESTERN AREA POWER ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY, LAKEWOOD, COLORADO

Ms. LeBeau. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Committee. My name is Tracey
LeBeau. I am an Administrator for the Western Area Power
Administration (WAPA). I am pleased to be here with you today.
WAPA is amongst the nation's largest transmission owners
and providers, covering a footprint of more than 1.3 million
square miles across 15 states in the West. We market hydropower
from 57 Federal dams and deliver along our 17,000 miles of
high-voltage transmission. Our core mission is to safely
provide reliable, cost-based hydropower and transmission to our
wholesale customers and the communities they serve.
WAPA's nearly 2,000 dedicated employees and contractors
tirelessly keep the lights on for over 40 million Americans,
and together we work to ensure that electricity is available
and affordable to those who rely on it for economic and for
basic needs.
Our recent strategic plan, Power Forward 2030, serves as a
framework around our three organizational priorities to
safeguard a sustainable energy future, to modernize our grid,
and to invest in our employees. This framework is to guide us.
We are well positioned to adapt to exciting and challenging
years ahead, as both a critical source of stable, clean energy
and a vital transmission backbone across the West.
One challenge we continue to face is drought. Drought
threatened WAPA's entire service territory for the first time
in 2022. While conditions improved in the last year, drought
remains what we consider a slow-moving natural disaster that
will take years of consistent and significant snowpack to fully
recover. In response, we have adjusted rates throughout our
system to ensure reliability.
Reduced hydropower generation means more customers must buy
power in the open market, which has led to increased costs and
constrained supply. Also, it has been negatively impacting
WAPA's customers, many who have served the most economically
vulnerable communities in the United States.
WAPA's purchased power and wheeling authority is an
important financial guardrail against drought, as it funds our
purchasing replacement power. This program's budget this year
has been adjusted to $688 million, down from $715 million last
year, which we fully recover through customer rates. Thanks to
your support of this program, we are able to mitigate the
economic impacts to the communities we serve.
WAPA continues to experience threats from extreme weather,
which result in damage to our lines and facilities. These
events are worsened by continuing supply chain challenges. Our
supply chain risk management program is integral to our
cybersecurity and our procurement strategies. We are also
exploring with industries ideas like creating reserves for
large transformers to establish some scale for new projects,
and possibly guard against emergencies.
The core of WAPA's mission is to provide safe and reliable
electricity. As such, we maintain, rebuild, and upgrade our
existing infrastructure, and we also build new transmission.
One current project in Arizona, the Vail to Tortolita Project,
demonstrates how to improve reliability without raising rates,
and is a model for future large-scale public-private
partnerships. We have also partnered with the U.S. military,
and we had some opportunities, particularly with the Beale Air
Force Base in Arizona, to help them with reliability for their
essential missions.
Our transmission infrastructure program continues to manage
and invest WAPA's $3.25 billion borrowing authority to finance
the exigent need for new transmission in the West. TIP is
supporting a number of projects, one of which being a recently
announced public-private partnership with grid lines to expand
a portion of our Mead substation outside of Hoover, which is a
critical transmission and energy market hub in the West.
Energy markets are supporting how we operate, making sure
that we reliably serve expanding loads, meet clean energy
goals, and plan and build new lines. WAPA was the first PMA to
fully join a Regional Transmission Organization, or RTO, in
2015. It has been very successful, and today we are involved in
every major energy market initiative throughout the Western
Interconnection.
Physical security is an increasing concern to the grid. We
continue to harden our system from physical and cyber risks.
Although there is no specific physical threat to WAPA at this
time, we have a concerning uptick in security incidents, and we
continue to be hyper vigilant, reminding everybody, if they see
something, to say something, and have increased our security
posture. As the energy landscapes evolve, WAPA stands ready to
address the challenges and seize opportunities for the benefit
of our nearly 700 wholesale customers across the West, as well
as the nation.
Thank you again for allowing me to testify today, and I
will be available to answer any of your questions you might
have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. LeBeau follows:]

Prepared Statement of Tracey LeBeau, Administrator, Western Area Power
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy

Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Tracey LeBeau, and as the Administrator of the Western Area Power
Administration (WAPA), I am honored to present our annual operations
review and discuss our budget request for Fiscal Year 2025. Our mission
at WAPA is as significant as it is complex--we are tasked with
delivering cost-effective, reliable hydropower across vast regions of
the Western United States. We maintain extensive transmission systems,
adapt to the evolving energy landscape, and ensure the sustainability
of our operations thanks to a truly outstanding workforce.
WAPA's transmission network spans 1.3 million square miles to serve
a diverse population, including nearly 700 wholesale customers which
are often in rural communities, including cities and municipalities,
rural electric cooperatives, irrigation districts, military
installations, and Tribal governments and utilities. We manage power
from 57 federal dams operated by the Bureau of Reclamation
(Reclamation), the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the International
Boundary and Water Commission. And we own, operate, and maintain one of
the nation's largest transmission systems, with over 17,000 circuit
miles of high voltage transmission and more than 300 bulk electric
substations across 15 states. This immense responsibility compels us to
continuously seek ways to enhance our operational efficiencies and
ensure the reliability of our services, especially in the face of
escalating environmental and energy markets challenges.
WAPA's FY 2025 budget proposal is designed to ensure the continued
reliability and security of the federal power and transmission system
while addressing the financial and operational challenges ahead. This
budget not only supports WAPA's operational needs but also contributes
to broader federal energy goals by maintaining critical energy
infrastructure across the Western United States.
Today, I will outline the advancements and strategic initiatives we
have undertaken in the past year, discuss the challenges we face due to
changing hydrological conditions and aging infrastructure, and detail
our financial strategies and requirements to continue fulfilling our
mission effectively.

POWER AND TRANSMISSION

At WAPA, we administer a range of rate structures across our
multiple different projects to facilitate the efficient delivery of
federal hydroelectric power. Established to recover annual operations
and maintenance costs as well as the original investment, plus
interest, our preference and power customers shoulder these financial
responsibilities, and we value their input and support as we manage
costs together. Repaying the Treasury for these investments, WAPA has
returned $1.5 billion to Treasury in the last 5 years.

There are a number of notable rate matters that deserve
highlighting this year:

Detailed Rate Structures and Adjustments: The Desert Southwest
Region's (DSW) Boulder Canyon Project (BCP) features a unique rate
structure with a base fee proportionally distributed among contractors
based on power allocation. For Fiscal Year 2024, the base charge is set
at $74.3 million, marking an 11.3% increase due to heightened Bureau of
Reclamation replacement costs and WAPA's operational enhancements.
This year WAPA introduced and successfully implemented a One
Transmission Rate (OTR) of $20.76 per kW-year in DSW starting January
1, 2024, for customers including the Central Arizona Project (CAP). The
OTR unified the rates for several projects in DSW to a single rate,
reducing administrative overhead and supporting WAPA's objectives to
enhance operational flexibility and ensure fair distribution of
transmission service costs. This OTR was a strategic and timely move
towards a standardized rate structure maintaining project rate
integrity, eliminating rate pancaking and fostering regional
consistency. This major change represents a positive example of WAPA's
collaboration with customers to drive efficiencies.
The Sierra Nevada Region's (SNR) Central Valley Project (CVP) has
benefited from improved hydrological conditions, leading to increased
projected generation for FY 2024. Despite hydropower fluctuations,
WAPA's Power Revenue Requirement (PRR) system protects customers from
market price spikes, ensuring stable and predictable pricing. This
fiscal year, the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (CVPIA)
Restoration Fund charge assessed to commercial power is $8 million, the
lowest it's been in over 15 years (the highest was $35.9M in FY 2017).
In FY 2023, the CVP derived rate was $30.74 per megawatt hour (MWh) in
comparison to the market cost at $57.28 per MWh. SNR rates were 46
percent below the market which is a significant benefit to the CVP
power customers in SNR's service territory.

Project-Specific Challenges and Responses: In the DSW Region's
Pacific Northwest-Pacific Southwest Intertie Project (Intertie), WAPA
maintained stable rates until the OTR was implemented. The transmission
service rate for the Intertie remained unchanged at $19.32 per
kilowatt-year (kW-year) to maintain cost predictability for
stakeholders.
While the OTR consolidation simplifies regulatory interactions and
creates a unified rate structure, some stakeholders have raised
concerns about disproportionate cost distribution. WAPA is addressing
these concerns through regulatory channels to ensure that the new rate
structure meets federal standards and supports the needs of the broader
region.

Vail-Tortolita and Southline Transmission projects: WAPA and Tuscon
Electric Power (TEP) have decided to rebuild the 60-mile portion of
WAPA's Parker Davis Project transmission system, the Vail-Tortolita
Project, using advanced/high-temperature low sag conductors. Aluminum
conductor, steel supported (ACSS) technology uses soft (annealed)
aluminum, making it resistant to breaking even at higher temperatures.
Using this conductor will be beneficial, especially in congested urban
areas with limited infrastructure. WAPA and Southline will work
together on rebuilding an adjacent 60-mile segment of the same line.

Drought: Drought impacts on generation and transmission continue to
be a priority across WAPA's footprint. While hydrology improved over
the last two years, those improvements fall short of normal levels with
respect to energy deliveries and the impact drought is having on
hundreds of WAPA's customers who must secure replacement power due to
lost hydropower in the short term. Customers are also planning for
long-term power replacement needs. Similar to the support WAPA provides
through mutual aid in any emergency or crisis, WAPA linked arms with
customers to explore and begin to implement initiatives and solutions
to address the long-term drought. Drought has been described as a slow-
moving natural disaster and that remains the case.
Through careful planning, transparent rate-setting processes, and
continuous stakeholder engagement, WAPA is committed to providing
reliable and cost-effective federal hydroelectric power. We are
continually refining our approaches to rate setting, ensuring the
fiscal health of our projects, and effectively meeting the needs of our
customer base. Our goal is to maintain financial stability and
sustainability across all operations.

MARKET INTEGRATION

WAPA's mission is to deliver clean, renewable, and reliable power,
even as we navigate the complexities of modern energy markets and the
imperatives of environmental stewardship. As we progress into an
increasingly dynamic energy landscape, WAPA is taking decisive actions
to enhance operational efficiency and adapt to new market conditions. A
significant aspect of this strategy is engagement with the Southwest
Power Pool (SPP) and involvement in critical federal hydropower
initiatives.

SPP RTO West Membership: In a landmark decision for WAPA, I
authorized the Colorado River Storage Project (CRSP), Rocky Mountain
(RM) region, and Upper Great Plains (UGP) region to pursue final
negotiations with the Southwest Power Pool (SPP) regarding entry to, or
expansion of the Regional Transmission Organization (RTO). Final
negotiations consist of WAPA working alongside SPP to develop tariff
language for the WAPA terms and conditions approved by the SPP board.
WAPA is also working with SPP on the implementation details of a
technical solution to meet the needs of CRSP's Southern Division
customers who are not in the SPP footprint. If final negotiations are
successful, to include FERC approval, the SPP RTO is expected to go
live in April 2026. This includes CRSP and RM executing SPP membership
agreements and UGP expanding its participation, resulting in full
membership as SPP RTO participants for all three regions. Full
membership allows for SPP to expand its footprint as the market
operator and will enable the broad operational and reliability benefits
of the RTO to the west participants.
Integrating into an RTO presents challenges, particularly in
navigating governance and operational control changes. However, WAPA
remains committed to ensuring these transitions uphold our mission and
meet the needs of our stakeholders while mitigating associated market
and cost risks.

TRANSMISSION SERVICES

Our transmission services function undertakes strategic projects
and initiatives to enhance infrastructure, integrate renewable energy
sources, and maintain safety and reliability in the face of
environmental challenges and community needs.
One of our significant projects is the Trinity Public Utilities
District (TPUD)-WAPA Right-of-Way Project, a collaborative effort with
Trinity Public Utilities District in Northern California. This project
focuses on expanding the right-of-way and enhancing vegetation
management to mitigate wildfire risks and improve electrical
reliability for communities in vulnerable areas. Such initiatives are
critical as they directly impact our ability to maintain service
integrity in regions prone to natural hazards.
Additionally, the Rail Tie Wind Project, located south of Laramie,
WY, is a 504-megawatt wind energy development that exemplifies WAPA's
role in facilitating the integration of renewable energy. This project
involves interconnecting to WAPA's Ault-Craig transmission line and
highlights our commitment to supporting sustainable energy sources
while supporting Tribal partners and adhering to environmental and
regulatory standards.
Integrating a diverse mix of renewable and conventional energy
sources presents complex challenges, particularly in maintaining system
reliability and managing extensive regulatory environments. These
challenges require sophisticated strategic planning to balance
technical, economic, and environmental considerations.
WAPA's planning efforts also aim to address the aging
infrastructure within the network. Modernization is paramount to
keeping pace with technological advancements and regulatory
requirements. This involves upgrading physical infrastructure and
adopting innovative technologies and practices that enhance operational
resilience and efficiency.

NATIONAL SECURITY

WAPA is honored to have partnered with Beale Air Force Base (Beale)
in California to provide redundant 230-kilvolt (kV) bulk electric
system feed to improve reliability to Beale and bolster reliable
operation of the base's critical national security mission. In addition
to its critical national security role, Beale is also located in a Tier
III high fire risk area. WAPA's interconnection will be outside the
risk area and will utilize steel pole structures. This project is on
schedule albeit challenged with supply chain issues facing much of the
industry.

SAFETY AND SECURITY

WAPA remains steadfast in its commitment to ensuring the highest
safety and security standards across all facets of its operations. Our
expansive network, which includes four control centers, over 300
substations, and more than 17,000 miles of transmission lines, requires
a vigilant and proactive approach to manage the myriad risks associated
with such a vast infrastructure. Our commitment extends beyond mere
compliance; it is about safeguarding communities, employees, and the
systems that power the nation.

SCADA Modernization: Another WAPA initiative is the Common SCADA/
EMS Vendor Project. This project aims to standardize SCADA (Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition) and EMS (Energy Management System) across
all WAPA regions, enhancing our operational efficiencies and
cybersecurity measures. By streamlining these systems, WAPA will boost
overall system management capabilities, ensuring that operations are
secure and adaptable to the evolving energy landscape.

Cybersecurity Initiatives: In the realm of cybersecurity, WAPA has
adopted a robust framework that prioritizes the protection of our
critical infrastructure. Our cybersecurity initiatives are rigorously
designed to mitigate risks and defend against potential breaches. We
undertake comprehensive audits endorsed by authorities, including the
DOE, OIG, and NERC, to ensure our defenses remain impenetrable.
Furthermore, WAPA participates in national-level training and
simulations, such as the DOE CyberFire and GridEX exercises, which
prepare our team to handle emerging cyber threats effectively.
Our ongoing cybersecurity enhancements, including the
implementation of a Zero Trust Strategy and advancements in Multifactor
Authentication and data encryption, have significantly fortified our
systems. These measures align with recent executive orders and are
crucial for maintaining the integrity and reliability of our
operations.

Physical Security: Physical security threats remain a top concern
across the country and at WAPA. We have seen a near three-fold increase
in incidents these last few years, from surveillance to theft to
threatening behavior near our facilities. WAPA is vigilant and on alert
while continuously assessing the threat landscape facing our assets and
systems.
WAPA's strategy involves a comprehensive assessment of
vulnerabilities, ensuring the resilience of facilities and
infrastructure. Regular risk assessments, compliant with North American
Electric Reliability Corporation Critical Infrastructure Protection
(NERC CIP) standards, and constant surveillance identify and mitigate
potential threats. Our focus on updating security methodologies and
enhancing collaboration with stakeholders ensures that physical
security measures are practical and adaptive. WAPA collaborates closely
with industry and agency counterparts on threat information, response
and recovery planning, and threat mitigation strategies for both
physical and cybersecurity.
Recovery is an integral component of resilience and ensuring
operations are put back into place in the most safe and timely manner
possible. WAPA has shared over the years its continuing concern
regarding the potential for multiple, simultaneous or cascading
failures of bulk electric components on the system due to an attack or
series of attacks. We have evaluated and continue to evaluate
strategies for establishing or participating in reserves of high
voltage transformers and likewise continue to encourage the public, the
industry and Congress to reprioritize this important issue.

Wildfire Prevention and Vegetation Management: Addressing
environmental challenges, particularly wildfires, is paramount, given
their frequency and severity in the regions we serve. WAPA's Integrated
Vegetation Management (IVM) Program is essential for reducing
vegetation around transmission lines and mitigating wildfire risks.
WAPA's proactive approach includes updating wildfire mitigation plans
annually, incorporating the latest technologies and best practices to
enhance preparedness and response capabilities.
Collaborations with local stakeholders and agencies play a vital
role in the effectiveness of wildfire mitigation strategies. These
partnerships are crucial for ensuring the safety and operational
stability of the transmission network and protecting the communities
that depend on it.
As WAPA continues to navigate the complexities of maintaining a
secure and reliable energy infrastructure, our commitment to safety and
security remains unwavering. Through continuous improvement, advanced
technology, and strategic partnerships, we are dedicated to upholding
the highest safety and security standards to protect infrastructure and
the communities we serve. Our ongoing efforts in cybersecurity,
physical security, and wildfire risk management are integral to the
mission and fundamental to the trust placed in WAPA by customers and
the 40 million people we serve.

ASSET MANAGEMENT

WAPA's Asset Management (AM) Program supports the reliable and
efficient delivery of power. This program integrates comprehensive
field knowledge with systematic criticality assessments to guide risk-
based, data-driven capital planning and maintenance decisions. Our
strategic approach is designed to optimize the management of WAPA's
most crucial assets, ensuring that our operations continue to meet high
standards of reliability and efficiency.
The primary goals of our Asset Management Program include improving
asset management practices aligned with ISO 55001 standards, increasing
the valuation of our assets, and prioritizing investments and
operational activities. This comprehensive strategy is crucial for
effectively communicating asset-related information to diverse internal
groups and stakeholders, ensuring all parties are informed and engaged
in our processes.
Under the Asset Management Program, WAPA successfully completed its
seventh annual asset risk assessment, focusing on key components such
as transformers and breakers. Additionally, we continued condition-
based health analytics for our transmission lines. These initiatives
were bolstered by the adoption of new IT tools, which has improved our
data collection and analysis processes, thereby enhancing transparency
and providing deeper insights into asset conditions.

Supply Chain Management and Security: The Supply Chain Risk
Management (SCRM) program is integral to WAPA's cybersecurity and
procurement strategies, especially when paired with federal initiatives
and standards such as Executive Order 14028 and NERC CIP-013. Our
actions have included comprehensive vendor assessments and
incorporating robust SCRM standards into operations, enhancing the
security and reliability of WAPA's technology and supply chains.
Looking to the future, the AM Program is poised for further growth
and refinement. In FY2024, WAPA will perform a maturity assessment, a
crucial step in the journey to align WAPA practices with industry best
practices and prepare for future technological trends. This proactive
approach is not just a strategy, but a necessity in a rapidly evolving
energy environment. It is this forward-thinking mindset that will
continue to maintain and advance WAPA's operational capabilities.

FY 2025 BUDGET REQUEST

WAPA's success and operations are supported through management of
three program and financing accounts: Construction, Rehabilitation,
Operation, and Maintenance (CROM); Falcon and Amistad Operating and
Maintenance Fund; and the Colorado River Basins Power Marketing Fund.
Only CROM and Falcon and Amistad program and financing accounts request
funds from appropriations.
CROM is the largest account and includes four components:
Construction and Rehabilitation (C&R); Operation and Maintenance (O&M);
Purchase Power and Wheeling (PPW); and Program Direction (PD). C&R
results in replacement, upgrade, and modernization of the electrical
system infrastructure with an eye towards continued reliability,
improved connectivity, and increased adaptability to the grid.
For FY 2025, WAPA requests a total budget authority of $1.787
billion, predominantly sustained through offsetting collections and
alternative financing arrangements, which comprise 94% of the total
funding. The budget supports critical operations, maintenance, and
enhancements across WAPA's extensive transmission system and associated
infrastructure.

Appropriations and Funding: WAPA's Construction, Rehabilitation,
Operation, and Maintenance (CROM) require a significant portion of the
budget, totaling $1.178 billion, with $101 million (approximately 6% of
total mission costs) coming from direct appropriations. The majority of
CROM funding is sourced from offsetting collections ($777 million) and
alternative financing ($301 million).

Operational Increases: The projected increase in Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) funding is crucial for addressing routine and
strategic infrastructure needs across WAPA's transmission network. A
significant portion of this increase--approximately $32 million--is
allocated specifically for the replacement and upgrading of
transmission lines, which includes the reconductoring of the DSW Gila
Knob 161-KV and the RMR Alcova-Casper North/South lines. These upgrades
are essential for improving reliability and safety within the network.
The Gila Knob project will employ both conventional and advanced high-
temperature low sag conductors, enhancing the line's ampacity and
resilience to high temperatures without compromising its structural
integrity. Additionally, this project includes replacing existing wood
structures with light-duty steel H-frames over 15 miles and steel
monopoles over five miles. This hardens the infrastructure against
climate-induced turbulent weather and consolidates transmission paths
to free up land and minimize environmental impact.

Stable Construction and Rehabilitation Funding: The Construction
and Rehabilitation (C&R) budget remains static at $0, reflecting no
projects classified under this category for FY 2025.

Program Direction and Support: WAPA's Program Direction (PD)
funding has risen by $25 million from $295 million in FY 2024 to $320
million in FY 2025, maintaining a workforce of 1,521 full-time
equivalents. This increase supports essential workforce expenses
related to the operation, maintenance, construction, IT, and physical
security of WAPA's high-voltage transmission system, including
compensation for sophisticated control systems like SCADA. These
systems are crucial for real-time operational management and ensuring
grid reliability.

Purchase Power and Wheeling Adjustments: The Purchase Power and
Wheeling (PPW) budget is adjusted to $688.3 million, down from $715.8
million in FY 2024, influenced by reservoir levels and weather impacts.

CRSP Basin Fund: WAPA's FY2025 budget request for the Colorado
River Basins Power Marketing Fund account is estimated at $584 million
with no request from appropriations, funded instead through offsetting
collections. CRSP carries out WAPA's mission in Arizona, Utah,
Colorado, New Mexico, Nevada, Wyoming and Texas, selling about 5,300
gigawatt hours to cities and towns, rural electric cooperatives, Native
American tribes, irrigation districts and federal and state agencies.
WAPA works with sister agencies, such as the Department of the
Interior's Bureau of Reclamation, and other stakeholders, to address
challenges in the basin while supplying critical power to customers. As
CRSP does not rely on separate appropriations, the basin fund is an
essential component of the success of the Colorado River Storage
Project for both WAPA and Reclamation.

CHALLENGES AND RISK MANAGEMENT

Financial Sustainability: The reliance on a blend of offsetting
collections and alternative financing highlights WAPA's innovative
approach to funding but also underscores the vulnerability to
fluctuating market conditions and hydrological changes.

Infrastructure and Service Reliability: With aging infrastructure
and escalating supply chain costs and severe weather events, WAPA is
challenged to maintain service reliability and compliance with
regulatory standards without sufficient capital funding.

Strategic Investments: The budget supports strategic investments in
infrastructure resilience and cyber and physical security enhancements
crucial for protecting the grid against emerging threats.

CLOSING STATEMENT

Thank you for the opportunity to present the FY 2025 budget and
operational priorities for WAPA. WAPA is at a critical juncture, facing
both challenges and opportunities as we strive to maintain the
reliability and affordability of our power and transmission services
across the Western United States. Our commitment is to continue
enhancing our infrastructure resilience, advancing technological
innovation, and ensuring the security of our energy systems against
physical and cyber threats. The agency continues to work with Congress,
customers, and other stakeholders to secure the necessary support to
effectively fulfill its mission.
Thank you again for your trust and support. I look forward to our
continued partnership in achieving these vital goals, and I am ready to
address any further questions you might have.

Appendix 1

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Administrator Wech
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MIKE WECH, ADMINISTRATOR, SOUTH-
WESTERN POWER ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY, TULSA, OKLAHOMA

Mr. Wech. Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I
am Mike Wech, Administrator of the Southwestern Power
Administration. Thank you for the opportunity to be here today.
Since 1943, Southwestern has marketed and delivered Federal
hydropower and energy in our region from 24 U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers multi-purpose projects. With a combined capacity of
2.2 gigawatts and an average annual energy of 5,000 gigawatt
hours, Southwestern collects about $200 million a year in
revenue. Our staff works from offices in Arkansas, Missouri,
and Oklahoma. We own and operate about 1,400 miles of high
voltage transmission line, 26 substations, and 46 communication
sites that support regional and national energy security. The
customers we serve are not-for-profit municipalities, electric
cooperatives, and military installations that depend on Federal
hydropower and the energy received from Southwestern to serve
over 10 million electric consumers in our area of the country.
Our system of reservoirs is almost entirely dependent upon
rainfall. Operations are regularly impacted by rain events, and
we work with other water users so that we can continue to meet
the power needs of our customers under a variety of water
conditions. In some cases we have to purchase power so that we
can meet our obligations to our customers and the consumers
that they serve. To fund those purchases, we have historically
relied on our congressional authority to use our receipts over
the long term. Prior-year balances have been available to
Southwestern so that we are financially prepared and able to
achieve rate stability.
Southwestern's program is cost-based, funded by our
ratepayers. We perform power repayment studies annually to
review the projected and actual costs of operating our business
to assure that sufficient revenues are being collected to repay
those costs, along with the principal and interest on the
Federal investment. Southwestern remains cost conscious, always
seeking ways to maximize value amidst rising costs.
At the request of our customers, Southwestern is developing
a program to equitably distribute renewable energy
certificates, or RECs, to its customers based on each megawatt
hour of Federal energy generated.
We also continue to invest in our generating assets through
our customer funding initiative. To date, over $1.2 billion in
funding has been approved by our customers, who know that this
kind of investment is crucial to keeping Federal hydropower
reliable. Southwestern has consistently proven that dependable
Federal assets contribute to the reliability of the regional
electrical grid. During recent winter storms, Southwestern
provided voltage support, assisted with transmission congestion
relief, and worked with other stakeholders to ensure that the
lights stayed on.
As part of the regional grid, Southwestern participates in
strategic planning and other initiatives. Our decades-long
participation in the Southwest Power Pool promotes cooperation
amongst regional stakeholders, while our participation in the
Midcontinent Independent System Operator allows options to
purchase power when needed, and will enable us to directly
market two projects into MISO later this year.
From an agency perspective, we continue to engage in
strategic planning, with safety as our No. 1 goal. We were
honored to be recognized once again this year with the Safety
Award of Excellence from the American Public Power Association.
This year's strategic planning effort, Set to Thrive in 2025,
incorporates safety, workforce excellence, operational
excellence, collaborative partnering, and evolving services.
Southwestern is committed to these strategic goals and to our
mission of providing Federal hydropower that benefits our
customers, regional communities, and the nation.
Southwestern's Fiscal Year 2025 request for appropriations
is $11.44 million, and includes offsetting collection
authorities and alternative financing, both of which are
essential to Southwestern accomplishing its mission through
minimal congressional appropriations.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I would be
pleased to address any questions that you or members of the
Subcommittee may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Wech follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mike Wech, Administrator, Southwestern Power
Administration, U.S. Department of Energy

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to share information about the FY 2025 budget of
Southwestern Power Administration (Southwestern).
Southwestern has marketed and delivered Federal hydropower since
1943. Our service territory includes Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana,
Missouri, Oklahoma, and Texas, and customers in these states depend on
Federal hydropower to keep their economies strong and help their
constituents thrive. Southwestern is proud to support the farms,
businesses, and factories in these areas, and I look forward to sharing
with you today an overview of our program and some of the current
initiatives we are working on that will allow us to continue our
service in the future.

SOUTHWESTERN PROFILE

Southwestern markets and delivers hydroelectric power from 24 U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) multi-purpose dams with a combined
capacity of 2,243 megawatts (MW). On average, Southwestern markets
5,600,000 MW-hours of energy annually, with revenue of approximately
$200 million per year.
The energy produced at the hydroelectric power plants flows mainly
over transmission assets owned by Southwestern. Our 1,381 miles of
high-voltage transmission lines, 26 substations and switching stations,
and a communications system that includes digital microwave, VHF radio,
and fiber optic communications are an integral part of the regional
electrical grid.
We have a staff of approximately 180 full-time equivalent Federal
employees and approximately 50 contractors who work out of offices in
Gore, Oklahoma; Jonesboro, Arkansas; Nixa, Missouri; Springfield,
Missouri; and Tulsa, Oklahoma. Around-the-clock power scheduling and
dispatching are conducted by staff in Southwestern's Nixa and
Springfield Operations Centers.
Southwestern employees are dedicated professionals, conscientious
in ensuring that costs are kept to a minimum. They understand that
every dollar Southwestern receives in revenue is dedicated to the
repayment of the Nation's investment, with interest, in our program,
and they also understand that Southwestern's ratepayers are the ones
footing the bill.

SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS

Southwestern often describes its system of 24 reservoirs as
``hydro-only,'' meaning that those reservoirs are almost entirely
dependent on rainfall. In general, when it rains and inflows into the
reservoirs and river channels are sufficient, hydropower generation
flourishes; when it does not rain, hydropower generation suffers.
Operations are regularly impacted by the rainfall we receive in our
region, both too little and too much, and we work with other water
users so that we can continue to meet the power needs of our customers
under a variety of water conditions.
In some cases, due to drought, downstream flooding, operational
restrictions, or other contributing factors, Southwestern's contractual
obligations to provide power exceed the amount of hydropower that is
available. Southwestern must continually balance Federal hydropower
needs against the needs of other water users and current energy market
conditions when determining whether to purchase power to meet
contractual obligations.

FUNDING

Power purchases have historically been funded by Southwestern
through Congressional authority to use our receipts over the long-
term--across good water years and bad. Prior year balances have been
available to Southwestern so that we are financially prepared and able
to achieve rate stability for our customers. After five years of
decreased funding, in FY 2023 and FY 2024 we received our full
offsetting collections authority request for purchase power and
wheeling, and the President's FY 2025 Budget requests a continuation of
this authority that is critical to operating our program according to
sound business principles.
Southwestern's program is funded by authority to use receipts,
alternative financing, and other authorities approved by Congress,
including appropriations, which traditionally have represented only
about 6% of Southwestern's total program. Generally, the more funding
flexibility we have, the more efficiently we can operate our business
and provide a high-value product to our customers.

RATES AND REPAYMENT

Southwestern's program is cost-based, funded by our ratepayers. We
perform Power Repayment Studies annually to review the projected and
actual costs of operating our business to assure that sufficient
revenues are being collected to repay those costs, along with the
principal and interest on the Federal investment.
Power Repayment Studies, conducted in 2023, indicate the need for
more revenue across all three of our rate systems to meet repayment
obligations due to rising cost estimates for future transmission and
hydropower infrastructure investments, elevated interest rates, and
increased costs for operations and maintenance.
We are in the process of developing new rate schedules to reflect
the needed revenue increase and have extended our current rate
schedules through September 30, 2024. We have concluded the public
comment period for one of our rate systems, and expect to open the
public comment period for the additional rate systems within the month.
Southwestern remains cost conscious always, seeking ways to
maximize value amidst rising costs. Our support of the regional
electrical grid during recent winter weather events is a good example
of the value of Federal hydropower. To put it simply, hydropower showed
up to help keep the lights on during Winter Storm Uri in 2021, during
Winter Storm Elliott in 2023, and, most recently, in January of this
year during Winter Storm Heather. We were able to provide voltage
support, assist with transmission congestion relief, and worked with
the Regional Transmission Organizations to ensure the bulk transmission
system remained reliable during these periods.

INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT

To keep hydropower available, the generating plants must be ready
to operate. The year 2024 marks the silver anniversary--25 years--of
Southwestern's customer funding program. Since 1999, through a
memorandum of agreement (MOA) among Southwestern, its customers, and
the Corps, we have provided funding to keep the turbines spinning
without the need for annual appropriations. To date, over $1.2 billion
in funding has been approved by our customers for use in replacing
aging, obsolete, and failing equipment at the Corps hydroelectric power
plants. This kind of investment is crucial to keeping Federal
hydropower viable, and customers have steadfastly supported this effort
since the beginning.

SAFETY

Southwestern is in many respects a typical electric utility. As
such, we sell and deliver power, develop rates to recover our costs,
and maintain our assets so that the lights stay on, all the while
maintaining safe operating procedures and practices.
In fact, this is the second year in a row Southwestern was
recognized for its safe operating practices. In March 2024,
Southwestern was awarded a Safety Award of Excellence from the American
Public Power Association (APPA). APPA bestows the award based on
incident-free records and the overall state of the safety programs and
culture, elements that Southwestern takes great pride in.

REGIONAL TRANSMISSION PLANNING

Southwestern is taking part in studies under the DOE Grid
Deployment Office for interconnections between Regional Transmission
Organizations to bolster the electric infrastructure in our region.
These studies involve the use of Southwestern's facilities as part of
Southwest Power Pool (SPP), and could result in future interconnections
between SPP and the Midcontinent Independent System Operator (MISO),
and between SPP and the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT).
Interconnections of this magnitude have the potential of strengthening
the backbone of the Nation's economic, energy, and national security
infrastructure.

RENEWABLE ENERGY CERTIFICATES

It is often said that Federal hydropower is one of the original
renewable energy sources in the Nation, and our customers have been
seeking the benefits that go along with purchasing this renewable
energy from Southwestern. To that end, Southwestern is developing a
program to equitably distribute Renewable Energy Certificates--or
RECs--to its customers based on each MWh of Federal Energy generated.
This distribution of RECs will allow our customers to support their
respective state's renewable energy goals, provide the opportunity to
offset their carbon footprint and support clean energy, and build
stronger relationships within their communities.
I want to commend my colleagues at Southeastern Power
Administration for their expertise implementing a successful REC
program and for sharing their experience so that Southwestern can begin
distributing RECs to our customers.

MARKET PARTICIPATION IN MISO

Southwestern registered as a Market Participant in MISO in June
2021 in response to a need for Southwestern to better position itself
to align with electric industry initiatives and to ensure, as drought
and hydrological challenges occur, that Southwestern has additional
options to purchase power. As an extension of that effort, we will
begin directly marketing two Corps-owned projects in Arkansas into
MISO, with DeGray--beginning June 1, 2024, and Blakely Mountain
beginning June 1, 2025
Benefits of this effort will include optimizing these generation
resources to provide maximum value for our customers while reducing our
capacity replacement costs due to long term outages for rehabilitation
and infrastructure investment.

STRATEGIC PLANNING EFFORTS

Southwestern is constantly working to provide the best possible
product for our customers while also providing the best possible work
environment and strategic direction for our organization. To that end,
Southwestern has implemented our latest Strategic Planning Effort--Set
to Thrive in 2025. The revised strategic plan incorporates elements to
achieve success and clear direction in the following areas: Workforce
Excellence, Operational Excellence, Collaborative Partnering, and
Evolving Services.

BUDGET HIGHLIGHTS

Southwestern's FY 2025 request for appropriations is $11.44
million. The FY 2025 budget request also includes offsetting collection
authorities, including the up-to request of $80 million for purchase
power and wheeling. The use of offsetting collection authorities as
well as alternative financing are essential to Southwestern
accomplishing its mission with minimal Congressional appropriations.

CONCLUSION

Southwestern remains committed to our core values and strategic
direction. We strive for workforce and operational excellence, a safe
and healthy workplace, increased value for our customers, and rate
stability. We also look forward to opportunities to continue investing
in the Nation's infrastructure and exploring ways that we can be a part
of strengthening grid resiliency and supporting the Nation's energy
security.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I would be pleased to
address any questions that you or the Members of the Subcommittee may
have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Mike Wech, Administrator,
Southwestern Power Administration

Mr. Wech did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In November, you testified before this committee at a
legislative hearing on H.R. 4219, the Southwestern Power Administration
Revolving Fund, which would create a self-financed fund through
Southwestern's power sales receipts. In your testimony, you said that
the Administration did not have a position at that time. Do you have a
position now? Are SWPA's customers united in wanting this legislation
to advance?

Question 2. In December, the USACE shut down power production at
Narrows Dam in my district in order to repair its trash racks.
Approximately how much power does Narrows produce? Do you have an
estimated timeline for when the repairs will be made so power can be
restored?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Administrator Hobbs
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF VIRGIL HOBBS, ADMINISTRATOR AND CEO,
SOUTHEASTERN POWER  ADMINISTRATION,  DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY, ELBERTON, GEORGIA

Mr. Hobbs. Subcommittee Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Committee, I am Virgil Hobbs. I am
the Southeastern Power Administrator. I appreciate the
opportunity to share current program accomplishments, upcoming
initiatives, and our Fiscal Year 2025 budget request.
Southeastern's mission is to market and deliver Federal
hydroelectric power at the lowest possible cost, consistent
with sound business principles, to public bodies and
cooperatives in accordance with the Flood Control Act of 1944.
Southeastern's 44 full-time employees market approximately
3,400 megawatts of power produced at 22 multi-purpose projects
operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The projects are
separated into four marketing systems and serve the 11 states
of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kentucky, Mississippi,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West
Virginia.
In Fiscal Year 2023, Southeastern sold nearly 7\1/2\
billion kilowatt hours of energy to 471 wholesale customers,
with revenue totaling $307 million. Over 12 million consumers
benefit from Southeastern's Federal hydropower. Southeastern
coordinates the operation of these Federal carbon-free
generation assets from our office and dispatch centers in rural
Elberton, Georgia. Southeastern does not own transmission
facilities, but delivers allocation of Federal hydropower
through lines and substations operated by neighboring
utilities. Power sales revenue is used by Southeastern to
compensate transmission service providers through long-term
energy wheeling contracts.
Federal hydropower must remain a competitive and viable
component to our customers' energy portfolios. Regional energy
variables, including the reduction of baseload coal generation,
new nuclear reactors connected to the local grid, fluctuations
in natural gas prices, and intermittent alternative renewable
resources have made affordable, reliable Federal hydropower
vitally essential to our customers.
Southeastern's ability to consistently deliver needed
energy, as we did during Winter Storm Heather this past
January, has earned high praise and appreciation from our
customers.
The transmission service provider at the Jim Woodruff
Project notified Southeastern in 2022 of their intent to
terminate a vintage contract dated back to 1957, a bundled
transmission arrangement where deficient stream flow energy was
purchased from, and excess Federal hydropower was sold to, an
investor-owned utility. Over the last 2 years, Southeastern
formalized and implemented a power marketing policy to address
energy delivery decisions associated with this single project
electrical system, and in April began delivering all available
power to only public power customers in Florida.
Efforts to provide Renewable Energy Certificates, or RECs,
associated with Southeastern Federal hydropower generation
began in 2019. Potentially, Southeastern can create 6 million
REC each year across all of Southeastern's marketed systems.
Since inception, 25 million RECs have been verified as
generated, and 15 million RECs have been enthusiastically
distributed to our Federal power customers, having purchased
the accompanying energy. Southeastern's customers are extremely
grateful to be accessing this intrinsic additional economic
benefit linked to the Federal hydropower.
The Water Resources Development Act of 1996 and 2000
enables hydropower customers to provide funding to improve
generation infrastructure. Since 2004, at the direction of our
customers, Southeastern has transferred $872 million of energy
and capacity sale receipts to the Corps for hydropower
equipment replacements.
Southeastern's Kerr-Philpott system customers are excited
to be rehabilitating the smallest Federal hydropower plant,
Philpott, by authorizing $23 million to increase the station's
2-generator output from 14 megawatts, nearly 30 percent, to 20
megawatts. The contractor has completed both generator rewinds,
is fabricating two new turbines, and will finish ahead of
schedule.
Southeastern has begun implementing a 4-year strategic
plan, with initiatives dedicated to employee engagement,
relationship enhancement, and organizational modernization.
This year, Southeastern petitioned personnel to form small,
comfortable focus groups to share perspectives and office
improvement ideas. Senior leadership will hear directly from
our most valuable asset, our employees, to better the work
experience at Southeastern.
The future success of hydropower relies heavily on our
ability to find solutions to complex challenges threatening the
program through higher costs and reduced generation. These
critical issues are discussed routinely with customers and the
Corps at biannual partnering meetings.
Southeastern's Fiscal Year 2025 operating budget request is
a net zero appropriation of $9 million for program direction
expenses and $90 million for purchased power and wheeling
costs, which are completely reimbursed by power sales
collections.
March 21, 2025 marks Southeastern's 75th anniversary of
proudly delivering Federal carbon-free hydroelectric power in
an energetic energy environment.
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to submit this
testimony and highlight the extraordinary accomplishments of
Southeastern's civil servants.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Hobbs follows:]

Prepared Statement of Virgil G. Hobbs III, Administrator & Chief
Executive, Southeastern Power Administration, U.S. Department of Energy

Subcommittee Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of
the Committee, I am Virgil Hobbs, Administrator of the Southeastern
Power Administration (Southeastern). I appreciate the opportunity to
share the Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 budget request for Southeastern,
including current program issues, recent agency accomplishments and
upcoming activity.

Southeastern Power Administration Profile

Southeastern's mission is to market and deliver Federal
hydroelectric power at the lowest possible cost, consistent with sound
business principles, to public bodies and cooperatives in accordance
with Section 5 of the Flood Control Act of 1944 (16 U.S.C. 825s).
With a staff of 44 full-time employees, Southeastern markets
approximately 3400 megawatts of power produced at 22 multipurpose
projects, operated and maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(Corps). The projects are separated into four marketing systems and
serve an eleven-state area, including Alabama, Florida, Georgia,
Illinois, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. Each marketed electrical system
is integrated hydraulically and financially with separate cost-based
power rates and repayment schedules. In FY 2023, Southeastern sold
nearly seven and a half billion kilowatt-hours of energy to 471
wholesale customers with revenue totaling $307 million. Southeastern's
Federal hydropower extends to over 12 million residential and
industrial consumers.
Southeastern coordinates the operation of these Federal carbon free
generation assets from our dispatch centers in rural Elberton, Georgia.
We use customer determined load schedules and the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation's (NERC) power balancing control
performance criteria, while complying with the Corps' water management
and environmental requirements.
Southeastern does not own any transmission facilities but delivers
allocations of Federal power through transmission lines and substations
owned and operated by neighboring utilities. Electric power sales
revenue is used by Southeastern to compensate these transmission
service providers through long-term energy Purchasing Power and
Wheeling contracts.
Rates charged to our wholesale customers recover all of
Southeastern's and the Corps' power related costs. Southeastern's rate
schedules are designed to recoup expenses, on an annual basis, for
operations, maintenance, purchased power, transmission, and interest.
Rates also recover infrastructure improvement investments which are
capitalized over an appropriate number of years.
Southeastern's mission is achieved in a manner promoting the
maintenance and upgrade of our region's Federal energy infrastructure.
These efforts help to ensure reliable and efficient delivery of Federal
carbon free hydroelectric power, which is an integral part of the
Nation's overall security and electric energy supply.

Federal Hydropower Program in Evolving Energy Markets

Southeastern is committed to the mission detailed in our governing
law, the Flood Control Act of 1944, to employ sound business principles
in delivering power to our customers at the lowest possible rates.
Federal hydropower must remain a competitive and viable component of
the customer's energy resource portfolios to support the region as the
energy landscape in the Southeast evolves. Energy variables including
the reduction of base load coal generation, new nuclear reactors
connected to the local grid, fluctuations in natural gas prices and
intermittent alternative renewable resources have made affordable,
reliable Federal hydropower vitally essential to our customers.
Southeastern's ability to consistently deliver energy, such as through
Winter Storm Heather in January 2024, has earned high praise and
appreciation from our consumers.
The Southeastern Energy Exchange Market (SEEM) was established in
the Fall of 2022 as a bilateral energy trading platform and uses an
algorithm to match power buyers and sellers while further optimizing
available generation and transmission assets. As a cost-free
participant in SEEM, Southeastern will lower replacement and pumping
energy purchase price by expanding the pool of potential power
providers. Southeastern will pass on savings achieved by participation
in SEEM to our Federal power customers.

Jim Woodruff Power Marketing Policy

The transmission service provider at the Jim Woodruff project
notified Southeastern in 2022 of their intent to terminate a 66-year-
old interchange agreement in favor of modern Open Access Transmission
Tariff service. The original 1957 contract was a bundled arrangement
where deficient stream flow energy was purchased from, and excess
Federal hydropower was sold to, an investor-owned utility. Southeastern
formalized and implemented a power marketing policy to address
generation capacity and energy delivery decisions associated with this
single project, run-of-the-river electrical system and has begun
delivering all available power to only public and cooperative power
customers in the central panhandle Florida. No changes in stream flow
operations or to the amount and timing of energy production was
required to initiate the policy.

Renewable Energy Certificates

Efforts to provide Renewable Energy Certificates (REC) associated
with Southeastern's Federal hydropower generation began in 2019 and REC
distributions are enthusiastically proceeding. The potential REC volume
is approximately six million per year across all four of Southeastern's
marketed systems. Since program inception, over 25 million RECs have
been verified as generated and 15 million RECs have been distributed to
our Federal power customers having purchased the associated energy.
Southeastern's customers are extremely grateful to be accessing this
intrinsic additional economic benefit linked to Federal hydropower.

Federal Hydropower Infrastructure Investment

The Water Resources Development Act of 1996 section 216, as amended
by section 212 of the Water Resources Development Act of 2000 (33
U.S.C. 2321a), enables hydropower customers to provide the Corps
funding to improve generation infrastructure reliability and
capability. Since 2004, at the direction of our customers, Southeastern
has transferred $872 million of energy and capacity sale receipts to
accomplish hydropower equipment replacements and renewals.
In 2012, Southeastern's Cumberland System customers agreed to fund
$1.2 billion of planned rehabilitations of all 28 generation assets
housed in the nine hydroelectric facilities operated by the Corps'
Nashville District. With three units complete, eight more generators
and seven turbines at the Barkley and Old Hickory projects are being
replaced to improve reliability and increase maximum energy output.
Perpetuating the cleanness and greenness of hydropower, Cumberland
power customers also authorized $24 million to commission a dissolved
oxygen injection system upstream of the Wolf Creek project to
reestablish year-round full power output by providing downstream fish
friendly habitat.
Southeastern's Kerr-Philpott System customers are excited to be
rehabilitating the smallest Federal hydropower plant, Philpott, by
authorizing $23 million to increase the station's output. Located in
southwestern Virginia and operated by the Corps' Wilmington District,
Philpott is a 14 megawatt two generator facility which will be upgraded
nearly 30% to 20 megawatts! The contractor has completed both generator
stator rewinds, is fabricating two new turbines, is well ahead of
schedule and will be finished before the local utility can complete the
transmission line replacement.

Upcoming Rate Developments

Southeastern formulates and proposes marketed power system rates
through a public process and places rates into effect on an interim
basis. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) confirms all of
Southeastern's rates on a final basis for a five-year term. Annual
adjustments, based on actual operational results and infrastructure
investment placed into service, enable rates to respond accordingly
within the term to assure proper repayment. Southeastern reviews all
marketed system rates annually to ensure revenue is adequate to meet
repayment obligations. In 2025, Southeastern will propose new rates for
the Cumberland and Kerr-Philpott Systems.

Workplace Transformation Response

Southeastern ensures available Federal power is delivered to the
grid for the benefit of regional public customers. Southeastern is
determined to accomplish this mission with shared vision and values.
Southeastern is implementing a 2025-2029 Strategic Plan with
initiatives dedicated to Employee Engagement, Relationship Enhancement,
and Organizational Modernization. This year, Southeastern petitioned
personnel to form small, voluntary and comfortable focus groups,
moderated by our Human Resource Business Partner, to share perspectives
and office improvement ideas. Senior leadership will hear directly from
our most valuable asset, our employees, to better the work experience
at Southeastern.

Customer and Federal Partner Relationship

Southeastern maintains strong cooperative working relationships
with our customers and the Corps. Future success of the Federal
hydropower program in the southeast relies heavily on the success of
those relationships and our ability to find solutions to complex
challenges threating the program through higher costs and reduced
generation capability. Financial and operational issues are discussed
at the Southeastern Federal Power Alliance and Team Cumberland biannual
meetings.
The Southeastern Federal Power Alliance was established in 1991 and
includes representatives from Southeastern, the Corps' South Atlantic
Division and Southeastern's customers served by the Georgia-Alabama-
South Carolina, Kerr-Philpott and Jim Woodruff Systems. Team Cumberland
was formed in 1992 and includes representatives from Southeastern, the
Corps' Great Lakes and Ohio River Division and Southeastern's
Cumberland System customers, which are located both inside and outside
the Tennessee Valley Authority's area of operation.
Over the past seven and a half years, fellow Administrators and I
have met with Corps Commanding Generals to discuss topics critical to
the sustainability of our jointly managed Federal Hydroelectric Power
Program. Areas identified where changes can reap benefits include
infrastructure acquisition strategies, cost accounting, water storage
management, operations and maintenance staffing efficiencies and common
communication plans.

Southeastern's Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request

Southeastern's FY 2025 operating budget request of approximately
$98.9 million results in a net appropriation of $0 (Attachment 1). The
FY 2025 budget request provides $9.1 million for Program Direction
expenses, which are completely offset by collections for these annual
expenses and use of prior year balances, and $89.8 million for Purchase
Power and Wheeling costs, which are entirely supported with offsetting
collections and net billing. Southeastern contracts with interconnected
utilities for transmission service to deliver Federal power to
customers at an estimated annual cost of $45 million. In recent years,
dependent on hydrology and energy market volatility, Southeastern's
purchases has varied between $4 million and $85 million for replacement
energy and pumped storage energy to fulfil Federal power customer
contracts. The use of offsetting collections and net billing enables
Southeastern to operate in a business fashion by allowing
Southeastern's revenues to pay for purchase power and transmission
costs rather than relying on appropriations. No new program starts are
planned in this FY 2025 Budget Request.
Fiscal Year 2025 marks Southeastern's 75th anniversary of proudly
delivering Federal carbon free hydroelectric power in an energetic
electric energy environment at the lowest possible cost, consistent
with sound business principles. Thank you for the opportunity to submit
this testimony.

Attachment 1

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, and I thank the witnesses for their
testimony. We will now move to Member questions. Each Member
will have 5 minutes.
Congressman Graves, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. I appreciate your testimony.
Dr. Spinrad, I want to thank you for allocating additional
funds to red snapper research last year. I do appreciate that,
and I think it is critically important that we continue working
to improve the data to where we can more accurately and more
sustainably manage the fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico.
And as we know, the data that the five Gulf states is
collecting is more accurate, I also want to thank you for the
recalibration that was announced on Monday. I believe that was
for Florida, Mississippi, and Alabama. It is progress. But as
we both know, we still have a long way to go.
Lastly on this topic, I just want to say that we continue
to have a great deal of frustration, as you and I have
discussed in the past, with the lack of integration of the
great red snapper count, which is the most robust, the most
accurate assessment of the stock in the Gulf of Mexico, and
NOAA refusing to actually incorporate that into management
strategies. But let me say it again, thank you for working with
the Gulf Council, the Commission, and the states.
Let me pivot to the North Atlantic right whale issue. We
had been asking for a while for NOAA to engage some of the
stakeholders, some of the folks with different technology, and
it appeared that we were moving in the right direction when
NOAA actually held a workshop with some of the folks that had
technology that, for example, is being used in Canada to avoid
strikes. But I couldn't help but feel that that was really
disingenuous when the same exact day that workshop occurred
NOAA submitted the rule to OIRA for review.
How could you all possibly have taken into consideration
anything that was presented in the workshop, if you are turning
over your proposed rule to OIRA the same day?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for the question, Congressman, and I
share the concerns.
First of all, thank you for your complimentary comments
with respect to red snapper management. I think we have made a
lot of progress there. I point out my boss just received today
the letter from a bipartisan collection of roughly two dozen
Members who shared the sentiments with respect to the progress
we have made on red snapper.
On the North Atlantic right whale, things are changing
considerably. And our responsibilities, as reflected in both
the Endangered Species Act and the Marine Mammal Protection
Act, have required us to continue to have the dialogue, as well
as taking into account the latest and most appropriate science
and economic analysis, especially in light of the fact that we
have, since 1999, seen 29 lethal vessel strikes. Just this
year, we have seen one entanglement and three vessel strikes
off the East Coast, dictating that we move with some alacrity.
We provide the best analysis possible, and we incorporate
all of the input that we have received. And I assure you that
all of the input that we received was included in what we have
now provided to OIRA under----
Mr. Graves. Dr. Spinrad, I appreciate that, but let's be
honest. It is impossible for NOAA to have incorporated what you
received, what you learned at a workshop the same day that you
turned over a rule to OIRA, so that was impossible. And let's
be clear there.
Let me just ask you, what can we actually expect to see in
a final rule? I think everyone here shares the objective of
ensuring the whale's sustainability, but also not using tools
that are going to be ineffective and create safety issues when
they are more effective technologies available such as are
being deployed by the Canadians.
Dr. Spinrad. I assure you we are having dialogue with the
Canadians. We are also having dialogue with our partners in
other Federal agencies who have technological approaches.
Like I say, the final rule is with OIRA right now. I cannot
give an update on the timeline. I suggest that you ask----
Mr. Graves. If you could submit something back to the
Committee on the timeline, I would appreciate it, and what we
can expect to see.
Secondly, on the Rice's whale in the Gulf of Mexico, I know
that NOAA is moving in a direction of finalizing a rule there,
as well. There are numerous studies that directly conflict with
the outcomes or the conclusions that NOAA has reached. Can you
give me a commitment that NOAA will review this alternative
data before you submit a final rule?
Dr. Spinrad. First of all, the Rice's whale, as you know,
is limited to the Gulf of Mexico. We are committed to using the
best available science. If you have science that you believe is
not being incorporated, I will tell you we are using whatever
we receive as recently as, I would add, just a month ago, when
we received some of the very first images of Rice's whale that
are being incorporated. So, we are welcoming the inclusion of
additional scientific information.
Mr. Graves. Dr. Spinrad, we have had thousands of hours of
acoustic monitoring off the coast of Louisiana. You haven't
detected a single whale there, yet your zone is right off the
coast of Louisiana.
Dr. Spinrad. But we are seeing them with aerial surveys.
Mr. Graves. I am not the smartest guy here, but that
doesn't look like you are incorporating data or taking proper
science into consideration.
Mr. Chairman, I apologize. I am out of time and yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman
Napolitano for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Commissioner Touton, the Bureau has been
working to implement the funding secured under our
infrastructure law for large-scale water recycling projects.
But one investment is, frankly, not enough. One-time investment
is, frankly, not enough. There must be continuous funding to
grow, construct, maintain, and operate these facilities, which
is why I am proud to introduce the Large-Scale Water Recycling
Reauthorization and Investment Act to reauthorize funding for
water recycling and reuse projects in the West.
It is imperative that we work to address climate change now
to protect our water supplies and increase the presence of
regional large-scale water projects. Could you speak how the
Bureau is prioritizing water recycling on the 2025 budget?
Ms. Touton. I would be pleased to, Congresswoman.
First, thank you for your championship of water recycling
projects and now large-scale water recycling projects.
In our Fiscal Year 2025 budget, including in our Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law work plan for Fiscal Year 2025, we have $263
million for water recycling projects. You asked me specifically
about large-scale water recycling. We are looking to make
funding announcements for construction of large-scale water
recyclings in the near future. I am happy to follow up with you
on specifics, but we look to continue the work that you have
championed, and get real wet water to those communities.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much. But what recycling
and reuse projects are critical components in water security as
we move forward, especially in Colorado River Basin?
You have been engaging with the Basin states and tribes
regarding the ongoing post-2026 operations negotiations. Until
then, we are operating under the 2007 Interim Guidelines in the
Drought Contingency Plan. Could you explain to the Committee
how the funds for the Drought Contingency Plan are being
implemented currently, and how are discussions going with Basin
states and tribes?
Ms. Touton. Absolutely, Congresswoman.
Regarding the Drought Contingency Plan, we have allocated
$138 million of that already, thank you again to Congress for
those funds, including $25 million that we announced last month
for Yuma East Wetlands and the Topock Marsh. Those are critical
components of our ability to be able to deliver water, but also
protect the ecosystem within the Colorado River basin.
You asked about negotiations for post-2026. First, so
excited to have the Secretary sign the Record of Decision
stabilizing the near-term operations at Colorado River. We are
focused now on what operations look like from 2026 and beyond.
We are working with the entire Basin states and the sovereign
nations. I have personally visited half of the 30 sovereign
nations. And we have a Federal state-tribal partnership
meeting: 30 sovereign nations, 7 basin states, and the Federal
Government meeting on a very frequent basis on these operations
for the future.
So, everyone is at the table to be able to find consensus
on the Colorado River.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you for being so inclusive.
Dr. Rick Spinrad, in 2020 NOAA submitted a report to
Congress describing actions needed to support water management,
which included starting a pilot project to improve winter
precipitation forecasting in the West. Creating reliable
precipitation forecasts is vital for our cities, agricultural
producers, and water agencies. So, I was very disheartened to
see that NOAA's budget proposed significant cuts to its weather
and climate research programs.
Can you give me an update on how NOAA is working to improve
subseasonal to seasonal forecasting?
Is there any movement on creating a pilot program to
improve forecasting for water management?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congresswoman. Also, let me add my
appreciation for your continued support in our work.
I assure you, we are continuing our investment in the
efforts associated with integrated water in the West. As I am
sure you well know, we have put a particular focus on the
precipitation forecasts associated with atmospheric rivers, the
largest majority of precipitation that affects agriculture
that, as you already heard from the power administration reps
on the panel here, affects operations of our dams and affects
the hydrology of the West completely. Our efforts are going to
focus largely on atmospheric rivers and improving the forecast.
We are also investing some of the Inflation Reduction Act
resources we got into improving the climatology of
precipitation. The current climatologies we have in some cases
are 20 or 30 years old.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you very much. And the last question
would be for Ms. LeBeau.
What is the ongoing wholesale price of power?
Ms. LeBeau. Thank you for the question. It does really vary
throughout our footprint. We have well over a dozen different
rates throughout our 15-state footprint.
And we are, generally, anywhere from 20 to 50 percent lower
than our counterparts because of the long-standing historic
investment in our generation fleet and in our transmission
systems, and because it is at cost.
Mrs. Napolitano. I would like you to report to the
Committee on what the prices are, please.
Ms. LeBeau. Anywhere from $20 per megawatt----
Mrs. Napolitano. No, in writing. In writing, please.
Ms. LeBeau. Oh, yes, I will, thank you.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman Webster for 5
minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Bentz.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for putting this
together. I really appreciate it.
I am sorry, I missed what you said.
[Pause.]
Mr. Bentz. I am sorry, Chair Westerman. Sorry about that.
Congressman Webster, you are up.
Mr. Webster. Great. Yes, pointing is good.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Webster. All right, thank you for hosting this, and it
is very important.
Administrator Spinrad, several members of this Committee
have great concern about NOAA's upcoming rule imposing
additional speed restrictions on a broad category of vessels.
And the proposed rule would expand the restriction on vessels
35 feet and longer, and will expand the Go Slow Zone as far as
90 miles out in the Atlantic Coast. This rule, if finalized,
will destroy the recreational fishing industry and create
massive safety hazards for commercial vessels off the Atlantic
Coast.
I remain concerned that NOAA didn't fully consider the
effect the increased restrictions will have on recreational
fishing, as well as the downstream industries that rely on it.
These industries are very significant for my home state of
Florida, and NOAA has previously acknowledged that the rule
will impact far more anglers than are impacted by the current
rule.
How does NOAA anticipate that these proposed changes, if
finalized, will impact outdoor recreation industries,
particularly in our economy which continues to face high
inflation and high costs?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congressman. As I indicated
earlier, North Atlantic right whales are both an endangered
species and a marine mammal. So, consequently, our statutory
authorities under the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the
Endangered Species Act dictate that we take efforts to ensure
that this endangered population survives, with fewer than 350
in the population right now.
We have looked at the economic impacts of the proposed
rule, and we have found no indication of widespread economic
harm as a result of the proposed rule.
I would also point out there has been some discussion about
impact on the boating community. And, in fact, less than 4
percent of the boats that would be impacted are going to be
larger than 35 feet. So, by any measure, the economic analysis
suggests the impact not to be as draconian as some others have
said.
I can also tell you that the specifics on the economic
analysis are part of the rule that is currently in
consideration at OIRA. And it is our assumption and perception
that, done effectively, meaning allowing an adaptive management
structure such as we have seen in Massachusetts, where, in
fact, we were able to remove the closed area earlier than
indicated because we found there were no whales in the area, so
our ability to manage this and our understanding of the
economic impact suggests this is the most appropriate way to
balance economic activities while ensuring our responsibilities
under MMPA and ESA.
Mr. Webster. Well, I went to kind of just a display at the
entrance in the Rayburn Building, and there are many, many
innovative companies who have developed already-existing
technology that could be used to track whales and vessels and
patterns and other things in this issue. These technologies are
very promising, and provide, I guess, a better solution than
just what has been proposed in the rule.
Is NOAA aware of these available technologies?
Dr. Spinrad. We most certainly are. In fact, we are talking
with the developers of those technologies.
I would add on a little bit of a personal note, I spent the
better part of my early career working for the U.S. Navy,
trying to find large, dark objects at the surface of the ocean,
and I assure you none of the technologies that are being put
forward right now are 100 percent effective in finding whales.
Mr. Webster. Are you considering at all using some of those
technologies?
Dr. Spinrad. Absolutely, and some that are currently in the
laboratory for new development, as well. The solution, I
believe, is going to be a combination of technology and policy
activities such as those we have put forward in the proposed
rule.
Mr. Webster. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. Congresswoman Peltola is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Peltola. We are having a thumb war over here to see
who goes first.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it. I
have three questions for Dr. Spinrad. My first question is
about the nearly $350 million in disaster funding, which I
understand is stuck in various stages within NOAA, and are not
able to proceed because of problems with NOAA's accounting
software.
And I just really want to emphasize this ongoing crisis
that our commercial fishermen are in. They are in a freefall.
The banks are still expecting their boat payments and mortgages
and all of their overhead. Meantime, this disaster funding is
stuck in the mud. And I am wondering if you can give us an idea
of when the funds will be released, and what is being done to
make sure that other communities don't face the same kind of
delay.
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you for this question,
Congresswoman, and for your continued emphasis on the need to
engage in process improvement and have the resources.
The Fishery Disaster Program is one that we recognize is
critical for coastal communities, fishing communities at the
individual and community level. I will tell you that part of
the issue is that in the last 5 years, we saw 50 disasters,
declarable disasters. That compares with 21 disasters in the
previous 5-year period. So, part of this is the volume of
requests that are coming in.
As a consequence of Congress' passage of the Fisheries
Resource Disaster Improvement Act, I can tell you we have
already halved, cut by 50 percent, the time for processing
these disaster declarations. That is good news, but not good
enough.
So, we are looking at all of the places in the current
timeline for disaster relief, fishery disaster declarations,
where we can improve the speed with which we process these. I
am having this discussion with Secretary Raimondo as we speak.
I will tell you that we are about to make some announcements
here very, very shortly that will at least move some of these
out of the hopper into action. So, we recognize the need to
expedite it.
I will also tell you that, as you can tell from my answer,
this is not necessarily attributable to our implementation of a
new accounting system. A lot of it is the volume of activity we
have seen, and a lot of it is the process timeline and the
steps we have to go through between NMFS, NOAA, Department of
Commerce, OMB, through the chop chain.
Mrs. Peltola. Just a follow-up. In my experience, the
definition of ``coming soon'' in government is a much different
definition than ``coming soon'' for non-government people. What
do you mean when you say, ``coming soon''? Like, in a week, in
a month, in 6 months?
Dr. Spinrad. The announcements that I was alluding to?
Mrs. Peltola. Yes.
Dr. Spinrad. You can expect within days to weeks.
Mrs. Peltola. OK. And are those announcements in regard to
Alaska, as well?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Peltola. OK. Thank you.
My second question is, NOAA recently announced that it
canceled the 2024 Bering Sea Longline Fisheries Survey. Last
year, it was the halibut survey that was not performed because
of a lack of funds. And I am wondering what steps NOAA is
taking to ensure that the surveys go forward next year.
Dr. Spinrad. First, I will say we recognize the criticality
and the value of the data that we get from the surveys. We do
these particular surveys on a cost recovery basis. And, in
fact, in this particular case, the vessel operator did incur a
number of losses due to decreased value of the catch that they
had.
We are looking at options associated with how to do this.
As you know, we have included a $41 million increase for our
days at sea for our own operations. I would like to see us be
able to incorporate this, get beyond the implications of having
a cost recovery effort.
My commitment to you is to try to define options that work
better than a cost recovery that is subject to the market
fluctuations.
Mrs. Peltola. OK, and we need to do this quickly because,
if we have zero abundance and there is a horrible price, that
is no money. And things move very slowly on this side of the
table, as well. So, time is of the essence.
My third question, because I am looking at 30 seconds left,
last year, NOAA began updating the national standards on 3 of
the 10: abundance, bycatch, and communities. I am most
concerned that at the North Pacific Fisheries Management
Council at the AP they are talking about communities being
factory trawlers with a straight face. They are making
arguments that factory trawlers are communities versus
communities that have been in that same location for 12,000
years based on a relationship with returning salmon that is no
longer happening.
A factory trawler is not a village that has been there for
12,000 years. We have to get some definitions that make sense
in our national standards, and I am hoping that isn't, like,
``coming quickly,'' meaning 10 months from now.
Dr. Spinrad. First of all, I appreciate the concern you
have expressed. And I think part of the answer is tied to the
construct of the council. You have alluded to that.
We have reached out to the governor in Alaska, and said
that we would like to see nominations be a bit more inclusive
of the representation that you alluded to. So, I think that is
part of the solution.
Mrs. Peltola. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Chairman Westerman for 5
minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, and thank you to
the witnesses for being here today.
Administrator Spinrad and Director Williams, you have both
put out some rules recently that haven't been finalized yet,
but are very, very unpopular rules. They also seem to lack
logic. I have looked at them, tried to have an open mind. I am
talking about the speed limit rule with NOAA and the BIDEH rule
with U.S. Fish and Wildlife.
And I think you know this, but I just want to remind you
that you have really offended a lot of sportsmen and women
across the country with these rules. And I would hate to see a
vote on which one of these rules they dislike the most, because
they dislike both of them very much. And it is almost like you
all had a side bet to see who could offend the most people with
rules that you have made. And I don't think it is your intent
to alienate sportsmen and women around the country, but that is
certainly what is happening.
And just to offer some advice, I would do everything in
your power to pull these rules back before they become final,
because these are people all over the country that are going to
be pushing Republicans and Democrats to stop the rules that you
are putting in place. And my position will be to try to stop
that through the authorization and the appropriation process.
But I don't have time to talk about both of them, so we are
going to talk about BIDEH, Director Williams. Last month, the
Subcommittee held an oversight hearing on the Service's
proposed BIDEH rule. At the hearing, the Service claimed this
rule is largely consistent with current practices, and then
later testified that it would look at certain management
practices ``through a new lens.'' What does the new lens mean?
Ms. Williams. Mr. Chair, thank you for the question, and I
appreciate it. I listened intently to the BIDEH hearing.
What I would like to say about BIDEH is that I have pored
through the National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act,
the statute that authorizes the refuge system and guides its
management, in its language says that it is the charge of the
Secretary to ensure that the biological integrity, diversity,
and environmental health of the system are maintained for the
present and future generations.
So, I would like to say that we have had the requirement of
the biological integrity, environmental health of the refuge
system in place. We have also had policies in place. This
rulemaking is meant to reinforce that requirement from the
Refuge Act.
Where I think there has been a misunderstanding, and I will
absolutely acknowledge it and recognize that our sportsmen and
women across the country are very important constituents to the
Fish and Wildlife Service, are important to the health of the
refuge system. I think that some of the misunderstanding and
the distrust from the rule coming out was the way in which it
was couched, ``prohibited unless,'' and that came from the way
the National Wildlife Refuge System Act is written that starts
with refuges being closed unless opened.
We extended our comment period. We understand there are
many comments to go through.
Mr. Westerman. I am going to have to----
Ms. Williams. And I want to address them to clarify.
Mr. Westerman. Right. The message that the public is
getting is that Fish and Wildlife doesn't want to manage fish
and wildlife refuges for fish and wildlife anymore, that they
want to make them another little sanctuary, where people maybe
can go in and bird watch or something. But not being able to do
agriculture practices on these fish and wildlife refuges is
definitely going to hurt wildlife habitat.
During our hearing, the Service also claimed that this rule
would not ban the use of important management practices.
However, the plain language tells a different story and
supporters such as the Humane Society have lauded the proposal
because it would ``ban the use of predator control measures
throughout the National Wildlife Refuge System.'' So, who is
correct here?
Ms. Williams. Mr. Chair and Congressman Westerman, the
agricultural practices and predator management that support the
purpose for which the refuge was created can continue. The
BIDEH rule does not get rid of those agricultural practices or
predator control practices.
Mr. Westerman. Well, your friends at the Humane Society are
touting that it gets rid of predator control.
Administrator Wech, I have a question for you. I will just
submit it to the record. It has to do with the Narrows Dam in
my district and what is taking so long to get the trash gates
fixed on it.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Ranking Member Huffman, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Spinrad, I believe you did the right thing by moving
forward, as you said, with alacrity to begin protecting the
North Atlantic right whale in the face of an imminent
extinction threat. I know it has been suggested that we should
just continue endless dialogue. Of course, we all want to see
new technology and other things that could help us, but you
took action.
And you are a science agency. What do the scientists tell
you that we can afford to lose each year when it comes to the
North Atlantic right whale population, if we are going to keep
them from going extinct?
Dr. Spinrad. Well, the scientists and, I would also point
out, the judicial system has indicated we cannot afford to lose
one, much less, say, a reproductive female, of which there are
only 70.
Mr. Huffman. And we are losing more than one to ship
strikes.
Dr. Spinrad. We are. As I indicated, this year we have
already had at least three deaths attributable to ship strikes
because one of those was a female who we knew had a calf
associated with her, and we haven't been able to find the calf.
I should point out we can only account for 36 percent of those
that are killed.
Mr. Huffman. The ones we count, right.
Dr. Spinrad. Yes.
Mr. Huffman. You did the right thing.
Moving on to the Rice's whale, there is a suggestion that
you should have focused singularly, I suppose, on some acoustic
surveys that show no Rice's whales in the area proposed for
critical habitat. But you have some other evidence that you
didn't get to talk about because you were cut off. Tell us a
little more about the aerial surveys.
And I understand there are also some anecdotal accounts
from fishermen recently in the area you are proposing for
critical habitat.
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you, Ranking Member Huffman.
First of all, I would say there is an old credo within the
scientific community that the absence of evidence is not the
evidence of absence.
[Slide.]
Dr. Spinrad. That was confirmed, in fact, in the image that
I tried to share is this one, which was just taken by some of
our scientists last month. It is an aerial survey. It is one of
two Rice's whales that were detected in the area that is
currently under consideration as critical habitat.
So, between that and, as you indicated, some of the
anecdotal observations by those who fish and navigate in those
waters, we know they are resident there.
Mr. Huffman. I appreciate that. You talked a little bit
about some of the funding from the IRA that has enabled you to
do a lot of good work in the last couple of years: climate-
ready fisheries, resilient coastal communities, safeguards
against climate and weather impacts, tribal fish hatcheries. I
understand some of the red snapper research, even, that you
were praised for earlier benefited from some of that IRA
funding. And if I heard you correctly, the demand for this
programmatic funding is 28 times what we have been able to push
out the door. Did I hear you right?
Dr. Spinrad. That is absolutely right, and that is for a
large chunk of those resources, almost $600 million for what we
are calling Climate Resilience Regional Challenge. These will
typically be investments of, say, $10 million, maybe as high as
$50 million. So, you have a sense of, at $16 billion, what the
nation, what the communities, industries, individuals around
the country are asking for.
Mr. Huffman. All right. So, the idea that this funding was
not doing critically important, beneficial work would not be
right. And I think that is important when we consider the fact
that Chairman Westerman's proposed wildlife bill, the Wildlife
Habitat and Conservation Act, his version of RAWA, if you will,
would actually strip that funding back by $700 million, I
guess, in the name of protecting wildlife. It seems to make no
sense to me.
Commissioner Touton, I want to ask you about a recent LA
Times report on illegal water theft from the Bureau of
Reclamation. I know you are familiar with this, the Panoche
Water District in California stole water over two decades. It
was sold for more than $25 million. This is, obviously, an
outrage for taxpayers and for other water users who have
struggled during difficult water years.
The Bureau is charged with allocating these scarce water
resources, and also ensuring adequate stream flows and making
the other tough calls to manage water. It is hard for me to
imagine that the Panoche Water District is the only one of the
dozens and dozens of Federal contractors that are plugged into
the system that have done this.
Can you tell me what you are doing to get your arms around
this problem, to understand the scope of it, and to make sure
that illegal diversions stop, and that we don't continue to
allow this to happen right under our nose?
And I am interested to know how the heck it did happen for
over two decades under this agency's watch.
Ms. Touton. Thank you for that question, Ranking Member.
When we look at our ability, this is key to our mission,
right, knowing where this water is going, and it showed that
there was a significant gap in our monitoring. So, one of the
things we are immediately doing now is utilizing BIL and IRA
funding to increase our monitoring. The other tool is fines. As
you alluded to, we fine them. But a key part of this is working
with the state of California for enforcement.
Mr. Huffman. All right, thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Congressman Carl, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Chairman. I would like to apologize to
my colleagues on this board. I am beginning to think like
Garret Graves, and all of my questions are exactly what Garret
asked. So, I have to make this up as we go along. Thinking like
Garret is scary, especially being from Alabama.
Roll Tide, just for Garret's purpose.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Carl. Mr. Spinrad, help me fill in some blanks here.
How much did you say we were budgeting for the Rice's whale
study? In your opening statement you said billions?
Dr. Spinrad. No, it was certainly not billions. I would
have to get back to you with the exact number.
Mr. Carl. Well, you have it in your notes right there. And
while you are looking, how many strikes did you say we had last
year?
Dr. Spinrad. On Rice's whale or North Atlantic right
whales?
Mr. Carl. Well, let's just take Rice's whale for the
moment.
Dr. Spinrad. I don't have records of any strikes on Rice's
whales.
Mr. Carl. No strikes in the Gulf.
Dr. Spinrad. Which is why, of course, we are not putting a
rulemaking in place for vessel strike rule on Rice's whale.
Mr. Carl. So, how many have we killed in the Gulf?
Dr. Spinrad. Rice's whale, I am not aware of any
mortalities.
Mr. Carl. So, no mortalities in the Gulf. You are talking
about just the East Coast. So, you are talking about primarily
the Bryde's whale. The Bryde's whale, correct?
Dr. Spinrad. Rice's whale.
Mr. Carl. Bryde's?
Dr. Spinrad. Rice's whale.
Mr. Carl. OK. Your picture right there, is that a Bryde's
or a Rice's?
Dr. Spinrad. That is a Rice's whale.
Mr. Carl. How do you tell the difference?
Dr. Spinrad. I can't, but our experts can. We have experts.
Mr. Carl. Do you know how they tell the difference?
Dr. Spinrad. They look at fluke markings. They look at
size, they look at shape. They look at the same things you
would use to identify basically any other marine mammal.
Mr. Carl. According to what I read, they crack the skull
open, and that is how they figure it out.
Dr. Spinrad. No, not for these. These were aerial surveys,
sir, that were done without any harassment or impact on the
animal.
Mr. Carl. All right. What I am saying is you have to crack
the skull open to actually tell the difference between a
Bryde's and a Rice's. You are trying to talk about two
different whales. I don't think we are talking about two
different whales.
So, the East Coast whale, well, let's call it the East
Coast whale. Have we done any studies on these windmills to see
how it affects these whales?
Dr. Spinrad. We have looked at the acoustic signatures of
the operations to put the wind turbines in the water, and we
find no conclusive evidence of harassment, as defined by the
Marine Mammal Protection Act, on the whales.
Mr. Carl. I mean, a fish that does all of its hunting and
traveling based on acoustics, I don't see how that is possible.
That is common sense. Obviously, I am not a scientist.
So, these three that were killed in the East Coast, these
are----
Dr. Spinrad. Right.
Mr. Carl. How many of those were dead strikes before they
hit them? Do we know if the ship actually killed them, or were
they dead, floating fish that they hit?
Dr. Spinrad. Well, they were obviously struck, and the
nature of the damage----
Mr. Carl. Well, that is obvious. They wouldn't be on the
ship. But were they dead when they were hit?
Dr. Spinrad. No, it is obvious on the whale.
Mr. Carl. OK, I get that. But were they dead when they were
hit? Were they a floating fish when they were hit?
Dr. Spinrad. Were they floating when they were hit?
Mr. Carl. Do you know?
Dr. Spinrad. I cannot answer that. We were not present to
see----
Mr. Carl. OK. So, we don't know if they were dead already
from something else, and the ships had picked them up.
Dr. Spinrad. The chances of that are pretty slim, based on
the necropsies which indicate roughly time of death and where
they were at the time.
Mr. Carl. OK, in the Gulf we are very concerned about this.
And you show us pictures. Early on in this conversation, there
were no pictures. You show us pictures. I find no reason to
think you would be lying to us. OK, great. We have whales.
I have talked to an extensive amount of people that fish in
the Gulf. No one has ever seen them. All the charters have
never seen them. Now, that doesn't mean they don't exist, but
the idea of trying to shut down traffic in that Gulf is going
to affect me and my district tremendously, because we are a
port city. And from a defense standpoint, we are working on
naval ships, we are working on Coast Guard ships. We have oil
platforms and gas, and so many things are going to depend on
the moving of these ships in and out of the Gulf.
Please take into consideration who you are going to affect
and what it is going to affect, because we have a 13 percent
favorable rating in Congress. I promise you, in my district you
have less. And those are the people that pay the bills. And
when they turn on us, there is no stopping. We get blamed for
everything that you do now, whether it is the fish count or
whether it is talking about controlling the speed of their
boat. But we have way too much government involved here.
I am like Westerman. I think we should look at the
appropriations side. I think your Department is drunk on money,
I think you are drunk on power, and I think we have to wheel it
back.
With that, I yield my time back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman Hoyle for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Mr. Chairman, could I briefly just request
unanimous consent that Representative Kim Schrier of Washington
be permitted to sit at the dais and participate in the hearing?
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
Ms. Hoyle. Thank you. My question is for Administrator
Spinrad.
First of all, an aside, I know that the NOAA weather
stations aren't part of this Committee's jurisdiction, but I
would like to point out that you have a weather station in
Portland, you have one in Medford. The Mid-Willamette Valley
isn't covered, and we just had a devastating ice storm, and
have a completely different weather system. So, we would love
to work with you on making sure we cover that.
But a major focus of your Fiscal Year 2025 budget is NOAA's
climate resilient portfolio and the investments necessary to
provide those services. And we can argue about how we got here,
but we have seen a lot of extreme climate events.
The Oregon coast relies on NOAA's high-quality science and
data. NOAA needs people, ships, satellites, and airplanes to
make that all happen. The city of Newport hosts many NOAA staff
with collaboration with Oregon State University--go, Beavers--
and I know you are familiar with this site. The state-of-the-
art research facilities in Newport are an economic boost to
that community, and important to the entire coast and, I would
say, to the entire country.
Unfortunately, the proposed Fiscal Year 2025 budget cuts to
ocean research could have real impacts on NOAA's work in Oregon
for ocean health. And, again, that research helps the entire
country, and it impacts our commercial and sports fishing
industries which are a critical part of our economy, as they
rely on that data.
Could you talk about some of the ways that NOAA science is
used in the Pacific Northwest, and what are you most worried
about? Like, what should we most worry about if NOAA is not
fully funded?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for that question, and thank you for
your comments about the work that we do out of Newport, and
your support for those activities, as well.
In effect, NOAA's activities in the oceans take three
flavors. One is fundamental research relevant to our mission.
So, understanding, for example, how ocean conditions are
changing. Is the ocean becoming more acidic? The second
category would be our fisheries surveys and assessments of the
biology of the ocean, if you will, for our responsibilities for
fisheries management and ecosystem management. And the third is
what we call our hydrographic charting. That is the mapping. If
you are a boater, you use a navigational chart that comes from
NOAA.
So, those are the basic categories of investment. And I
would point out we conduct those kinds of activities with
different kinds of vessels operating out of ports like Newport.
Ms. Hoyle. OK. Thank you. And, again, I very much
appreciate your work. I would love to talk to you at another
time on how we can manage to get weather station and tracking
in the Mid-Willamette Valley.
I yield the rest of my time.
Mr. Bentz. Congressman LaMalfa, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Touton, it is good to have you here today, as
well as the rest of our panel. Let me direct this to you, going
back to the Klamath River and the water shortages up there.
With the process of the dams being destroyed, Reclamation
will not have the ability to borrow water from those reservoirs
and do the water swapping that had been possible in the past
with the lake, with the reservoirs, and for flow purposes. So,
as you develop the new operations plan for the project, what do
you intend to look at for the water borrowing to replace that
if the dams are all destroyed?
Ms. Touton. First, Congressman LaMalfa, I just very much
appreciate our continued dialogue here at the hearing, but also
on all things easy but also hard.
When we look at the Klamath Project and our flexibility,
first we need to be able to improve our modeling and forecasts
so that the allocations are as sound as they possibly can be.
We are also looking at Inflation Reduction Act funding for the
Klamath Basin to be able to see what improvements we can make
on infrastructure from our other basin funding.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, what my concern is, is that without that
flexibility, as a new plan is developed for operations, then
that means the only place they can really look is either take
the water from the lake, which they don't want to do, or take
it from agriculture, which has been done a lot lately.
Can you somehow promise to me that the solution won't be
just buying out or taking water from agriculture as an
additional long-term solution?
Ms. Touton. I think what I can commit to you, Congressman,
is that we have to be able to look at a better way to operate
the system so that there is reliability for our agricultural
communities to continue to farm, as well as meeting our
requirements for the ecosystem. And we have to find a path
forward, and not just have one-off IOPs every year. And I think
we are working toward that path.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. It is my understanding you are not
necessarily a biologist yourself.
Ms. Touton. I am an engineer, Congressman.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, the interim operation plan that you have
been forced to use the last few years, let me rapid-fire these
real quickly since we have limited time. Does the interim
operating plan adjust the water temperature required for fish
downstream of Lake Shasta, based on how good or bad the water
year is? Are you allowed to adjust that temperature goal?
Ms. Touton. Are we looking at the Central Valley Project,
Congressman?
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes.
Ms. Touton. So, in our operations plan there are thresholds
of temperatures that we are looking to use. But more
importantly, like Klamath in the Central Valley Project, we are
looking to have a longer operations instead of again operating
on 1-year ops every year.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. So, there is a level of flexibility, I am
gathering. Does IOP adjust the cold pool water that is to be
maintained behind the lake based on how good or bad the water
is?
Ms. Touton. Again, as part of the IOP, and this is
something that we coordinate with Fish and NMFS, depending on
what water year it is also helps to identify the cold water
pool that is needed, and helps to lock in the operations for
the water year.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, my understanding is that it does depend
on how good or bad the pool level is.
Ms. Touton. Yes, that is right.
Mr. LaMalfa. Does it adjust the amount of delta outflow
based on population numbers of the fish in a water year?
Ms. Touton. I don't know that one, specifically,
Congressman. I can follow up for the record.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Does the IOP require a certain amount of
water carry over, based on a water year in the lake?
Ms. Touton. Within the IOP, there are targets in which we
end the water year for specific storage, including within
Shasta.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. So, better water years typically result in
better fish runs is a pretty safe conclusion, I would say.
Is there an ability to have the amount of take be
adjustable based on the water year, the amount of fish take,
whether we are talking salmon-type, et cetera?
Ms. Touton. I think there are a lot of factors in that. I
would defer to my colleagues with the Fish and Wildlife
Service.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, I am going to have to answer it for you,
because our experience on it is it is a hard number, and we
have seen that in the Delta as we were trying to operate the
pumps this year. Last year, we were able to fill San Luis
Reservoir 100 percent. This year, there was a vast amount, like
95 percent, of cut-down in running the pumps, based on the idea
of a hard take number.
And the fish that were taken there were in a high
population year, a successful run of fish, of steelhead. Yet,
they are not distinguishing between steelhead and raised
rainbow. So, what we are getting is a distorted number of the
types of fish being lumped into one, and they are not even
marking the hatchery fish.
So, the fish that are rescued in their facility there and
put back into the system are still counted as take, so we have
an artificially high, a fake high number of take of fish that
weren't actually taken and are of two different species being
counted as one. So, that would be very problematic, because we
didn't get to run the pumps this year, and we left half a
million acre-feet out of San Luis Reservoir based on false data
of what the fish take was having reached the level of take.
I have to stop there, and I wish there was more time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Mr. Mullin for 5 minutes,
and then we will break for voting.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know we have votes
looming.
Thank you all for your testimony. My question is for Dr.
Spinrad.
Your agency in particular provides critical information
about changes in climate, weather, and oceans. In this year's
budget request, your agency has asked to reduce funding from
programs such as NOAA research, while boosting funding for
National Environmental Satellite Data and Information Service.
Amidst these shifts, how is NOAA ensuring that fundamental
questions about climate risk continue to be answered?
And how are you making sure that this information is
available to leaders at state and local levels to inform
decision-making?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for your question focusing on what I
would argue is one of our most important mission
responsibilities, and that is giving American industry,
individuals, communities what I call the environmental
intelligence to make decisions, which means we have to sustain
our ability to deliver in an operational way climate-related
information.
We are going to do that by sustaining activities like the
Climate Resilience Information Toolkit, the Climate Mapping for
Resilience and Adaptation tools so your constituents can go
look at a census tract level and determine are we going to see
a tendency towards more heat days in the summers to come? Are
we going to see more precipitation, more drought? Those tools
will continue to be delivered.
Unfortunately, because of some of the cuts that we had to
take associated with the Fiscal Responsibility Act, we have to
diminish some of our investment and the research that supports
those. But I am confident in the years to come we will be able
to embellish that part of it, as well.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for that. And then, finally, Director
Williams, the Don Edwards National Wildlife Refuge is in my
district. We received $2 million out of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law for ecosystem restoration and climate change
resilience projects. But funding for the refuge system has been
nearly stagnant since 2010.
So, under these budget constraints, can you just tell me
about the regulatory efforts by Fish and Wildlife to protect
the biological integrity of the national wildlife refuge
ecosystems amidst the threats from climate change? If you
could, just speak to that.
Ms. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Congressman
Mullin, I know that the Secretary really very much appreciated
getting to visit with you and go to the Don Edwards San
Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge. And I think that visit
highlighted, as you say, just what the Fish and Wildlife
Service is able to do when we have had the investment from the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and it has allowed us to do
ecosystem restoration projects like the one you mentioned, in
light of climate change, in making that area more resilient. It
helps with water quality, it helps with flooding, it helps with
access for those who live in San Francisco to get out to this
refuge.
And then, of course, it helps with the species, whether
they are migrating through or that are resident species,
plants, birds, and amphibians alike. So, I think that is an
example of just what we can do when we have the investment.
Unfortunately, the Fish and Wildlife Service and the refuge
system, as I testified earlier, our budget has been stretched
so far I worry about it snapping. We have had to complex
refuges. We don't have an employee on every refuge. I believe
there are seven or eight states where we don't even have a
Federal wildlife officer, and those officers respond to
emergencies, they help with the safety of our visitors. Many of
our visitor centers are run wholly by volunteers. Almost all of
them are on limited hours of operation. Some of them don't have
a staff person to even oversee the volunteers. And it goes on
and on.
So, here is a gem of a system of public lands for people to
hunt, fish, recreate, and enjoy, and also established to be
this connected network. And our proposed rulemaking, our
comment period just ended, is intended to allow us to do just
that, and that is to focus on that connected network,
biological integrity, ecological health of those refuges, and
allow people to use them and enjoy them.
So, thank you for asking the question.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. Here is what we are going to do.
Congresswoman Hageman is going to take over as Chair. I am
leaving to go vote. I am not sure about everybody else. We will
come back. She will complete her 5 minutes of questions, and
then she will go to vote, and we will go into recess, and then
be back here after votes, but roughly at about 5.
Ms. Hageman [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Williams, on March 30 of this year, the state of
Wyoming filed a petition for judicial review in the Wyoming
District Court that alleges that the Department of the Interior
has failed to meet the 12-month deadline for determining
Wyoming's petition to delist the grizzly bear population in the
Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem. Wyoming's petition to delist was
submitted in January 2022. It has now been 2\1/2\ years. And it
was submitted to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service requesting
the agency to delist the GYE grizzly bear. This request came
after the population was determined to be sufficiently
recovered in the Yellowstone Ecosystem under the Endangered
Species Act.
I spoke to you about this a year ago, and you emphasized
that the Service needed to complete its scientific review,
which was supposed to be done within a 12-month period. Here we
are, one year later, and you have had plenty of time to finish
the review, but we haven't heard from you yet. Director
Williams, when will we see this review?
Ms. Williams. Congressman Hageman, I do not have a specific
date for the review. We are working diligently on this.
Ms. Hageman. Why is it taking so long?
Ms. Williams. It is taking long because, as you have noted,
under the Endangered Species Act, in determining whether to
list or delist a species, there is a five-factor analysis.
Ms. Hageman. Well, I understand the five factors. I am very
familiar with the five factors. In fact, that is part of what
my confusion is, because the Greater Yellowstone grizzly
population has been fully recovered for over two decades. And,
in fact, according to the Fish and Wildlife Service, we have
more than double the number of grizzly bears that are
considered a recovered grizzly bear population.
And Wyoming's management plan has already been determined
to be an adequate regulatory mechanism for protecting a
recovered species. So, again, I am still confused as to why
2\1/2\ years later, after our petition was filed, we still do
not have that review finalized.
Ms. Williams. Congresswoman Hageman, that determination, as
you know, numbers are very important.
Ms. Hageman. By the statute you have 12 months, right? You
have 12 months to finish the review, correct?
Ms. Williams. That is correct.
Ms. Hageman. And you have exceeded that by 2\1/2\ times,
correct?
Ms. Williams. That is correct.
Ms. Hageman. When will we see that review? What will you
commit to here today?
Ms. Williams. I will commit to continuing to work on that
review expeditiously, Congresswoman Hageman.
Ms. Hageman. How much longer do you think you are going to
need?
Ms. Williams. There are a number of other litigation and
activities before the Fish and Wildlife Service regarding
grizzly bears, including a petition, actually, a litigation and
proposed settlement from Idaho.
Ms. Hageman. After this hearing, could you provide me with
a response, an actual response of when you estimate to have
that review finalized? Will you provide that information in
writing?
Ms. Williams. Yes, Congresswoman.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
Administrator Spinrad, I want to ask you about a couple of
letters that have been sent to you, one by Mike Lee on March 12
of this year and another one by me on April 19, that highlight
NOAA's use of the Billions Project data set, which tracks the
information related to climate and natural disasters that
allegedly resulted in at least $1 billion in damages since
1980. Have you reviewed either of those letters?
Dr. Spinrad. We are reviewing those letters.
Ms. Hageman. Have you personally reviewed either of those
letters?
Dr. Spinrad. I have read the letters, and my staff is
working with me to provide responses.
Ms. Hageman. When do you think you will have responses to
those letters?
Dr. Spinrad. I can't give you a specific date.
Ms. Hageman. OK. Mr. Spinrad, as you know, the data used to
monitor the billion-dollar disasters does not distinguish
between climate and weather-related disasters and other
disaster losses. In fact, the Billions Project does not utilize
climate data at all, it simply highlights losses from disasters
that allegedly caused over $1 billion in economic impact and
damages.
NOAA has reportedly failed to disclose its method for
calculating disaster loss, as well as information pertaining to
sources it uses to calculate losses related to climate change
and using the Billions Project data.
On NOAA's Frequently Asked Questions page about the
Billions Project, it claims that it uses ``more than one dozen
public and private-sector data sources to help capture the
total direct costs, both insured and uninsured, of the weather
and climate events.'' But the project does not identify these
sources in relation to specific events. I want to make sure
that we receive responses to our letters so that we can
actually understand from NOAA what the data set is that you are
using.
Does NOAA have its own method of calculating disaster
losses?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, we look at the information that we get
from the communities. We use our reassessments that we do after
every weather event as part of that data set.
Ms. Hageman. And you will provide that in response to my
letter?
Dr. Spinrad. We will, yes.
Ms. Hageman. With unanimous consent, I would like to submit
two documents for the record. One is a Protect the Public's
Trust request for an investigation into apparent scientific
integrity violations related to NOAA's billion-dollar disaster
project, and the second one is Corrupted Climate Stations,
which documents that 96 percent of the data that is being used
by NOAA to calculate its so-called climate change and global
warming are corrupted. I would like to submit both of those for
the record.

[The information follows:]

PROTECT the PUBLIC'S TRUST

April 3, 2024

Roderick Anderson, Acting Inspector General
U.S. Department of Commerce
1401 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20230

Dr. Cynthia J. Decker, Science Integrity Officer
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration--Science Council
1315 East-West Highway
Silver Spring, MD 20910

Re: Request for Investigation into Apparent Scientific Integrity
Violations Related to NOAA's ``Billion Dollar Disaster''
Project

Dear Mr. Anderson and Dr. Decker:

The American people deserve a government that meets the highest
standards of conduct and integrity, particularly when it comes to the
government's handling of priority issues like climate change. That is
why it is so concerning that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (``NOAA'') appears to have run the Billion-Dollar
Weather and Climate Disasters tracking project (the ``Billions
Project'' or the ``Project'') in a manner that violates fundamental
principles of scientific integrity.
Protect the Public's Trust (PPT) is a nonpartisan organization
dedicated to promoting ethics in government and restoring the public's
trust in government officials. Sensational climate claims made without
proper scientific basis and spread by government officials threaten the
public's trust in its scientific officials and undermines the
government's mission of stewarding the environment. It also poses the
danger of policymakers basing consequential government policy on
unscientific claims unsupported by evidence. For this reason, PPT
requests that you investigate the apparent scientific integrity
violations of NOAA's Billions Project and its misleading and inaccurate
claims about the Project's dataset.
Background

The Billions Project is a tally of weather and climate disasters
since 1980 that resulted in $1 billion or more in losses.\1\ The
Project has had a big impact: it was highlighted by the U.S.
government's U.S. Global Change Research Program as a ``climate change
indicator,'' \2\ and was cited as evidence that ``extreme events are
becoming more frequent and severe'' in the Fifth U.S. National Climate
Assessment.\3\ The dataset's influence and reach is vast. Per Google
scholar, it has been cited in almost 1,000 articles.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI)
U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters (2024). https://
www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/.
\2\ Human Consequences of Climate Change, USDA Forest Service
Office of Sustainability and Climate and the Environmental Protection
Agency (March 30, 2023), https://storymaps. arcgis.com/collections/
ad628a4d3e7e4460b089d9fe96b2475d?item=6.
\3\ Fifth National Climate Assessment: Climate Trends, U.S. Global
Change Research Program (November 2023), https://
nca2023.globalchange.gov/chapter/2/.
\4\ https://scholar.google.com/
scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C6&q=%22billion+dollar+disasters%22 &btnG=.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Though cited as evidence of climate change effects, the Billions
Project does not utilize climate data. The Project's dataset only
collects and reports economic data about disaster losses. Because of
this, it cannot distinguish the effect of climate change as a factor on
disaster losses from the effect of human factors like increases in the
vulnerability and exposure of people and wealth to disaster damages due
to population and economic growth.
The Project's statistical practices have raised criticism that they
lead to inaccurate reporting on disaster events since the Project's
beginning. For example, while the Project adjusted the dollar amount of
damages for events in the database for inflation, it only included
events that crossed the billion-dollar threshold in the year they
occurred.
5,6
This resulted in an apples-to-oranges
comparison over time, as inflation effectively lowered the threshold
for initial inclusion in the database over time. NOAA corrected this
issue in 2012 and warned ``[c]aution should be used in interpreting any
trends based on this graphic for a variety of reasons.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Jason Samenow, 2011 billion dollar weather disaster record:
legit or bad economics, The Washington Post (Jan. 12, 2012), https://
www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/capital-weather-gang/post/2011-billion-
dollar-weather-disaster-record-legit-or-bad-economics/2012/01/12/
gIQADocztP_ blog.html.
\6\ Roger Pielke, Jr., Everything You Hear About Billion-Dollar
Disasters Is Wrong, Forbes (Nov. 7, 2019), https://www.forbes.com/
sites/rogerpielke/2019/11/07/everything-you-hear-about-billion-dollar-
disasters-is-wrong/?sh=5f74db052fea.
\7\ Pielke, supra note 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since that time, the Project has continued to engage in statistical
practices that appear to lead to inaccurate reporting on disaster
events, such as using undisclosed calculation methodologies for
determining losses from individual disaster events that result in
drastically higher loss estimates than those reported by other
institutions at NOAA.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See infra at 7 (comparison of the Billions Project's estimate
of losses from Hurricane Idalia to the National Hurricane Center's
estimate of losses).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, the Project's dataset itself is beset by numerous
violations of the scientific integrity standards set by NOAA and the
Biden Administration.

The Scientific Integrity Policies Regulating the Billions Project

NOAA's Scientific Integrity Policies
NOAA maintains strict and far-reaching scientific integrity
policies to ensure it upholds the highest standards of quality in its
scientific research and publications. The primary source of NOAA's
scientific integrity policies is NOAA Administrative Order 202-735D.3
(the ``SI Order''), which went into effect on March 1, 2024.\9\ NOAA's
stated intent behind the SI Order is ``to strengthen universal
confidence--from scientists to decision-makers to the general public--
in the quality, validity, and reliability of NOAA science.'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ NAO 202-735D-3: Scientific Integrity, NOAA (Mar. 1, 2024),
https://www.noaa.gov/organization/administration/nao-202-735d-2-
scientific-integrity.
\10\ SI Order at 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The SI Order applies broadly within NOAA. Section 2.01(a) of the SI
Order applies its scientific integrity policies to ``[a]ll NOAA
employees, political and career . . . who engage in, supervise, or
manage scientific activities, analyze and/or publicly communicate
information resulting from scientific activities, or use scientific
information or analyses in making bureau or office policy, management,
or regulatory decisions, unless excepted under a collective bargaining
agreement.'' \11\ Under this far reaching definition, the NOAA staff
that produce, maintain, and communicate with the public about the
Billions Project are covered by the SI Order's policies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Id.

The SI Order's definition of forbidden ``Scientific and Research
Misconduct'' is sweeping and total: \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Id. at 7.

Scientific and Research Misconduct--Scientific misconduct is a
significant departure from the Code of Scientific Conduct or
the Code of Ethics for Supervisors and Managers and may be
committed intentionally, knowingly or recklessly. This type of
misconduct includes, but is not limited to, fabrication,
falsification, plagiarism and interference. Research misconduct
is fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing,
performing, or reviewing research, or in reporting research
results. Research misconduct does not include honest error or
differences of opinion, and may be committed intentionally,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
knowingly or recklessly.

Similarly, the SI Order forbids the ``Suppression of Science,''
which it defines in relevant part as the ``deliberate . . .
[d]istorting or selective releasing of scientific analysis, assessment,
research, product, or data for public communication.'' \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Id. at 8.

The SI Order defines ``Scientific Integrity'' as adherence to a
core set of professional values that insulate science from scientific
misconduct: \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Id. at 7.

Scientific Integrity--Scientific integrity is the adherence to
professional practices, ethical behavior, and the principles of
honesty and objectivity when conducting, managing, using the
results of, and communicating about science and scientific
activities. Inclusivity, transparency, and protection from
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
inappropriate influence are hallmarks of scientific integrity.

As used in these definitions, and throughout the SI Order, the
terms ``falsification'' and ``fabrication'' have particular
definitions: \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Id. at 4.

Falsification--Manipulatingresearch materials, equipment, or
processes, or changing or omitting data or results such that
the research is not accurately represented in the research
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
record.

Fabrication--Making up data or scientific results and recording
or reporting them.

In addition to these standards of honesty, the SI Order's
Principles of Scientific Integrity require adherence to standards for
ensuring NOAA's scientific and research products can be reviewed and
their methodologies analyzed.\16\ These standards are ``transparency''
and ``traceability:'' \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Id. at 9.
\17\ Id. at 8.

Transparency--Transparency of scientific integrity should guide
scientists to give visibility to their data and to describe
their analyses, methods and how to interpret their results in
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ways that allow others to assess them.

Transparency ensures that all relevant data and information
used to inform a decision made or action taken is visible,
accessible,--and consumable by affected or interested parties,
to the extent allowable by law. This includes, to the extent
possible, providing the information necessary to interpret
artificial intelligence and machine learning methodologies when
used.

Traceability--The ability to verify sources, data, information,
methodology, results, and assessments, research, analysis,
conclusions or other evidence to establish the integrity of
findings.

The SI Order's Principles of Scientific Integrity further promote
scientific openness by encouraging all covered individuals who ``engage
in science and the development of scientific products . . . to publish
data and findings in transparent ways that enhance NOAA's reputation
for reliable science,'' including by ``communicating what is known
about the provenance, validity, and accuracy of ail data as well as the
process of creating the data.'' \18\ The SI Order's definition of
``scientific products'' is broad and encompasses communications about
scientific research, like the Billions Project: \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Id. at 10.
\19\ Id. at 8.

Scientific Product--The results of scientific activities
including the analysis, synthesis, compilation, or translation
of scientific information and data into electronic and hardcopy
formats for the use of NOAA, the Department of Commerce, or the
Nation. These products include, but are not limited to,
experimental and operational models, forecasts, graphics, and
verbal and written communications of all kinds relating to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
scientific activities, including NOAA social media accounts.

Additionally, the SI Order's Code of Scientific Conduct requires
NOAA staff and partners to be ``[a]ccountable in conducting research
and interpretation of research results'' by ``[d]isclos[ing] all
research methods used, available data, and final reports and
publications consistent with applicable scientific standards, laws, and
policy.'' \20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Id. at 17.

NOAA's commitment to these principles is demonstrated by how
seriously it takes potential scientific integrity violations. The SI
Order's Policy on Scientific Integrity strictly prohibits them and
requires thorough investigation when they have been alleged: \21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Id. at 8-9.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is NOAA policy that:

.01 Research and Scientific Misconduct by any covered
individual are prohibited.

. . .

.02 All covered individuals comply with the requirements of,
and adhere to, the principles of scientific integrity,
integrity of science activities, Code of Scientific Conduct and
Code of Ethics for Science Supervision and Management described
in this NAO when performing their duties within and outside of
NOAA.

. . .

.04 Under no circumstance may any covered individuals ask or
direct Federal scientists or other NOAA employees to suppress
or alter, or delay scientific data, findings, analysis,
assessments, or research, including how they are used in
communications of all kinds, both public and internal, and in
congressional testimony.

.05 All allegations of scientific and research misconduct, and
loss of scientific integrity brought against covered
individuals will be thoroughly assessed to determine if they
are credible.

.06 Credible allegations of fabrication, falsification,
plagiarism, and interference with or undue influence on
accurate public reporting of science will be examined using the
process laid out in the Procedural Handbook to this NAO and may
result in personnel actions, referral to the Inspector
General's office, or NOAA's Acquisition and Grants Office.

The SI Order makes clear that NOAA considers all these policies
necessary for its ability to fulfill its purpose: ``Transparency,
traceability, and integrity [including prohibitions against
falsification and fabrication] at all levels are required for NOAA to
achieve its strategic vision of `healthy ecosystems, communities, and
economies that are resilient in the face of change.' '' \22\ ``These
are the ``core values of [NOAA] and the reason for maintaining this
Order.'' \23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Id. at 7.
\23\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Biden Administration's Memorandum on Scientific Integrity
In addition to the NOAA's scientific integrity policy, President
Biden's Memorandum on Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific
Integrity and Evidence-Based Policymaking prohibits the influence of
politics on science and requires government agencies to use well-
established scientific processes: \24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Memorandum on Restoring Trust in Government Through Scientific
Integrity and Evidence-Based Policymaking, 86 Fed. Reg. 8845 (Jan. 27,
2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-02-10/pdf/2021-
02839.pdf.

It is the policy of my Administration to make evidence-based
decisions guided by the best available science and data.
Scientific and technological information, data, and evidence
are central to the development and iterative improvement of
sound policies, and to the delivery of equitable programs,
across every area of government. Scientific findings should
never be distorted or influenced by political considerations.
When scientific or technological information is considered in
policy decisions, it should be subjected to well-established
scientific processes, including peer review where feasible and
appropriate, with appropriate protections for privacy.

Analysis
The Billions Project appears to violate basic scientific integrity
standards.

Several potential violations have been identified and thoroughly
analyzed by Professor Roger Pielke, Jr. in his forthcoming paper
Scientific Integrity and U.S. ``Billion Dollar Disasters'' (the
``Pielke Paper'').\25\ Professor Pielke identifies at least seven
violations of scientific integrity within the Billions Project related
to transparency and traceability. These errors also present concerns
about falsification and fabrication because the discrepancies within
the Project's dataset and its extreme departures from disaster loss
estimates by other institutions are incapable of outside review and
evaluation due to the opacity of the Project's baseline data and
calculation methods. These errors are described below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ A preprint of the Pielke Paper is available online: https://
osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/3vf7b.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. The Billions Project does not identify its sources or methods for
calculating disaster losses.

NOAA's use of undisclosed non-traditional costs in its calculations
can mislead and misinform the public about the relevant scale of the
disaster losses reported in the Project's dataset.
Though the Billions Project claims it uses ``[m]ore than one dozen
public and private sector data sources help capture the total, direct
costs (both insured and uninsured) of the weather and climate events''
it reports,\26\ the Project does not 1) identify these sources in
relation to specific events, 2) explain how the estimates are derived
from their sources, or 3) provide the estimates themselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ FAQ: Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters, National
Centers for Environmental Information, https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/
access/billions/faq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The absence of this information is not an idle concern, as it
prevents meaningful review of the Project's methods and calculations.
For example, the NOAA employees who maintain the Billions Project have
identified non-traditional cost considerations, like livestock feeding
costs as a function of national feedstock trends, as a variable used in
compiling the Billions Project's dataset.\27\ But conventional disaster
accounting methods do not consider livestock feeding costs in their
calculations.\28\ Because the Billions Project's sources, estimates,
and calculation methods are neither transparent nor traceable, it is
not clear why costs such as livestock feeding costs are part of its
calculations or how many other non-traditional costs are used in NOAA's
calculations, how they are used, and how much they affect the total
disaster losses reported in the Project.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Smith and Matthews, Quantifying Uncertainty and Variable
Sensitivity within the U.S. Billion-dollar Weather and Climate Disaster
Cost Estimates, Natural Hazards (2015), at 8. Available at https://
www.ncei.noaa.gov/monitoring-content/billions/docs/smith-and-matthews-
2015.pdf.
\28\ Pielke Paper at 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This opacity precludes other scientists, or even members of the
public, from scrutinizing NOAA's decision-making and calculations in
producing the Project's dataset and from evaluating the utility of its
loss estimates. Furthermore, because NOAA does not disclose all the
costs it considers in calculating its estimates and their details, it
is impossible for independent sources to protect against the
falsification and fabrication of data.
2. The Billions Project's accounting method for disaster loss estimates
are undisclosed and produce suspect results.

Similarly, NOAA does not explain how it estimates the costs of
disasters generally. This lack of transparency is particularly
problematic given that NOAA's cost estimates appear to deviate
dramatically from conventional accounting practices for disaster loss
estimates.
This is exemplified in its loss estimates for hurricanes. The
historical practice of NOAA's National Hurricane Center has been to
double insured losses from hurricanes to estimate total direct
losses.\29\ But, for unexplained reasons, this is not the practice NOAA
uses in the Billions Project, as demonstrated with its Hurricane Idalia
estimates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hurricane Idalia hit Florida in September 2023. Initial catastrophe
models estimated insured losses of $2.5 to $5 bil1ion; \30\ the
Billions Project's initial estimate was $2.5 billion. But actual
insured losses recorded after Idalia hit were far less: approximately
$310 million.\31\ Under the National Hurricane Center's method, the
estimated total direct losses would be about $620 million. But the
Billions Project's estimate increased after the insured losses from
Idalia came in at 1/4th of the lowest initial estimate. The Project's
ultimate estimate was $3.5 billion,\32\ about six times higher than the
National Hurricane Center's method would indicate. NOAA provides no
explanation for why it increased its loss estimate after Idalia turned
out to be less destructive than initially anticipated, nor does NOAA
provide any explanation for why there is a massive disjunction between
the Idalia loss estimates for two of its projects.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ RMS, Verisk Weigh in With Insured-Loss Estimates in Low
Billions of Dollars From Idalia, Insurance Journal (Sept. 5, 2023),
https://www.insurancejournal.com/news/national/2023/09/05/738970.htm.
\31\ OIR Hurricane Idalia Information, Florida Office of Insurance
Regulation (Updated November 16, 2023), https://www.floir.com/home/
idalia.
\32\ Events, National Centers for Environmental Information,
https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/events/US/1980-
2023?disasters[]=all-disasters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The absence of transparency and traceability in the Billions
Project's estimate methodology raises direct concerns about potential
falsification or fabrication of data: there is no indication why the
Billions Project's loss estimate for Hurricane Idalia so far exceeds
what it ``should'' have been, nor whether these accounting
discrepancies are pervasive throughout the Project's dataset.
3. The Billions Project adds and removes disaster events from the
dataset without acknowledgment or explanation.

Because the Billions Project's dataset is ``living'' and new
entries are added as disasters occur, it is expected for the dataset's
count of disasters to increase over time. What is not expected is for
disasters to be added years after they occur or for them to be removed
from the dataset, and for it to do both without acknowledgment or
explanation. Yet this occurs within the Project's dataset. Professor
Pielke compared the version of the Project's dataset from late 2022 to
an updated version published in mid-2023 and found that 10 new events
were added and 3 were deleted in the mid-2023 version without any
documentation or explanation reflecting these changes.\33\ Professor
Pielke further compared the mid-2023 version to a more recent version
and found an additional 4 historical events were added.\34\ While
changes to the dataset to add or remove historical events may plausibly
occur as a result of renewed research into the disaster records for
particular years or as a result of clean up and re-evaluation of
existing data, scientific integrity requires that such changes be
documented with explanations of the analysis and decision-making behind
them. Transparency and traceability require NOAA to disclose if it
added historical events for reasons such as a change in its calculation
methodology for disaster losses, or if it removed historical events
because its calculations were incorrect, inflated, or based on an
outmoded method.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Pielke Paper at 5.
\34\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Whatever the justification for NOAA's changes to the dataset,
NOAA's scientific integrity principles require it to disclose that it
changed its dataset and explain why. Instead, NOAA has provided no
documentation, justification, or acknowledgement of these changes. In
point of fact, Professor Pielke only discovered the discrepancy between
these different versions of the dataset because he happened to download
the publicly available version of the dataset at different times and
realized they had different information for historical disasters.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. The Billions Project adjusts its loss data beyond what inflation-
adjustments require and does so for unexplained reasons.

According to NOAA, the only annual adjustment to the Billions
Project's dataset that it acknowledges is to account for inflation
based on the Consumer Price Index (``CPI'').\36\ As inflation
adjustments based on the CPI are uniform, NOAA's adjustments should be
uniform as well. But this is not the case. From 2022 to 2023,
adjustments to the loss data for historical disasters in the dataset
were made individually, and multiple of the adjustments were beyond
what would be reasonable for a CPI-based inflation adjustment.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Id.
\37\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most disasters were adjusted between 4.5% and 6%. But 9 events were
adjusted between 6.6% and 145%, and one was reduced by about 75%.\38\
NOAA provides no documentation or explanation for why its supposed
inflation adjustment is not uniform and contains an increase of 145% to
one event and a reduction of 75% to another. The opacity of NOAA's
adjustment method, which must necessarily incorporate considerations
beyond a CPI-based inflation adjustment, raises strong concerns about
potential intentional data manipulation, if not outright falsification
and fabrication, given the absence of a justification for its non-
uniform cost adjustments and its massive increases in the cost of
certain events.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. The Billions Project ``scales up'' loss data based on various
factors without disclosing the methodology for its calculation
or the baseline data.
According to NOAA, it ``scal[es] up insured loss data to account
for uninsured and underinsured losses, which differ[] by peril,
geography, and asset class;'' NOAA refers to these adjustments as ``key
transformations.'' \39\ But these ``key transformations,'' which all
serve to raise the losses reported in the dataset, lack any
transparency or traceability. NOAA adjusts the loss totals up using
these transformations without providing any details on 1) the
methodology for these transformations or their basis, 2) the impact
these transformations have on loss estimates, 3) how these
transformations may change over time or within the dataset, or 4) the
baseline data on disaster losses prior to any transformations. NOAA
admits that the losses it reports are higher than the baseline data
would indicate but provides no way for its manipulations of the data to
be scrutinized, evaluated, or replicated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Calculating the Cost of Weather and Climate Disasters,
National Centers for Environmental Information (Updated: Apr. 21,
2022), https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/calculating-cost-weather-and-
climate-disasters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, these ``key transformations'' are not the only data
manipulations. NOAA employees refer to an overall bias correction
applied to the dataset in a 2015 paper,\40\ and in another paper from
2013, NOAA employees refer to other data adjustments, such as
adjustments based on U.S. flood insurance participation rates.\41\ Like
with the ``key transformations,'' NOAA fails to disclose either the
methodologies or effects of these adjustments or the baseline data they
were applied to.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ Smith and Matthews at 4.
\41\ Smith and Katz, U.S. Billion-dollar Weather and Climate
Disaster: Data Sources, Trends, Accuracy and Biases, Natural Hazards
(2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA's approach to these key transformations violates its
scientific integrity commitments. Not only does NOAA's approach to
these key transformations eschew transparency and traceability, it also
raises concerns about the potential for purposeful data manipulation,
if not outright falsification and fabrication of the data, given that
NOAA is manipulating the Project's loss data without disclosing any
details.
6. The Billions Project appears to use inconsistent calculation methods
over time for unexplained reasons.

Within the Billions Project's time series, there is an implausible
and unexplained spike in billion-dollar disasters reported starting in
2008, followed by a second spike starting in 2017. Prior to 2008, no
year from 1980 to 2007 had more than four reported disasters. 2007
reported none. But starting in 2008, the number of yearly reported
disasters spiked tremendously, as reflected in the chart below: \42\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ The chart is taken from the Pielke Paper at 6.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As the chart shows, prior to 2008, only two years (1998 and
2000) had as many as four reported disasters. After the 2008 spike,
only a single year had fewer than four disasters.
All other years but one (2015) reported more than four. Starting in
2017, there was a second spike and the number of yearly disasters
increased precipitously. From 2017 to 2023, the average number of
billion-dollar disasters each year was 9.2--more than 150% higher than
the previous record for yearly disasters reported prior to 2017.
Because of their sudden and unexplained appearance in the data.
These sharp increases in the number of reported yearly disasters
suggest a change in disaster accounting methods. But because NOAA does
not disclose either the methods or raw data used for producing its
dataset, it is impossible to know the reasons for these jumps in the
dataset or to evaluate the consistency and accuracy of NOAA's
calculations. The inability to investigate NOAA's methodologies to
understand the reasons for these implausible discontinuities
demonstrates why transparency and traceability are such fundamental
principles of scientific integrity. NOAA's failure to abide by these
principles leaves these discontinuities unexplained and raises the
specter of intentional data manipulation, if not outright falsification
and fabrication in the Project.
7. The Billions Project's loss estimates for hurricanes are
substantially and unexplainedly higher than the estimates
produced by NOAA's National Hurricane Center.

Both the Billions Project and NOAA's National Hurricane Center
maintain loss estimates for various hurricanes that have hit the United
States. And both ostensibly use CPI-based adjustments for their loss
data to account for inflation. But the Billions Project's loss data in
almost all cases (with the exception of Hurricane Andrew from 1992) is
substantially higher than the National Hurricane Center's.\43\ This is
reflected in the below table: \44\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Pielke Paper at 6.
\44\ Id.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

There is no obvious pattern to the discrepancies between the
National Hurricane Center's CPI-adjusted data and that of the Billions
Project. Because NOAA neither documents nor releases the methodologies
or baseline data it uses in its calculations, it is impossible to
evaluate why there are such large differences between the two datasets.
The absence of transparency and traceability in the Billions Project's
methods raises the concern that the unexplained increases in the
Project's reported losses compared to the National Hurricane Center's
reported losses are the result intentional data manipulation, if not
outright falsification and fabrication in the Project.

NOAA misuses the Billions Project as evidence of increased disaster
harms from climate change.

Alongside the lack of transparency and traceability in the Billions
Project's dataset and the attendant concerns about data falsification
and fabrication, NOAA misuses the dataset as evidence of increased
harms from climate change.
Due to its design limitations, the dataset cannot serve as evidence
that climate change itself is responsible for any increase in losses
from natural disasters over time. This is because the dataset bluntly
reflects total economic losses from disasters and does not breakdown
and separate-out the influence of the various factors that contribute
disaster losses. Intensity of weather events alone is not the sole, or
even primary, cause for total losses suffered because the vulnerability
and exposure to harm of the people and assets from disaster damage are
key factors affecting total losses. For example, a super storm hitting
a barren wasteland with no population will cause significantly less (or
no) loss compared to a smaller storm hitting Manhattan. Concentrations
of people and wealth, and the relative vulnerability of both to
disaster damage, are essential factors in disaster losses.
Because the Billions Project's dataset is solely derived from
economic loss data, it does not (and cannot) conclusively disaggregate
the effect of climate change on disaster losses over time from the
effect of population growth and economic expansion. These human/
economic factors alone can entirely explain an increase in losses from
disasters: as the population and the economy grow, including in areas
vulnerable to disasters, the potential damage from disasters increases
simply because there is more wealth vulnerable to destruction. Without
further data beyond mere economic loss, the Billions Project's dataset
cannot detect the influence of climate change on disaster losses nor
attribute any change in losses to climate change.
NOAA researchers admitted this limitation in a 2013 paper on the
Billions Project: ``the billion-dollar dataset is only adjusted for the
CPI over time, not currently incorporating any changes in exposure
(e.g., as reflect by shifts in wealth or population).'' \45\ Other
researchers have attempted to ``normalize'' disaster data to account
for changes in exposure and vulnerability.\46\ A simple method used to
normalize disaster losses over time is to use GDP as a proxy for
increasing population and wealth and analyze disaster losses as a
percentage of US GDP.\47\ Professor Pielke provides a graph
demonstrating how this analysis would apply to the Billions Project's
dataset: \48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Smith and Katz at 24.
\46\ Professor Pielke reviewed 54 papers on normalization in a 2020
paper. See Pielke, Economic `normalization' of disaster losses 1998-
2020: a literature review and assessment, Environmental Hazards Vol.
20, 2021.
\47\ Pielke Paper at 8-9.
\48\ Id. at 9.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The graph reflects that losses from disasters are down as a
proportion of GDP since 1980 according to the Project's own dataset.
This trend is reflected in other normalization analyses that use more
sophisticated and detailed methods.\49\ These analyses reflect that
hurricane, flood, and tornado losses have all decreased as a proportion
of GDP on climate time scales-as has the aggregate for disaster losses
overall.\50\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ See id. at 10 (collecting six research papers reflecting the
same downward trend in disaster costs relative to GDP).
\50\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA's failure to account for changes in exposure and vulnerability
of people and assets to harm from disasters introduces a significant
bias into the Billions Project and obscures that a significant portion
(or all) of the increases in loss totals it reports over time are a
result of population and economic growth, not climate trends. NOAA
researchers acknowledged as much over a decade ago, stating that ``the
magnitude of such increasing trends [in disaster costs] is greatly
diminished when applied to data normalized for exposure.'' \51\ Claims
that the Billions Project provides evidence of increasing harms from
climate change are therefore misleading and unscientific. Not only is
it impossible for the Billions Project to provide such evidence because
it does not normalize for increases in vulnerability and exposure, but
such normalization analyses show that the relative harm of disasters
has diminished over the lifetime of the Billions Project.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\51\ Smith and Katz at 24.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite these issues with the Billions Project and despite NOAA's
direct acknowledgment of the role vulnerability and exposure play in
disaster losses, NOAA officials and staff have repeatedly made
misleading and unscientific claims that the Billions Project indicates
ever-worsening harms from climate change. In a statement to CBS News, a
NOAA official responsible for the Project's dataset claimed that
``climate change is supercharging many of these extremes that can lead
to billion-dollar disasters.'' \52\ And at a 2022 press conference
where an update to the Project's dataset was released, a NOAA
administrator claimed that the dataset indicates that ``climate change
is creating more and more intense extreme events that cause significant
damage.'' \53\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ 18 extreme weather events caused $165 billion in damage last
year, NOAA says, CBS News (Jan. 10, 2023), https://www.cbsnews.com/
news/noaa-billion-dollar-weather-disasters-2022-hurricane-ian-drought/.
\53\ Nathan Rott, Extreme weather,fueled by climate change, cost
the U.S. $165 billion in 2022, National Public Radio (Jan. 12, 2023),
https://www.npr.org/2023/01/12/1148633707/extreme-weather-fueled-by-
climate-change-cost-the-u-s-165-billion-in-2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

The American people deserve to have their tax dollars fund science
that satisfies all the rigors of scientific integrity, to have their
agencies abide by their own standards, and to have their government
produce and rely on only the highest-quality scientific research. It is
therefore imperative that the apparent scientific integrity issues in
the Billions Project be addressed. The national conversation on climate
change and disaster-response should not be tainted by inaccurate,
misleading, and self-serving scientific analysis. Accordingly, we
request an immediate investigation into NOAA's apparent violations of
its scientific integrity principles in its operation and promotion of
the Billions Project.

Sincerely,

Michael Chamberlain,
Director

______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240516/117321/HHRG-
118-II13-20240516-SD005.pdf

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you. With that, I yield back. I would
now recognize Mr. Newhouse for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you for letting
me be on the panel this afternoon. I am here to talk about a
recent Fish and Wildlife Service final rule that has, I
believe, the potential to have grave consequences on my
constituents and visitors to the northern part of my district.
Director Williams, you recently decided, I might add
against the will of my constituents, to move forward with the
introduction of grizzly bears into my district. Of the $338.2
million requested in the budget for resource management to
conserve, protect, and enhance listed and at-risk wildlife,
fish, plants, and their habitats, can you tell me how much is
currently allocated to finalize the grizzly bear plan?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I do not have the exact number
for that, but I would say that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service's role----
Mr. Newhouse. Well, let me just say that, if you don't have
the number, I would certainly like that. And it seems to me
after reading through your testimony and listening to the
comments, that this money would be much better used to ``end
the erosion,'' your words, of your on-the-ground conservation
efforts, as described in your testimony.
So, I should ask you, why is it, after over a decade of
public meetings, comment periods, two administrations, both
Republican and Democrat, are you moving forward with this plan?
However, I can answer that for you. Your agency is bending
to the extreme environmentalists who continually abuse the ESA
against the will of private landowners.
Earlier this week, we had a conversation with Director Sams
of the Park Service. He stated that the most pertinent reason
for moving these bears is their cultural significance. So,
would you think your agency should be making decisions on
current species management because of cultural significance?
More directly, Director Williams, would you feel safe if a
female grizzly bear made her way into your backyard in search
of her cubs? That situation will soon be a reality for my
constituents because of your agency's actions.
When we met last November, I remind you, you told me that
this 10(j) proposal was needed to expand management options due
to the fact, I underscore that word, the ``fact,'' that the
First Nations Tribes in British Columbia had plans to
imminently move bears to the northern border of the North
Cascades Ecosystem.
I would like to now enter into the record, if I could,
Madam Chair, correspondence between my staff and the Canadian
Government, specifically staff from the British Columbian
Province. This correspondence states that there are no
immediate plans to move bears into the Canadian side of the
North Cascades Ecosystem. Now, I find that very interesting.
So, what is abundantly clear to me now is that your agency
is relocating bears from other ecosystems, perhaps Yellowstone,
to prevent delisting, in spite of population recovery metrics
having been achieved as outlined per the ESA.
As a Representative of Washington's 4th Congressional
District, I do listen to my constituents, unlike your agency.
And in light of that, I will be introducing a resolution of
disapproval under the Congressional Review Act to overturn the
final 10(j) rule, and I will continue to fight for the farmers,
the ranchers, and the rural communities near the North
Cascades.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Williams. Madam Chair, Congressman, was there a
question in that, and may I answer?
Ms. Hageman. He yielded back. We are going to recess now
until, I believe, around 5, according to the Chairman, as we
need to go vote. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Bentz [presiding]. The Committee will come to order.
Thank you for your patience.
Mr. Stauber, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I appreciate
your affording me the opportunity to waive on to this
Subcommittee.
Director Williams, it is good to see you. In advance, my
condolences. I will be directing the bulk of my questions to
you today, but it is not all bad, I promise. In all sincerity,
I want to thank you and the Service for your recent decision
this April against listing the lake sturgeon under the
Endangered Species Act. The Service followed the facts, the
data, and the science in making this determination. I truly
want to recognize the Service not only for doing the right
thing, but for the engagement with my staff, the career staff
at the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, and citizens
across our great state.
As you recognized in your determination, the individual
state wildlife managers across the upper Midwest and the public
are doing a great job of ensuring the protection and proper
management of the lake sturgeon. A failure to properly
recognize this would have been devastating to northern
Minnesota, as you know.
Respectfully, I wish this was the case with other species
under scrutiny by the Fish and Wildlife Service, and I am sure
you know where I am going to go. We are going to be talking
about the gray wolf today.
Chairman Bentz just convened a Subcommittee hearing in
northern Minnesota on this very issue less than 2 weeks ago.
During that hearing, we heard from stakeholders from Oregon,
Wisconsin, and Minnesota on the listing status of the gray
wolf. Across the board, we heard loud and clear the gray wolf
has recovered. Unfortunately, the Fish and Wildlife Service
declined this Subcommittee's invitation to attend and
participate in that hearing. Hopefully, you can provide answers
to some of the questions we were looking for today.
During the hearing, we were reminded of the fact that at
least half the gray wolves in the Lower 48 are present in
Minnesota. And according to your agency and the Minnesota DNR's
estimates, we have over 2,700 wolves in Minnesota today. And
some think even more than that. When the gray wolf was listed
under the ESA in 1978, a recovery goal of 1,250 to 1,400 wolves
was set. It is clear we are far beyond that.
Director Williams, since the recovery goal has been met,
why hasn't the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service taken action to
delist the gray wolf in Minnesota?
Ms. Williams. Mr. Chair, Congressman Stauber, I look
forward to visiting with you more on this at some point. I have
not had a chance to sit down with you one-on-one and talk
through wolves, and I would certainly look forward to that
opportunity.
And I am sorry that we were not at that hearing. The Fish
and Wildlife Service prides itself for showing up, and it was
an issue of scheduling and preparing for this hearing. So, I am
sorry that we weren't there for that.
There are numerous processes before the Fish and Wildlife
Service regarding wolves right now. In fact, I keep a chart to
keep track of each of them. The previous administration had a
rule that the Fish and Wildlife Service promulgated to delist
the Lower 48.
Mr. Stauber. Under the past three administrations they have
supported the delisting, because they have recovered. So, go
on.
Ms. Williams. A district court overturned that decision. It
is now in an appeal process.
I also would love to recognize that I have worked on wolves
and wolf recovery for 30 years, from their first re-
introduction to now, and very much----
Mr. Stauber. Do you believe they have recovered? Do you
believe your own U.S. Fish and Wildlife stats that the gray
wolf has recovered?
Ms. Williams. I believe that they have met sufficient
numbers. But as to all five factors of the ESA, I don't have an
answer for you on that right now. But I would agree the numbers
are there.
But I would also, just like with grizzly bears and
Congressman Hageman, the analysis the Fish and Wildlife Service
undertakes is not just focused on the numbers, but also the
other five factors.
Mr. Stauber. I will tell you that 2 weeks ago Congress
actually started the legislating of delisting the gray wolf,
and it was a bipartisan effort. Before that vote even passed,
the Biden administration issued a Statement of Administrative
Policy, or a SAP, noting that the President would veto this
bill if it came to his desk.
Director Williams, was your office consulted on this before
the SAP was issued?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I am aware of what the SAP says,
and what the explanation in the SAP is.
Mr. Stauber. Was your office consulted on this before the
SAP was issued?
Ms. Williams. I do not have an answer to that. I was not
personally----
Mr. Stauber. Did you or anybody in your office provide any
recommendation to the White House on the SAP?
Ms. Williams. Not that I am aware of. I did not,
Congressman.
Mr. Stauber. So, here is the concern. The White House made
a policy decision relating to wildlife management without
consulting with the Federal Government's top official relating
to wildlife management, and that is you and your staff. That is
the frustrating thing. The White House put forth a SAP,
Director, without your knowledge or without your input.
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I was aware of it, and I agree
with the SAP for these reasons, that the Endangered Species Act
is driven by the law and science, and the Fish and Wildlife
Service would not support a congressional action to delist a
species. We would like to see the process of the ESA play out.
Mr. Stauber. Director, I understand the process. You can
process things to death, so long as it never happens. But we
had President Obama, his administration, President Biden, and
President Trump's administration all supported the delisting.
I see my time is up. I would ask that you answer one
question, and I will submit it to the Chair when I am done.
Thank you very much, and I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Mr. Moylan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to
waive into the hearing to hear our Administrator Spinrad here.
And I do hear constantly from Guam's local agencies and
fishermen that the foreign fishery vessels operate illegally in
Guam's waters, and the IUU fishing is a matter of both economic
and national security for Guam. It is no secret that there are
a large number of PRC vessels fishing illegally in the Western
Pacific. A 2021 report from the Office of Naval Intelligence
confirms that China's distant water fishing fleets may also
engage in security operations.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the
record a 2021 ONR report titled, ``Foreign Governments Use of
Distant Water Fishing Fleets as Extensions of the Maritime
Security Forces and Foreign Policies.''
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, sir.
This report lays out the startling reality, yet in my
meetings with NOAA officials they constantly underestimate,
understate, or outright deny the problem with IUU fishing in
the Western Pacific.
In fact, this report here has been updated about every 4
years, and initially you only see just a few dark blue spots.
And then, within less than an 8-year period, now it is
multiple, spread everywhere. Those are IUU fishings. In Guam,
there is a small section there, if you can figure out where
Asia is there, with China, and we are just a small dot in this
dark blue circle, and it is really affecting the island.
So, the question for our NOAA Administrator Spinrad, sir,
yes or no, please. Does NOAA believe that there is an IUU
fishing problem in the Western Pacific?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you. And how many cases in the Pacific
territories has NOAA's Office of Law Enforcement referred to
NOAA's Special Counsel or Department of Justice for review and
prosecution? Just a rough estimate.
Dr. Spinrad. I am going to have to get back to you for the
record with the specific numbers.
Mr. Moylan. OK. I can let you know, from our record, since
2015 there have been 0. And we cannot identify if there is
really a problem unless we start seeing where it is.
And in the report, there are these dark blue circles
everywhere, and it continues to grow. I bet you 4 years from
now it is going to be all over the place. So, I think the IUU
is a serious problem, and I would really, really appreciate the
focus on this problem.
Mr. Administrator, what projections would the Pacific
remote island areas add that are not already in place through
the current cumbersome system of management?
Do we really need more red tape and regulations?
Dr. Spinrad. Congressman, thank you for your attention to
this particularly insidious problem, and I want to disabuse you
of the sense that we don't care. In fact, I would emphasize the
point that this is a very important issue for us for a variety
of reasons, not the least of which is our responsibilities in
the Department of Commerce for ensuring economic security, but
food security, and addressing that our seafood enterprise or
seafood economy is solid.
We have identified IUU fishing as a critical area for
development of new tools and new capabilities. We are currently
working on finding enhanced enforcement opportunities for
Maritime Safe, the Port State Measures Act, and the Moratorium
Protection Act, as well as doubling down on our seafood import
monitoring program, especially the enforcement pieces, and
especially, I would add, the unfair labor practices and forced
labor activities associated with IUU fishing.
Mr. Moylan. It is important, the IUU, and we should be
addressing it, but I don't think we should be addressing it by
adding more sanctuaries in my area of Guam, in the Marianas
Trench. We should be focused on the IUU. But I am glad to hear
that.
Now, the Marine Conservation Plan and marine project areas.
NOAA's Equity and Environmental Justice Strategy and the
President's Environmental Justice for All Executive Order
states that the underserved communities should not face
disproportionate burdens or under-investment. Quite frankly,
both burdens and the underinvestment are Guam's realities.
Basically, I know we are running short on time here, but
let's see if we can get one question. You are asking for $17
million in additional fundings for sanctuaries and marine
project areas. Disproportionately, sanctuaries affect the
fishing industries of the Pacific territories more than the
mainland in the United States. With the Pacific Remote Islands
Sanctuary, what economic impact do you see for the Pacific
territories?
Dr. Spinrad. We definitely understand the importance of the
fisheries development projects in Guam. With respect to
specifically the Marine Conservation Plan, I can assure you
that we support the fisheries conservation and management
objectives, and we look forward to exploring the ways in which
we might be able to work closely with the territories on that
plan.
Mr. Moylan. All right. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am out
of time. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Mr. Carter for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to waive on to this Committee.
Although I am not a member of the Committee, I am a member
of the Western Caucus. In fact, I like to take the title of
being the most eastern-most member of the Western Caucus. I
have the honor and privilege of representing the entire coast
of Georgia, including an area known as Okefenokee Swamp, an
area that is very important to us and that we are very proud
of, and that we do a lot to protect.
I have heard about the hardships that have been
communicated by my Western colleagues about dealing with the
permitting of Federal Government and the over-reach into their
natural resources, especially when it comes to mining. And now
this all-of-the-government approach that this Administration
seems to be using, it seems to be causing problems and stepping
all over states' rights.
Director Williams, your agency keeps trying to create
Federal hooks to assert jurisdiction over certain areas,
including in my district in Okefenokee Swamp, to stop all kinds
of important development projects.
Please, let me preface this by saying I am not taking up
for the project. I am not entering an opinion one way or the
other. My concern here is the Federal Government and their role
in this, and why they are inserting themselves into this when
it is obviously, and has been stated to be, a state project and
under state permitting.
There is a mining project right outside the Okefenokee
Wildlife Refuge. It is not within the refuge, it is outside. I
want to make sure that we understand that. It is not under Fish
and Wildlife jurisdiction. But over the last year, your agency
has tried to insert itself into the state process, even though
there isn't a Federal nexus. Even the Corps of Engineers has
said that there is no Federal Clean Water Act jurisdiction
where they wanted to mine in this district.
Then Interior Secretary Haaland wrote an unsolicited
letter, unsolicited, to Georgia Governor Brian Kemp, not to
allow the mine to proceed. That, to me, is over-reach of the
Secretary's authority, and without legal basis.
Now, the Fish and Wildlife Service last month has sent out
a what I would consider to be propaganda document that is
disguised as a fact sheet opposing this project. And Mr.
Chairman, I would like to enter this into the record, if I
could. It reads to be intervention. It looks to be
intervention. It smells like intervention. I would submit to
you it is intervention on behalf of the Federal Government, and
I would like to submit this into the record, if I could.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

Mr. Carter. My question, Director Williams, is this: Why
don't you trust the state to do their job? Why has the Federal
Government entered into this?
Ms. Williams. Mr. Chair and Congressman Carter, thank you
for this question, and our shared interest in the Okefenokee
Swamp and the National Wildlife Refuge.
A year ago, I went and camped in the wilderness. I think
many people don't realize there is a wilderness.
Mr. Carter. We are not talking about the wilderness. We are
talking outside of the swamp. We are talking outside of that.
Ms. Williams. Congressman, the Fish and Wildlife Service
provided comments to the state permit application, as we do
when we are adjacent landowners. In this instance, the Fish and
Wildlife Service commented on the proposal. In working in close
contact with the state of Georgia, both the Commission and the
agency, we commented because the proposed action has the
potential to negatively impact the National Wildlife Refuge and
the water rights.
Mr. Carter. When you send the Governor a letter asking him
to oppose it and to stop the project.
Ms. Williams. I am sorry, Congressman, I am not following
your question.
I have been paying very close attention to this matter. And
as I said, I have been working with our regional director in
the state of Georgia.
Mr. Carter. You are saying for the record that you are
opposing this project, and that you are spending Federal
taxpayers' money to put out propaganda like this opposing the
project.
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I am not aware.
Mr. Carter. That is outside of the refuge.
Ms. Williams. I am not aware of the flier. The Fish and
Wildlife Service does oppose an activity that negatively
impacts the water rights and the refuge that is the only one of
its kind, as you know, in this country.
Mr. Carter. I understand that.
Ms. Williams. So, where the impacts----
Mr. Carter. And again, I am not questioning whether the
mine should go forward or not. That is up to the state of
Georgia. My point here is that the Fish and Wildlife has
inserted themselves into something that even the Army Corps of
Engineers said they had no right to do.
And I am wondering to myself, why the Secretary sends a
letter to the Governor telling him to oppose this project? Why
don't we trust the state?
Can you give me an example of other projects that you are
opposing that are outside of your jurisdiction?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, we are not at all saying we
don't trust the state. The states often do invite us to comment
on the impacts of a proposal before them. And in this instance,
I would argue that the state of Georgia, the agency reviewing
this, wants to know and is looking at the potential impacts of
the proposed mine or not.
Mr. Carter. And with all due respect, Director, I would
submit to you that the state of Georgia is perfectly capable of
making these types of decisions, and without the intervention
and without propaganda being sent by the Fish and Wildlife. And
you are intervening in an area that is obviously outside of
your jurisdiction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to waive on to
this.
And thank you, Director Williams, for your answers.
Ms. Williams. Thank you.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Commissioner Touton, I want to thank you for your efforts
in the Klamath, a hugely challenging situation. Your phrase, or
I think the phrase was, ``We have to find a way to help provide
certainty,'' an admirable goal. I look forward to working with
you on that, and we have been working on that. And you might
share with us later, off camera here, so to speak, when and
what you have in mind in that regard.
Ms. Touton. I am happy to follow up, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bentz. I can't think of anything much more important to
the farmers in that space than certainty, which they certainly
have not had to this point.
Director Williams, I want to thank you also for the work on
the wolf. I just want you to say, for purposes of the record
today, that the wolf is not endangered.
[Pause.]
Mr. Bentz. I am listening.
Ms. Williams. Chairman, you are asking for me to say that
the wolf is not endangered?
Mr. Bentz. Your agency has already said it. It actually
said the wolf is, as things currently stand, good for another
100 years. So, can you say, as the Director, the wolf is not
endangered?
Ms. Williams. Congressman, I cannot say a hypothetical.
Mr. Bentz. All right, fine. You can't say it. Just say no.
Say you can't say it. Apparently, the wolf is endangered in
your mind, even though your agency says otherwise.
Ms. Williams. Congressman, the Fish and Wildlife Service
just issued a finding that the northern Rocky Mountain wolf
population is not threatened or endangered.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, that is good. I want to shift now to
Secretary Spinrad.
Mr. Secretary, you have a considerable amount of money in
your budget for studies, all kinds of different labels on those
studies. But my question is, how much of your focus is on the
salmon that emerged from the Snake and Columbia Rivers and go
into the ocean? How much of your budget is focused on figuring
out what is going on in the ocean with those salmon and
steelhead emerging from the Columbia River? And the Snake
River?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for the question, Chair.
There are dedicated investments that we make for very
specific studies. And there are, in fact, eight specific salmon
studies in the ocean.
Mr. Bentz. So, what I need to have you do is get those to
this Committee. I absolutely need those studies. And I want to
see what your agency is doing to help offset, if you will, the
three-quarters of a billion dollars that the ratepayers of the
Northwest are investing in the in-stream portion of that system
every year.
And I want to see what you are doing in your agency to go
into the ocean and figure out what is going on with the half of
the fish that get to Bonneville, but only one comes back on the
example of, like, 100 fish starting in Idaho. So, I need to
have those studies.
And more to the point, I kind of want to see what their
results are, so we don't have this ongoing maybe it is going to
work out, maybe it isn't.
Dr. Spinrad. Can I just correct that there are actually
nine studies, and we will get those to you.
Mr. Bentz. Say that again.
Dr. Spinrad. There are actually nine specific studies. We
will get those to you.
Mr. Bentz. Yes. I also want you to show me the type of
analysis you are doing in selecting the scientists to do the
studies. I want to see the science, how you do it, because I
think there is discrimination going on in who you hire, how you
hire them. I want to see what you are doing when it comes to
employing.
Dr. Spinrad. Those are in combination with our academic
partners, I would point out, as well. We can certainly get you
that information.
Mr. Bentz. I want to read this number to you here, and ask
this question. The question is lack of regulatory authority.
Neither the ESA nor the MMPA provides NMFS with the authority
to impose broad rules to regulate a societal activity like
boating that has a very low probability of occurring. The
probability of a vessel in a 35- to 65-foot class size class
striking a right whale is less than 1 in 1 million. Do you
agree or disagree?
Dr. Spinrad. I actually disagree with that fact, based on
what we have seen this year.
Mr. Bentz. What is your opinion? What is the probability?
Dr. Spinrad. That there is a higher probability. We have
had three strikes this year, and we know that some of those
strikes are from smaller vessels.
Mr. Bentz. Well, you had three strikes. What is the
probability of that happening?
Dr. Spinrad. I don't have that number.
Mr. Bentz. I suppose if there were three ships out there,
it would be 100 percent. But there are thousands of ships out
there. So, again, I need this number from you so we can kind of
get a grasp on the regulatory authority situation.
I want to shift again, sticking with NMFS, to the outcome
of the so-called ``friendly lawsuit.'' We call it a ``friendly
lawsuit'' back in my law practice when the so-called mediation
was worked out in determining what to do with the Snake River
dams.
Is it your opinion that those four lower Snake River dams
should come out? Is it your agency's opinion that they should
come out?
Dr. Spinrad. It is our agency's view that we can identify
what the impacts are on the salmon population. We don't express
an opinion on whether the dams should go in or go out, and that
authority actually resides with Congress.
Mr. Bentz. I would be probably hugely interested in knowing
where the ``healthy and abundant'' standard came from that
appears in the mediation documents. It certainly isn't the ESA
standard.
Can you share with us where that standard came from that is
now working its way into the documentation, the mediation
documents about where everybody wants to end up?
And I want you also to say that this is what the ratepayers
of the Northwest are now going to be asked to pay for, this so-
called healthy and abundant standard.
Dr. Spinrad. We can certainly get back to you for the
record on where the standard comes from, and the background on
that.
Mr. Bentz. I know where the standard came from. It came
from a document that was called, ``The Columbia Basin
Restoration Initiative.''
Dr. Spinrad. Yes.
Mr. Bentz. It is not a rulemaking exercise.
My time is up. I want to thank all of you for being here. I
want to thank you for coming back after we came off the Floor
from voting. Thank you all for your patience.
And the members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. Eastern Time on Tuesday, May 21. The hearing record will
be held open for 10 business days for these responses.
I also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
letter received by the Committee from the Santa Ynez Band of
Chumash Indians.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

SANTA YNEZ BAND OF CHUMASH INDIANS

Santa Ynez, CA

John Armor, Director
Office of National Marine Sanctuaries
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
1305 East-West Hwy
Silver Spring, MD 20910

Dear Director Armor:

We, the Santa Ynez Band of the Chumash Indians and the
International Connectivity Coalition (ICC), write to express our
unified support for the designation of the Chumash Heritage National
Marine Sanctuary. We ask that this designation allow for the
maintenance and expansion of submarine communication cables within the
Sanctuary boundaries to ensure that Indian Country and other
underserved communities across the nation can have access to expanded,
affordable and reliable internet in the years to come.

For generations, indigenous communities have been subjected to a
communications gap compared to other parts of the United States. Even
today, this gap is pervasive. According to the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis:

Households in tribal communities are 21 percent less
likely to have access to the internet than neighboring non-
tribal communities;

Download speeds in tribal communities are 66 percent
slower than download speeds in neighboring non-tribal
communities; and

Upload speeds in tribal communities are 78 percent slower
than download speeds in neighboring non-tribal communities.

Reliable access to and expansion of subsea cables and the
corresponding investment in internet infrastructure along the
California Central Coast will play a significant role in helping
address these shortcomings over time.

Importantly, we believe that submarine cables and conservation can
co-exist within the boundaries of the proposed sanctuary. The existing
regulatory structure relies on layers of environmental reviews and
permitting from multiple federal agencies--including the USACE, NOAA
and the FWS--as well as rigorous analysis and permitting by the State
of California's Lands Commission and Coastal Commission. This
regulatory structure has allowed for a dramatic expansion in
connectivity in recent years while ensuring that subsea and coastal
resources receive the protection they deserve. Consequently, provided
this existing process is followed after a Sanctuary declaration, we
believe this level of review should negate the need for further
permitting, including utilization of NOAA's Special Use Permits.

Since these subsea cables will be leveraged to expand the capacity
of the U.S. telecommunications to grow in a way that allows for
increased connectivity in Indian Country and in other underserved
communities, we respectfully urge the current regulatory and permitting
processes be deemed adequate for managing submarine cable activities
within the sanctuary boundaries.

The Santa Ynez Band of the Chumash Tribe and the ICC are committed
to advancing technological development while respecting and preserving
cultural heritage and environmental integrity. The cooperative approach
between these entities exemplifies a balanced path forward, where
technological advancement and environmental conservation go hand in
hand. We look forward to working with NOAA to ensure these shared goals
are met within the boundaries of a future Chumash Heritage National
Marine Sanctuary.

Sincerely,

Kenneth Kahn, Chairman        Elaine Albrich, on behalf of the
Santa Ynez Band of Chumash    International Connectivity Coalition
Indians

______

Mr. Bentz. If there is no further business before the
Committee, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 5:38 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Bentz

STATE OF OREGON

Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Subject: Federal Delisting of Grey Wolves

We are writing to express our support for the delisting of the grey
wolf (Canis lupus) in America, echoing sentiments shared by many who
have witnessed the remarkable recovery of this iconic species since its
initial listing under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) in 1973.

Since the enactment of the ESA, wolves have experienced a
remarkable resurgence, expanding exponentially in numbers and range
across the United States. This resurgence is a testament to the
effectiveness of the ESA in providing crucial protections and fostering
the recovery of imperiled species. The successful reintroduction of an
experimental population into Yellowstone National Park and Central
Idaho in the mid-1990s marked a turning point, leading to a resurgence
that has seen wolves reclaim territory in adjoining states and even
establish stable populations in Oregon and Washington. The wolf
populations in California and Nevada have also been dispersing.

The states empowered by the ESA and guided by their respective wolf
management plans, have played a pivotal role in safeguarding and
managing wolf populations. Oregon and Washington have demonstrated
exemplary commitment to wolf conservation and management, despite
three-fourths of their states being under ESA jurisdiction. Both states
have implemented robust management and protection measures, leading to
the stabilization of wolf populations, and prompting efforts to delist
wolves as endangered species.

On November 9th, 2015, Oregon voted to the delist wolves in Oregon
thus marking a significant milestone in recognizing the success of
state-led conservation efforts. Subsequent legislative actions
regarding that decision were made and was affirmed by the Oregon State
Legislature and Oregon State Governor in HB 4040 (2016) which
underscored the commitment of the state to assume greater
responsibility for the management and protection of wolves.

It is evident that the ESA has fulfilled its mandate in
facilitating the recovery of the grey wolf, paving the way for
successful state-led conservation efforts. Now with stable wolf
populations and comprehensive management plans in place, it is time to
transition authority and responsibility for wolf management solely to
the states. By delisting the grey wolf we can acknowledge the
achievements of both the ESA and state conservation efforts while
ensuring the continued conservation and sustainable management of this
iconic species.

Considering these developments, I urge you to consider the
overwhelming evidence supporting the delisting of the grey wolf and to
prioritize the transfer of authority to state agencies for the
management and protection of this species. We must recognize the
recovery of the grey wolf population in the lower 48 otherwise Federal
ESA recovery loses its legitimacy.

Respectfully,

Bobby Levy                    Tim Knopp
House District 58             Senate District 27

Bill Hansell                  Boomer Wright
Senate District 29            House District 9

David Brock Smith             Court Boice
Senate District 1             House District 1

Lynn Findley                  Jeff Helfrich
Senate District 30            House District 52
Mark Owens                    Rick Lewis
House District 60             House District 18

Cyrus Javadi                  Christine Goodwin
House District 32             House District 4

Emily McIntire                Virgle Osborne
House District 56             House District 2

Anna Scharf                   Ed Diehl
House District 23             House District 17

E. Werner Reschke             Dwayne Yunker
House District 55             House District 3

Christina Witham              Vicki Breese-Iverson
Baker County Commissioner     House District 5

Shane Alderson                Dan Dorran
Baker County Commissioner     Umatilla County Commissioner

Bruce Nichols                 John Shafer
Baker County Commissioner     Umatilla County Commissioner

Todd Nash                     Cindy Timmons
Wallowa County Commissioner   Umatilla County Commissioner

Susan Roberts                 Derrick DeGroot
Wallowa County Commissioner   Klamath County Commissioner

John Hillock                  Patti Adair
Wallowa County Commissioner   Deschutes County Commissioner

Paul Anderes                  John Rowell
Union County Commissioner     Grant County Commissioner

Matt Scarfo                   Roy Drago Jr.
Union County Commissioner     Morrow County Commissioner

Donna Beverage
Union County Commissioner

______

Submission for the Record by Rep. Westerman

May 6, 2024

Hon. Martha Williams, Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20240

Dear Director Williams:

The undersigned organizations, which represent millions of
America's hunters, anglers, recreational shooters, wildlife scientists,
and other conservation professionals, write regarding the recently
proposed rule and policy updates known as the National Wildlife Refuge
System (NWRS) biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health
(BIDEH) proposal (Docket Number: FWS-HQ-NWRS-2022-0106).

Specifically, we write to express our significant concerns and
disagreement with the BIDEH proposal given its marked and consequential
change in direction on the management of the NWRS. We strongly urge the
rescission of the BIDEH draft policy and manual chapter to initiate a
new, more thoughtful, inclusive discussion about the management
objectives and conservation challenges of the NWRS.

On February 26, 2024, many of the undersigned sent a letter to the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) requesting the 30-day comment
period be extended by 60 days given that the original comment period
was insufficient to conduct a thorough review of the extensive
proposal. Additionally, the letter requested that a meeting with the
Director be provided to discuss this proposal. We would like to thank
FWS for delivering on this request by providing an extension of the
comment period until May 6, 2024, as well as for speaking to many of
the undersigned during the North American Wildlife and Natural
Resources Conference in late March.

However, after more deliberative review, subsequent briefings, and
Congressional testimony from FWS, we write today to request FWS
terminate the BIDEH proposal, and then engage partners in a more
transparent, inclusive, and thoughtful discussion about the needs,
objectives, and real solutions for the conservation challenges facing
the NWRS. A recission of the proposal will provide the opportunity for
a meaningful discussion regarding the scientific data indicating the
need for this policy and impacts of a change to the current BIDEH
policy to the management of individual refuges across the country.

The undersigned appreciated the opportunity to hear from the
Director as well as senior FWS and NWRS staff in March, however,
despite this engagement, we do not feel our voices are truly being
heard, and that there appears to be a significant divergence between
what we read in the proposed rule and what we are hearing from
briefings from USFWS Refuge staff in terms of the implication of the
rule. We believe that the current proposal in its entirety is too far
adrift to be improved, and unfortunately, the proposal is far-reaching,
too vague, and in conflict with many refuge purposes to simply be
amended or altered.

In conclusion, we strongly urge FWS to entirely rescind the current
proposal and initiate a new, more inclusive approach as recommended
above. As you know, many of the partners below are strong advocates for
the NWRS and move forward to address the real pressing needs of the
System most notably addressing the challenges of staffing shortages,
reduced operational capacity and failing infrastructure. We thank you
for your consideration of this request.

Sincerely,

American Woodcock Society     National Shooting Sports
Foundation

Archery Trade Association     National Trappers Association

Backcountry Hunters &
Anglers                       National Wild Turkey Federation

Boone and Crockett Club       Pheasants Forever

California Waterfowl
Association                   Professional Outfitters and
Guides of America
Congressional Sportsmen's
Foundation                    Quail Forever

Conservation Force            Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation

Council to Advance Hunting
and the Shooting Sports       Ruffed Grouse Society

Delta Waterfowl               Safari Club International

Ducks Unlimited               Sportsmen's Alliance

Houston Safari Club           Theodore Roosevelt Conservation
Partnership

Izaak Walton League of
America                       Whitetails Unlimited

Masters of Foxhounds
Association                   Wild Sheep Foundation

National Deer Association     Wildlife Mississippi

National Rifle Association

______

Submission for the Record by Rep. Newhouse

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
