- OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON BIDEN'S BORDER CRISIS: THE CONSEQUENCES OF FAILING TO SECURE FEDERAL BORDER LANDS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BIDEN'S BORDER CRISIS: THE
CONSEQUENCES OF FAILING TO
SECURE FEDERAL BORDER LANDS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Thursday, February 8, 2024, in Sierra Vista, Arizona
__________

Serial No. 118-95
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-783 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                       CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, February 8, 2024.......................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     4
Ciscomani, Hon. Juan, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:

McCaa, Hon. Clea, Mayor, Sierra Vista, Arizona...............     8
Prepared statement of....................................    10

Dannels, Hon. Mark, Sheriff, Cochise County, Arizona.........    11
Prepared statement of....................................    12

Del Cueto, Art, Vice President, National Border Patrol
Council, Tucson, Arizona...................................    19
Prepared statement of....................................    21

Boelts, John, Vice President, Arizona Farm Bureau, Yuma,
Arizona....................................................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    24

Chilton, James, Rancher, Arivaca, Arizona....................    25
Prepared statement of....................................    26

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

Chilton Ranch LLC, Letter to the Committee...............    59

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stauber

Letter to Secretary Mayorkas, Department of Homeland
Security...............................................    38

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING ON BIDEN'S
BORDER CRISIS: THE CONSEQUENCES
OF FAILING TO SECURE FEDERAL
BORDER LANDS

----------

Thursday, February 8, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Sierra Vista, Arizona

----------

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:30 p.m., at
Cochise College, Community Room, 901 Colombo Avenue, Sierra
Vista, Arizona, Hon. Tom Tiffany [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Westerman, Curtis, Stauber,
Tiffany, and Moylan.
Also present: Representatives Newhouse, Ciscomani, LaMalfa,
Hageman, Collins, Carter, Fischbach, and Hern.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order. I am assuming the mic is on here. It sounds like it is
good.
I would like to welcome everybody to Cochise College here
in Sierra Vista, Arizona. And let's see here. Yes, thank you to
Dr. Rottweiler? Where are you? You are right here, yes,
terrific. First of all, thank you very much for the challenge
coin. We appreciate that very much. And thank you so much for
hosting this in your beautiful college here in Sierra Vista. We
really appreciate it.
We are here for an official Natural Resources Subcommittee
on Federal Lands Oversight Hearing entitled ``Biden's Border
Crisis: The Consequences of Failing to Secure Federal Border
Lands.'' My name is Tom Tiffany. I am the Chairman of the
Subcommittee and represent the 7th District of Wisconsin, right
underneath Lake Superior.
This Subcommittee is meeting today to discuss the Biden
administration's ongoing failure to secure our nation's
southern border. It has become a true national security,
environmental, and humanitarian crisis.
Before we begin, I would like to remind everybody about the
rules of decorum for official congressional proceedings. I ask
that there not be any kind of disruption regarding the
testimony given here today. It is important that we respect the
decorum and the rules of the Committee and of the House of
Representatives, and to allow the Members and the public to
hear our proceedings.
Now, we will begin our hearing with a presentation of the
colors by the Tombstone High School Junior ROTC. I will ask
that everyone please rise for the presentation of the colors.
[Presentation of the colors.]
Mr. Tiffany. We will now be led in the Pledge of Allegiance
by Representative Ciscomani.
Mr. Ciscomani. Please join me.
[Group recitation of Pledge of Allegiance.]
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Congressman Ciscomani.
Now, for a few additional housekeeping items, without
objection the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
Subcommittee at any time. I ask unanimous consent that the
following Members be allowed to participate in today's hearing
from the dais: the gentleman from Washington and the Chairman
of the Congressional Western Caucus, Mr. Newhouse; the
gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Ciscomani; the gentleman from
California, Mr. LaMalfa; the gentlewoman from Wyoming, Ms.
Hageman; the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins; the gentleman
from Georgia, Mr. Carter; the gentlewoman form Minnesota, Ms.
Fischbach; and the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Hern.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. I will now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
I want to begin by thanking the people here in Sierra Vista
for hosting us here today. It is our pleasure to be in this
beautiful community. And my only disappointment, coming from
northern Wisconsin, when we go to Arizona we expect 70 degrees.
I would also like to thank Representative Ciscomani and the
Congressional Western Caucus, led by Chairman Dan Newhouse, for
helping make this the most widely attended field hearing held
by the Natural Resources Committee this Congress. We are here
to discuss a vital subject, one that has doubtlessly affected
everyone in this city and in similar communities throughout
Arizona and the entire Southwest.
Under President Biden, the situation at the southern border
has spiraled completely out of control. During his term, United
States Customs and Border Protection has recorded more than 6
million encounters with illegal immigrants crossing into the
United States from Mexico. Added to that are the more than 1.7
million migrants who successfully evaded border officials
during the same period.
Since significant numbers of convicted criminals, known
gang members, and suspected terrorists have crossed the
southern border in recent years, the Biden administration's
failure to apprehend, or even adequately screen the millions of
people pouring into our country is an appalling security
failure. Further, under President Biden's watch, a full 90 to
95 percent of the illegal narcotics carried by smugglers across
the southern border makes it through without being seized. In
fact, more than 90 percent of the fentanyl currently
circulating in the United States enters the country this way.
And I would just say, we took a little side trip here
today, and it is not hard to understand why all that fentanyl
is pouring into our country when the border checkpoints are not
manned because they are off having to do other things.
This helps explain why fentanyl overdose kills roughly
70,000 Americans annually, and is now the leading cause of
death for Americans aged 18 to 45. Here in Arizona, the Customs
and Border Protection's Tucson Sector has become the busiest in
the nation for illegal drug smuggling.
You may be asking, why is the Natural Resources Committee
interested in this issue? Every person in this room knows the
effects of illegal immigration on our communities, but few know
about the damage and destruction illegal immigration has on our
public lands. We are here today to bring attention to this
issue. Roughly 40 percent of the southern border is made up of
Federal lands, and in Arizona, 80 percent of border lands are
owned by the Federal Government.
As the immigration surge has overwhelmed official ports of
entry, migrants have been pouring into Arizona's public lands,
which are more remote and less easily patrolled. Each of these
illegal migrants leaves behind an estimated 6 to 8 pounds of
trash. Last year, more than 28,000 pounds of trash were picked
up by the Federal officials in Arizona along the southern
border. This is barely scratching the surface. With more than
2.4 million illegal crossings last year, it is likely that
illegal immigrants left a minimum of 14.4 million pounds of
trash. Let me say that again: illegal immigration is causing
millions of pounds of trash to pile up on our Federal lands.
In many cases, this environmental degradation is happening
in our most sensitive landscapes: wildlife refuges, national
monuments, and wilderness areas. Many of you have probably been
to the Coronado National Memorial, which is a mere 30-minute
drive from here. A National Park Service employee at the
Coronado reported that the trash piles there have grown so
large that they have become resting spots for illegal
immigrants, who then need to be airlifted out of this
ecologically sensitive area, at enormous expense to the
taxpayer.
You cannot call yourself a true conservationist unless you
are willing to take a hard look at the environmental toll
illegal immigration is having on our public lands.
Unfortunately, with all the effects that illegal immigration is
having on our society, the consequences for our Federal lands
are often the last issues to receive attention. We are here
today to get the message out about the importance of conserving
our Federal lands and securing our border.
Today, I took the time this morning to go through the
Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge to the Coronado National
Forest, and the photos I am about to show you are from today. I
want to thank Sean Wilson and his crew for escorting me out
there to see what is going on.
First of all, you will see a pile of firewood. This is
firewood that has been harvested in the Coronado National
Forest.
Go to the second slide, if you would, the fire.
And here we have the firewood being burned. There is no
permit that is being taken out on this. You, as Americans,
would have to get a permit. You would have to get the right to
be able to do that. This is just happening in our national
forest not far from here.
Slide 3, you will see the trash and food piles all stacked
up in the national forest.
And finally, we found lots of these. Catholic Charities,
American Red Cross who are helping facilitate this. And I
understand that their mission, they say, is humanitarian. There
is nothing humanitarian about what is happening to so many
migrants that are coming across our southern border, how they
are being abused by the cartels. There is nothing humanitarian
about it. Catholic Charities and other NGOs need to reconsider
what they are doing with their facilitation of the greatest
human trafficking effort perhaps in the history of the world
since slavery.
As some of you may know, when on Federal lands, there are
strict rules on where campsites and campfires are allowed, and
permits can be required. But it appears these rules and
regulations are reserved for the citizens of this country. All
those pouring over illegally face zero repercussions for their
blatant disregard for our public lands and the environment, as
shown from our visit today. So, not only do they get free
flights around our country, free health care, and access to our
schools, but they also get to trash and leave human waste on
our public lands as their welcoming gift.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today, and
I look forward to the insights that each of you will bring to
this important discussion.
With that, I will now recognize the Chairman of the Full
Committee, Mr. Westerman, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REP-
RESENTATIVE IN  CONGRESS  FROM  THE STATE OF
ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and thank you
for your work and the work of the Subcommittee staff in
organizing this Federal Lands field hearing today. These are
hearings that we try to do across the country, in many
different places, to address the concerns of the Natural
Resources Committee, and as Chairman Tiffany noted, we have a
major concern with our Federal lands on our southern border.
Again, I also want to recognize and extend my thanks to
Representative Ciscomani, we are here in his district today,
for his leadership on these issues and many more issues in the
House. And as Chairman Tiffany said, we have several members of
the Western Caucus that are with us, including Chairman Dan
Newhouse. Dan, thank you for organizing the site visits and for
all your work in highlighting issues that are important to the
West and to rural America.
We just returned from a trip to the border to see
firsthand, once again, the challenges our law enforcement
personnel face securing our border under this Administration. I
first came to the Arizona border in, I believe it was 2018. I
see some familiar faces here, Art. And I came out here looking
at the same thing Representative Tiffany was talking about, the
trash on our Federal lands, how there is a double standard in
our country for an American to use our Federal lands versus an
illegal coming across the border and trashing our Federal
lands, as you saw in this picture. I thought we had a bad
border process at the time. It was nothing, in 2018, like we
are facing now.
Each trip I have made out here, and on the Texas border and
other places along the border, shows me that the situation is
getting worse. It is not getting better. It is unfortunate
because the witnesses before us today are faced with the
consequences of weak border policies that cripple the ability
of our Federal, state, and local law enforcement to fully
protect our people, our lands, and our freedom.
People often don't realize just how much of our southern
border is comprised of Federal lands. Under the jurisdiction of
this Committee, in Arizona, 80 percent of the border is Federal
land, and I have personally met with CBP officials who have
told me just how difficult it is to patrol the border on the
Federal lands. I had opportunity to fly the border, the whole
Arizona border. It is some rough country out there, some open
country out there. And I live in Arkansas. I don't think the
people in my state or other parts of the country realize just
how vast and open and difficult this border is.
These agents, who are just trying to do their jobs, lack
accessible roads and physical barriers that are proven to deter
illegal immigration. In some areas, restrictive designations
such as wilderness mean they must stop active pursuit of
dangerous criminals because they cannot use their ATVs.
When we fail to secure our Federal lands, we fail to secure
our border, and the process we have now at the border is
unprecedented. Last year, roughly 2.5 million people crossed
into this country illegally. That is a 43 percent increase from
2 years prior. This just isn't common sense. Our CBP agents
should have the access they need to do their jobs and have
operational control of the border. When we fail to do so, it
leads to a series of national security, environmental, and
humanitarian crises.
Due to the remoteness, Federal lands are often targeted by
bad actors. Drug and human traffickers seek out remote areas to
access the country. Illegal immigrants cut trails through
sensitive wildlife habitat, they start wildfires, and leave
behind an estimated 6 to 8 pounds of trash, as Representative
Tiffany talked about. That is per person.
Illegal immigration also deters members of the public from
visiting these areas. This is unacceptable. Every American
should feel safe and comfortable recreating on and visiting our
public lands. Unfortunately, every town is now a border town,
and every state is a border state. This is true of our Federal
lands as well, where the impacts of illegal immigration can be
felt from miles away, I will say thousands of miles away.
In California, dangerous cartels grow illegal marijuana on
Federal forest lands. The proceeds from illegal cultivation are
funding cartels, human trafficking, and a host of other illegal
issues. The Biden administration is housing illegal migrants on
National Park Service land in Brooklyn, New York. Right here in
Arizona, illegal immigrants discard millions of pounds of
trash, cut trails through sensitive wildlife habitat, and start
wildfires.
Today, we will hear stories and firsthand accounts from our
panel of witnesses describing the harm a porous border causes
on families, ranchers, farmers, local communities, law
enforcement, and, at the end of the day, on all of our citizens
of our country. These stories resonate with each of us.
I want to thank each of the witnesses for being here today.
I want to thank the college for providing this excellent
hearing space.
And we had an opportunity to meet with Sheriff Dannels this
morning. He said something, I think he put it more succinctly
than I have heard it said from anybody else. He said, ``This
isn't just an immigration crisis anymore. It is an organized
crime crisis.'' That is what is happening in the United States
of America, and you know firsthand here in Arizona how that
affects so many people.
Our Constitution says that Congress makes the laws, the
Administration enforces the laws, and the judicial system
interprets the laws. Congress has made laws that give the
Administration the power to do eight things that could be done
right now: we can end catch-and-release; we can re-instate the
Remain in Mexico policy; we can enter into asylum cooperative
agreements; we can end parole abuses; we can detain
inadmissible aliens; we can use expedited removal; we can rein
in taxpayer-funded benefits for illegal aliens; and we can
issue a proclamation to suspend, to restrict entry. Those
authorities are already there. There is one person, one person
in the United States of America that can do that. That is the
President of the United States, and I call on him today to do
his job and to protect our country.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your testimony. I
now turn to Congressman Ciscomani, who represents this
district, for his opening statement. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JUAN CISCOMANI, A REPRESENTA-
TIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Chairman
Westerman, and all of my colleagues for being here in Sierra
Vista to examine what is happening firsthand. I thank you for
showing up. I think showing up is a great example of the
interest and the true care that we have for this issue and our
resolve to do what we can on the Congress side, and continue to
do that, to fix this issue.
I would also like to thank Cochise College, of course, for
hosting us all here today, and I especially also want to thank
the witnesses. I know every single one of you personally, and I
know how busy you are, and I know how much you have been
dealing and struggling with this issue for as long as you have.
So, I want to say thank you so much for all of the work you
have done but also being here, to lend your expertise and show
my colleagues why I am so proud to represent all of you in the
U.S. Congress.
And I also want to thank everybody in the audience today.
Thank you for showing up. Thank you for being here. Thank you
for caring. Thank you for doing all that you can as well, as
this is something that has been impacting everyone in different
ways. So, I want to thank everyone for that.
As anyone in southeastern Arizona knows well, the border
crisis and crises are not a new phenomenon for us. They are a
result of a combination of the broken immigration system, a
lack of desire by the Federal Government to enforce the laws,
and just a plethora of other issues as well, and other factors.
Yet, what we see here in Sierra Vista and in the Tucson Sector
is quite unique compared to a lot of the southwest border. It
is bad actors, cartels and organized crime, pushing fentanyl,
migrants, and whatever else they want, as they have more
control over the area than anyone else. And we have seen that.
The other thing that makes the Arizona border unique is
that 80 percent of the southern borderland is on Federal lands.
This creates extra burdens on our local and Federal law
enforcement as well. CBP officials have publicly stated these
vast areas of Federal land ``provide transnational criminal
organizations significant opportunities to cross their
products, and most of them crossed by who have a criminal
record, are smuggling illegal narcotics or weapons or aliens
from specific interest countries.''
CBP encounters with migrants in the state's Tucson Sector
are already up over 140 percent in Fiscal Year 2024. Many
people don't know that. Many people assume that the worst part
of the border crisis is happening in other states. However, it
is right here, in this sector. This is ground zero for this.
At the beginning of the year, we experienced a port of
entry closure here in Arizona, in Lukeville. I was very vocal
against that closing. As temporary as it was, it was harmful.
This is in addition to all of our Border Patrol checkpoints
being closed as well. When ports of entry are closed, trade and
commerce suffer. We heard that this morning from a panel as
well.
That is one of the very unique things about this 2-day trip
that my colleagues and I are taking. It is focused on the
border security aspect of it, but it is also focused on the
environmental impact, the humanitarian impact, on trade and
commerce. We heard from these people at the border that are
crossing trade and commerce and goods and services across of
how much it impacts what is happening here. So, when the ports
of entry are closed, trade and commerce will suffer, and this
should be unacceptable.
But on top of that, when ports of entry are closed and
overrun, migrants have been pouring into Arizona's more remote
and less easily guarded territories, namely the Federal lands.
We have seen reports of smugglers and cartels actively
directing migrants towards Arizona's sparsely populated public
lands, border areas, as a means of entering the United States.
One thing that is very tragic, as well, as I know we will
hear from our panel is the morale of our Border Patrol agents
and how much they are suffering. So, I do want to take time, at
this point right now, to thank them for all their work and
being on the front lines for us every single day.
Moreover, when you have bad actors, they often don't want
to be caught and encountered by CBP, so instead, to evade
direction, they often are smuggled north. One of the
consequences of this is that they often end up in a vehicle on
a high-speed chase with law enforcement if they are caught.
That is why I introduced H.R. 5585. I am not going to say that
was my idea. That actually came from a meeting that I had with
local law enforcement here and Border Patrol agents, when I
said, as soon as I came into Congress, what is one bill that I
could pass, that we could introduce, that would address some of
the issues that you have. Name me one, and they named a
description of what we ended up passing.
We were proud to pass that bill through the U.S. House of
Representatives last week with bipartisan support, including
every single one of the Members that is at this table, that
voted for that bill today. So, thank you to my colleagues for
that.
This is a reality here in Cochise County, and I know our
witnesses are well equipped to speak on these issues.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Ciscomani.
Next, we are going to turn to our witness panel. Let me
remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you must limit
your oral statement to 5 minutes, but your entire statement
will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the light
will turn green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
Now, I would like to recognize our first witness, the
Honorable Mayor McCaa of Sierra Vista. Thank you for joining us
today. Sir, you have 5 minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLEA McCAA, MAYOR, SIERRA
VISTA, ARIZONA

Mr. McCaa. Thank you, sir. Good afternoon to the Chair and
distinguished members of this Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to address this Committee regarding the issues that
our city is having from the perspective of a mayor and
community leader. I have served the people of Sierra Vista as
mayor for the past 12 months, and prior to that I retired as a
combat service-disabled veteran of the great United States
Army. Additionally, I will submit my view from the perspective
of a father, husband, mentor, and a pastor.
Sierra Vista has a population of 45,000, and is located
about 20 miles from the U.S. border with Mexico. Sierra Vista
doesn't really feel like a border town. It is a military
community, home to the Army installation Fort Huachuca, which
is the home of the Buffalo Soldier. But it is the greatest city
in the United States, and I stand by that remark.
As I stated before, Sierra Vista is 20 miles north of Naco,
Arizona, and it is rare for the dangerous border issues you
sometimes read about to impact Sierra Vista. In fact, some of
the national rhetoric on border issues makes it harder for us
to attract businesses and visitors to our city because people
assume the area is much more dangerous than it really is. I
don't want to add any false perceptions about our violent crime
in our community, but for the past 3 years, the trend of young
people being recruited as so-called load car drivers does pose
a real threat to our residents and visitors, which fuels these
narratives about the violence near the border. Often using
social media, cartels in Mexico recruit residents in the United
States to travel to the border, pick up migrants whom the
cartels refer to as ``loads,'' and transport them north in
exchange for money. With two main thoroughfares coming through,
Sierra Vista lies in the path of those load car drivers who
travel through our community to proceed north.
In 2020, the Sierra Vista Police Department responded to 19
vehicle pursuits in our city, and that total increased to 38 in
2021. By 2022, the number increased to 50 pursuits. And in
2023, we saw 70 pursuits, where our Police Department was the
primary pursuing agency in 41 pursuits, and assisted in 29
other pursuits. The average speed of these load cars drivers in
those 41 pursuits was 90.5 miles per hour coming through our
city.
Those load car drivers, who often are teenagers or young
adults, are encouraged to drive recklessly through our town to
discourage pursuits. This has created extremely dangerous
situations to include load car drivers speeding through
elementary school zones and crashing into bicyclists. Two other
incidents resulted in serious accidents at major intersections
in town, while one that occurred north of the city ended in a
fatality.
Several more incidents resulted in motorcyclists being hit
by load car drivers, but thankfully it was not a fatality, but
also multiple properties have been damaged due to load car
drivers hitting concrete walls.
Our Police Department also saw a significant increase in
felony case submissions to the Cochise County Attorney's
Office, from 343 in 2020 to 588 in 2022. The number of felony
submissions remained high last year, with 531 in 2023. I want
to reiterate that this increase does not stem from the violent
crimes some may fear plague communities near the border, but is
largely tied to the surge of incidents related to load car
drivers. These incidents tie up a significant amount of time
for our Police Department's limited manpower.
I grew up in Sierra Vista and graduated from the local high
school, Buena High School--Go Colts. I have since raised my
family in this extraordinary community. It is a wonderful place
to call home. But recently I felt worried about my family
members' safety in a way that I have never felt before. I have
encouraged family members to avoid the major highways that run
through town, to stick to local streets because I know these
load car drivers pose a very serious threat to their safety. I
am not alone in feeling this way, as many have witnessed the
reckless driving and dangerous behavior of these drivers, and
many others have seen headlines about the damage and harm they
have caused.
Our law enforcement officers are burning out because they
are responding to speeding load cars in our county around the
clock. We do not have the resources or the personnel to handle
this sustained surge in illegal immigration. This county-wide
issue has caused the Cochise County majors to form a coalition
to stand behind our sheriff, police chiefs, and our Federal
partners in crafting a letter, which I have here, to President
Biden, describing our issues and noting the critical work that
our officers and deputies are doing in our county to make it
safe.
We urge you to make securing the U.S. border and supporting
our local, county, and Federal law enforcement a top priority.
Our communities depend on you. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. McCaa follows:]

Prepared Statement of Clea McCaa, Mayor, Sierra Vista, Arizona

Good afternoon to the Chair and distinguished members of this
committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to address this committee regarding
the issues that the city is having from the perspective of a mayor and
community leader. I have served the people of Sierra Vista as mayor for
12 months and prior to that, retired as a combat service--disabled
veteran of the US. Army. Additionally, I will submit my view from the
perspective of a father, husband, mentor, and pastor. Sierra Vista has
a population of about 45,000 and is located about 20 miles from the US
border with Mexico. Sierra Vista doesn't feel much like a border town.
It's a military community home to the Army installation Fort Huachuca
which is the home of the Buffalo Soldier.
It has a diverse, well-traveled population, who have settled here
often by choice to a quiet, safe lifestyle with a wealth of outdoor
recreational opportunities. I would like to say it's the best city in
the country and I will stand by that remark.
As I stated we are about 20 miles north of Naco, AZ and it's rare
for the dangerous border issues you sometimes read about to impact
Sierra Vista. In fact, some of the national rhetoric on border issues
makes it harder for us to attract visitors and businesses to our city
because people assume the area is more dangerous than it really is. I
don't want to add any false perceptions about violent crime in our
community. But for the past three years the trend of young people being
recruited as so-called load car drivers does pose a very real threat to
our residents and visitors, which fuels those narratives about violence
near the border. Often using social media, cartels in Mexico recruit
residents in the United States to travel to the border to pick up
migrants whom the cartels refer to as loads and transport them north in
exchange for money. With two main thoroughfares, Sierra Vista lies in
the path of those load car drivers who travel through our community to
proceed north.
In 2020 the Sierra Vista Police Department responded to 19 vehicle
pursuits in our City and that total increased to 38 in 2021. By 2022,
the number increased to 50 pursuits, and 2023 saw a record total of 70
pursuits where the Sierra Vista Police Department was the primary
pursuing agency in 41 vehicle pursuits, and assisted in 29 other
pursuits. The average maximum speed of the 41 SVPD pursuits was 90.5
miles per hour through our city.
These load car drivers, who are often teenagers or young adults,
are encouraged to drive recklessly through our town to discourage
pursuits. This has created extremely dangerous situations to include a
load car driver speeding through an elementary school zone and crashing
into a bicyclist. Two other incidents resulted in serious accidents at
major intersections in town, while one that occurred north of the city
ended in a fatality.
Several more incidents resulted in a motorcyclist being hit by a
load car, but thankfully it was not a fatality, and also multiple
properties being damaged due to load cars hitting their concrete walls.
The Sierra Vista Police Department also saw a significant increase in
felony case submissions to the Cochise County Attorney's Office from
343 in 2020 to 588 in 2022. The number of felony submissions remained
high last year with 531 in 2023.
I want to reiterate that this increase does not stem from violent
crimes some may fear plague communities near the border, but is largely
tied to the surge in incidents related to load car drivers. These
incidents tie up a significant amount of SVPD's limited manpower.
I grew up in Sierra Vista and graduated from the local high school,
Buena High School (GO Colts!). I have since raised my family in this
extraordinary community. It is a wonderful place to call home. But
recently I felt worried for my family members' safety in a way that I
never have had to think about before.
I have encouraged family members to avoid the major highways
running through town and stick to local streets because I know these
load car drivers pose a very real threat to their safety. I am not
alone in feeling this way as many have witnessed the reckless,
dangerous behavior of these drivers and many others have seen headlines
about the damage and harm they have caused.
Our law enforcement officers are burning out responding to speeding
load cars in our county around the clock. We do not have the resources
or personnel to handle this sustained surge in illegal immigration.
This county wide issue has caused Cochise County mayors to form a
coalition standing behind our Sheriff, Police Chiefs, and our federal
partners, crafting a letter to President Biden describing our issues
and noting the critical work that our officers are doing to keep our
county safe. We urge you to make securing the US border and supporting
local, county, and federal law enforcement a top priority. Our
communities depend on it.
______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mayor McCaa. I will now recognize
the Honorable Mark Dannels, Sheriff of Cochise County, for 5
minutes. Sheriff Dannels.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MARK DANNELS, SHERIFF,
COCHISE COUNTY, ARIZONA

Sheriff Dannels. Thank you. Good afternoon Chairman
Tiffany, Chairman Westerman, and distinguished members here
today. Welcome to Cochise County, and on behalf of the citizens
and my fellow sheriffs, we appreciate you.
I have served our border communities for 40 years, and
prior to that I served in the U.S. Army stationed here at Fort
Huachuca. I have worked with all my four major associations and
the United States with sheriffs, and we have three major
objectives: public safety, national security, and humanitarian.
I am proud of the relationship with all our law enforcement
partners, state, local, and Federal. We work very well
together. I am proud of our governors, Governor Ducey and
Governor Hobbs, who have stood in our corner here in Cochise
County to support us in our mission to secure our border and
the rule of law. I also want to give a shout-out to my citizens
here in Cochise County for their patience, their patience, and
their patience. They have been through a lot here.
To best understand my presentation is to understand where
we were 3 years ago. My county is one of the safest counties,
based on innovative programs and efforts here and our collected
governmental and prioritizations, our messaging, and yes,
enforcement efforts supported by the rule of law.
My citizens and law enforcement address mostly got-aways,
fight-and-flight in my county, versus those giving up.
Border-related crimes are at an all-time high in Cochise
County. Death, murder and investigations, illicit drug
poisonings, aggravated acts against my citizens, failure to
yield, search and rescue/recovery, and yes, aggravated assaults
against our law enforcement officials. My deputies in law
enforcement continue to be placed in life-threatening scenarios
as the cartels show no regard for citizens and those that wear
a badge.
Cochise County Sheriff's Office detention bookings related
to just border-related state crimes in calendar year 2022 and
2023: 2,884 people were booked in my jail for border crimes, up
to murder; 566 smugglers, which is a Class 2 felony, were
apprehended and booked in my jail, and that is over a 15-month
window; 414 failures to yield, high-risk pursuits were booked
in my jail at a cost of $9.4 million. And I will just say this
to you here. We get zero money from the Federal Government.
Fentanyl continues to poison and kill Americans at an
alarming rate, as mentioned by the Chairman earlier, leaving
families and communities devastated, not just here in Cochise
County but in our great nation. Arizona efforts by law
enforcement are remarkable, but the war on drugs must be a
priority topic and not deserted by political rhetoric. Arizona
fentanyl seizures account for 51 percent of all the fentanyl
seized in the country, sad to say. In the four border counties,
it was 35 million pills 2 years ago, and that is up this year.
In Federal Fiscal Year 2022, Arizona seized over 60 million
fentanyl pills. Again, Arizona counties had 35 million, which
includes four counties.
In closing, my fellow sheriffs and I have tried to partner
with this Administration to include the President of the United
States with high hopes to share a collective message, a
collective action plan, support the rule of law, prioritize our
southern border and all our borders, and provide updates
towards community impacts and concerns, with no success. To
this date, we have not met with the President, and that is not
one sheriff.
By allowing our border security mission and immigration
laws to be discretionary, these criminal cartels continue to be
the true winners. Their exploitation of mankind is simply
modern-day slavery, allowing thousands of pounds of illicit
drugs into our country that continue to erode the core value of
families, schools, and subsequently killing Americans, on
average, 290 per day. It is completely unacceptable at any
level. Experiencing migrant deaths without a reasonable process
while Members of U.S. Congress and this Administration
intentionally avoid reality is gross negligence.
Our voice of reason has been buried during what I call
``intellectual avoidance'' by this Administration, and yes,
Members of U.S. Congress. Communities have been neglected and
abandoned, relying on their own local and state resources to
address a border that is in crisis mode. Our southern border,
against all public, well-designed statements out of Washington,
DC, is in the worst shape I have ever seen it in my 40-year
career. When I look at public safety, national security, and
the humanitarian, our southern border has become the largest
crime scene in this country.
I am a true believer that Customs and Border Patrol are the
experts of border security, while sheriffs and police chiefs
are the experts of community. Together, this is a recipe of
success for all communities and engagement.
I would leave you with this final statement. We all serve
the priorities of Americans, based on our shared oaths of
office to keep them safe, enhance their quality of life, and
support the rule of law, absent political affiliation or the
concern of re-election. I ask each one of you to reflect on
this statement as you make your decisions to vote.
Once again, I thank this Committee for the invite and the
opportunity, and now stand ready to answer questions here in a
few minutes. Thank you, all.

[The prepared statement of Sheriff Dannels follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mark Dannels, Sheriff, Cochise County, Arizona

Good Afternoon Chairman (Bruce) Westerman, Ranking Member (Raul) M.
Grijalva and the Honorable members of this subcommittee. On behalf the
citizens of Cochise County and the State of Arizona, and my fellow
Sheriffs, Thank You for having me.
I have served our border communities for 40 years and prior to
that, as a member of our military serving in the U.S. Army stationed at
Fort Huachuca located within Cochise County. I have always been a
genuine believer in my Oath of Office to protect my Country, and now my
County as the duly elected Sheriff for the past 12 years. I am the
past-President of the Arizona Sheriffs Association, Chair of the
National Sheriffs Association Border Security, the Executive Board for
Western States Sheriffs and past leadership positions with the
Southwest Border Sheriffs.

All these associations share 3 0bjectives:

Public Safety, National Security and Humanitarian.

In my submitted brief, I have shared with you all an overview of
Cochise County and the history of our border. I have personally
experienced the good, the bad and the ugly of being a border county. My
office has always addressed border-related crimes, smuggling of both
illicit drugs, humans, weapons and cash by our Transnational
Organizations i.e. Criminal Cartels.
I am proud of our relationships with all our law enforcement
partners that serve our communities.
To begin, I want to ''Thank'' our Customs & Border Patrol Officers
and Agents who have worked tirelessly and diligently to protect this
great nation. I want to ``Thank'' our Governors; Ducey and Hobbs and
our State Congressional Members for all their support. The men and
women of the Cochise County Sheriff's Office for their dedication and
commitment in keeping our communities safe. To all my fellow Sheriffs
that stand united for the Rule of Law in the protection of their
communities. And, finally, I want to ''Thank'' my citizens for their
patience and support in a time of crisis and disarray.
To best understand my presentation is to understand where we were
over 3 years ago. My county was one on the safest border counties based
on our collective governmental efforts, prioritization, messaging and
yes, enforcement efforts supported by the Rule of Law.

The direct impact to my county/office:

My citizens and law enforcement address mostly Got-Aways ``Fight &
Flight'' in my County versus those giving up.

100% Camouflaged migrants being illegally smuggled by the Cartels,
price tag per UDA begins at $7000 and up.

These smugglers include juveniles being recruited via social media
by the Criminal Cartels.

Border Related Booking (Detention) Costs over the last 24 months is
$9.4 million, absorbed by my local and state taxpayers.

Border-related Crime at an all-time high:

Death/Murder investigations, Illicit Drug Poisonings, Aggravated
acts against my citizens, Failure to Yields, Search and Rescue/Recovery
and yes, assaults against law enforcement officials.

My deputies/law enforcement continue to be placed in life-
threatening scenarios as the Cartels shows no regard for my citizens
and/or those that wear a badge.

Agents, Troopers, Deputies and Officers are addressing dangerous
scenarios/criminals as a direct result of an ``Open Border'' exploited
by these criminal cartels for Violence, Fear and Greed.

Cochise County Sheriffs Office Detention Bookings related to
Border:

In calendar years 2022/2023:

2884 Suspects booked into my jail for border-related crimes.

566 Smugglers (state law violation) 414 Failure to Yields

154 Non-Citizens

$9.4 Million Cost to local/state

Fentanyl continues to poison/kill Americans at an alarming rate
leaving families and communities devasted. Arizona efforts by law
enforcement are remarkable, but the War on Drugs must be a priority
topic and not deserted by political rhetoric. Arizona fentanyl seizures
accounts for 51% of all the fentanyl seized in the country. In federal
fiscal year 2022 Arizona seized over 60 million Fentanyl pills. The 4
Arizona border counties seized 35 million Fentanyl pills with an
anticipated increase for 2023 Federal fiscal year.
In closing, my fellow Sheriffs and I have tried to partner with
this administration to include the President of the United States with
high hopes to share a Collective Message, Collective Action Plan,
Support the Rule of Law, Prioritize our southern border and provide
updates reference Community Impacts and Concerns with little to no
success.
By allowing our border security mission and immigration laws to be
discretionary, these Criminal Cartels continue to be the true winners,
their exploitation of mankind is simply ``Modern Day Slavery'';
allowing thousands of pounds of illicit drugs into our country that
continue to erode the core-values of families, schools and subsequently
killing Americans on an average of 290 every day is completely
unacceptable at any level. Experiencing migrant deaths without a
reasonable process while members of our U.S. Congress and this
Administration intentionally avoids reality is gross negligence.
Our voice of reason has been buried during what I call an
``Intellectual Avoidance'' by this Administration and yes, members of
U.S. Congress. Communities have been neglected and abandoned relying on
our own local and state resources to address a border that is in crisis
mode.
Our southern border, against all public well-designed statements
out of Washington D.C. is in the worst shape I have ever seen it. When
one looks at Public Safety, National Security, and Humanitarian, our
southern border is the largest crime scene in the country.
The morale of agents is extremely low, and the collective
frustration is very high amongst law enforcement at all levels and most
important, our citizens.
I am a true believer that Customs and Border Patrol are the experts
of Border Security while Sheriffs and Police Chiefs are the experts of
community, together, this is a Recipe of Success for all communities!
I will leave you with this final statement, we all serve the
priorities of Americans based on our shared Oaths of Office to keep
them Safe, enhance their Quality of Life and Support the Rule of Law
absent political affiliation or the concern of reelection; I ask each
one of you to reflect on this statement as you make your next decision
to vote.
Once again, I thank this committee for the invite and opportunity
and now, stand ready to answer any questions by members.

SUPPLEMENTAL TESTIMONY

U.S. House Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Introduction

Testimony of Mr. Mark J. Dannels, Cochise County Sheriff, Arizona
before the U.S. House of Representatives Subcommittee on Federal Lands
reference a scheduled hearing on ``Biden's Border Crisis: The
Consequences of Failing to Secure Federal Border Lands.'' The hearing
will be held on Thursday, February 8, 2024, at 1:30 p.m. at the Cochise
College, 901 Colombo Avenue, Sierra Vista, Arizona 85635.
Chairman Bruce Westerman, Ranking Member Raul M. Grijalva and
Distinguished Members of this Committee, thank you for the invitation
to speak to you today on this very important subject reference: Public
Safety, National Security, and Humanitarian and the impact to our
Federal Lands.

History of Cochise County

With eighty-three miles of international border within its
jurisdiction, Cochise County plays a significant role in combating drug
and human trafficking organizations and the associated violent crime
which adversely affects Arizona residents and other areas throughout
the United States. In 1990 the Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) designated Cochise County as a High Intensity Drug Trafficking
area within southern Arizona. This designation is a direct result of
overwhelming and sustained levels of illicit drug and human trafficking
within Cochise County.
With 6,219 square miles, Cochise County is as large as the states
of Rhode Island and Connecticut combined. The estimated population of
the county in 2022 is approximately 125,000. The geography of the
county consists of seven incorporated cities to include the historical
town of Tombstone. Surrounded by vast areas of desolate uninhabited
desert and mountainous terrain, the seven cities only represent a
combined area of 215 square miles, leaving 6004 square miles of
unincorporated area. These desolate areas are routinely exploited for
smuggling routes by the drug/human traffickers and pose one of the
greatest challenges to local law enforcements effort in establishing
border security and interdiction efforts. Cochise County is the 38th
largest land mass county in the United States, and is home to the
United States Army base, Fort Huachuca. Throughout the history of the
county ranching and farming has played a significant part in its
legacy.
Unlike other border counties in Arizona, Cochise County is unique
in that there are two cities in the Republic of Mexico situated on the
international border within the county. The cities of Agua Prieta and
Naco, with an estimated population of 80,000 and 10,000 respectively,
are well know to U.S. Law Enforcement officials as staging and
operational centers for one of Mexico's largest and most notorious drug
cartels. The Sinaloa Cartel has long employed the use of local Mexican
Drug and Human Trafficking Organizations (DTOs) to carry out the
Cartel's illegal distribution and transportation of illicit drugs and
humans into and throughout the United States.
These international DTOs also utilize their established smuggling
routes in Cochise County to transport the Cartels illicit profits such
as U.S. currency, firearms, and ammunition into Mexico. A large portion
of the profit is used to sustain control over the corridor through the
use of violence against law enforcement, rival trafficking
organizations, and bribes of government officials.
The Mexican drug trafficking organizations operating in Cochise
County are highly sophisticated and innovative in their transportation
methods. Aside from the normal use of human backpackers (mules),
clandestine tunnels, and vehicles, the trafficking organizations have
resorted to the use of ultra light aircraft which cannot be detected by
normal radar, cloned vehicles appearing to be law enforcement or other
legitimate companies and the use of catapults which hurl bundles of
marijuana into the U.S. to awaiting co-conspirators. The organizations
utilize sophisticated and technical communications and counter
surveillance equipment to counter law enforcements interdiction tactics
and strategies. Scouts or observers are strategically placed along
smuggling routes to perform counter surveillance on law enforcement and
report their observations to those controlling the drug/human smuggling
operation so they may avoid and elude law enforcement. The use of
cellphones and sophisticated two-way radio encryptions for
communications are standard equipment, as are night vision and forward
looking infra-red devices.
Violence against innocent citizens, public officials, law
enforcement, and rival drug/human trafficking groups in Mexico
continues to escalate. Cochise County's law enforcement and private
citizen fears of it spilling into the county were realized in 2010 when
a longtime Cochise County resident rancher was senselessly murdered
while inspecting fences on his ranch. Further complicating the concerns
is the potential for foreign terrorist to employ drug/human trafficking
organizations to smuggle individuals and or weapons of mass destruction
into the United States through Cochise County.
The adverse affects of the drug and human trafficking organizations
operating in Cochise County not only have significantly diminished the
quality of life of county residents, but also placed unbearable strain
upon the budgets and resources of private and government agencies in
the county.
Historically speaking, illegal border crossings into the United
States are well known in southern Arizona and recognized as a part of
everyday life within Cochise County and throughout the southwest
border. Many years ago, Cochise County citizens were not overly alarmed
when they observed a handful of undocumented aliens traveling through
private or public lands in search of jobs. Unfortunately, over time
these groups dramatically increased in size and became more reckless,
aggressive, and violent, bringing unrest and fear to the citizens
living on the border. Examples of this include reckless high-speed
pursuits, assaults on citizens, rapes, kidnappings, murders, and home
invasions to steal one's private and personal possessions. It was
apparent the search for the American dream was being over-shadowed by
these smugglers, mules, coyotes, bandits, and transnational criminals
preying upon our citizens and country.
Having the true-life experience to live and work as a law
enforcement officer/deputy and now Sheriff in Cochise County since
1984, it has been an educational lesson for me reference border
security. I have witnessed the escalation of violence by these careless
assailants on our citizens raising the question, who actually controls
our borders? Cochise County has become known as the gateway to illegal
activity for those unlawfully entering the United States.

History: Federal Government's Border Security Plan of the 90s

In the early 1990s, the federal government prepared a plan to
address the unsecure, unsafe border. At a press conference in Tucson,
Arizona, a Border Patrol spokesman announced their intent to secure the
populated areas of the border, specifically San Diego, Yuma and El Paso
and the International Ports of Entry. These targeted areas, which I
call the ``Ps = Ports and Population'', would be the federal
government's focus points. The second half of their plan was to reroute
the illegal activity/disturbances into the rural parts of the southwest
border with the thought that these cartel organizations and smuggling
groups would be deterred by the rugged and mountainous regions along
the border.
Since the release of the plan, many changes have taken place.
Specifically, Cochise County initially increased their staffing of
Border Patrol agents to a sufficient number for the threat at that
time. Over the last few years, it has again decreased from a
significant force to a scant number within Cochise County to secure and
protect the 83 miles of international border. Infrastructure, such as
metal fencing, lightning, cameras, sensors, radars, etc. have been
installed between both ports and some distance beyond bringing some
needed relief to this area and those that live within. Unfortunately,
upgrades were halted by President Biden's executive order on his first
day of office leaving our border's infrastructure in disarray.
Secondary immigration checkpoints were established on routes (roadways)
20-40 miles north of the border but due to staffing shortages, remains
closed most of the time.
Over the last several years, our southern border has drastically
changed for the worse. I have personally experienced our once
manageable border become a crisis over the last 36 months supported by
the attached statistics and increased criminal activity. The Covid
health pandemic placed many restrictions on foreign travel, but the
conversation regarding illegal entry at our southern border was
neglected by our federal leaders. The health exposure and risk
experienced by law enforcement officers, deputies and agents became
secondary in public restrictions and concerns. In fact, the
intellectual avoidance by this administration to actively engage and
support our efforts has been absent. Certain members of U.S. Congress
continue to ignore our immigration laws/crisis abandoning communities
as they struggle to address these challenges. I would remind my fellow
elected leaders, we share the same Oath of Office to protect this great
country, not to be driven by personal ideologies, but by and for the
People.
Sheriffs throughout the country have worked tirelessly to engage
and provide solutions, (i.e. a 16-point action plan prepared by
America's Sheriffs) with Homeland Security Secretary Mayorkas with no
success. As a result, the membership of Western States Sheriffs
Association issued a Position statement of NO Confidence against
Secretary Mayorkas and Vice President Harris.

The existing border plan has been in place for approximately 30
years and the following are some thoughts regarding the plan in current
time:

An increase in illegal smuggling/activity/illicit drugs
between the protected areas (ports)

Increase in larger groups of undocumented aliens between
the protected areas (ports)

Increase in illegal activity outside the protected areas
(ports)

Fear/Frustration increased in rural Cochise County/
Southwest Border

Ranch and Farmlands damaged due to increased illegal
activity

Property (fencing, livestock, waterlines, etc.) damaged

Burglaries/Thefts increased in rural Cochise County/
Southwest Border

Social Media has become a venue for smuggling recruitment
mainly focused on juveniles

Violent Crimes increased i.e., Homicides, Assaults, Rapes,
Drug and Human Smuggling, etc. in rural Cochise County/
Southwest Border

Transnational Cartels/Smuggling Organizations controlled
and set up smuggling routes in rural Cochise County/
Southwest Border

Lack of Border Patrol Agents directly on border due to
administrative processing assignments

Secondary checkpoints were established as a secondary
deterrent but remain closed the majority of the time due to
staff shortages

Lack of Re-Definition to the plan of the 90s (time erased
history)

Loss of recreational land use due to fear of criminal
activity

Economic decline

Legacy Ranches being sold

Lack of federally elected leaders to address unsecure
border/fears creating a lack of trust and anger by citizens

Questionable/Absent consequences by our federal government
by those committing border crimes

Undue pressure on local law enforcement/Sheriffs/Community
Leaders to address issues, fear, and consequences for those
committing crimes

Lack of funding for local law enforcement/criminal justice
system/corrections in order to address border crimes at the
local level due to federal government lack of intervention

Border Security shall be a Mandate, not a Discretionary
program

Border Security v. Immigration Reform (two different
programs not to be blended)

Lack of Trust and Confidence in our Federal Government

Action-Based Solutions Local-State Government

Local Solutions and Programs are no longer a thought, but a reality
for bringing relief to our citizens who consciously choose to live near
our borders. No better example of the importance of local law
enforcement during a national crisis was the terrorist attack on
September 11, 2001. First responders from local police and fire were
the first on scene to address this horrific threat. Local law
enforcement is best suited to best understand community needs and
solutions based on the expectations of their citizens. Community
policing begins and succeeds at the local level first.
As the Sheriff of Cochise County, I embrace my elected and
statutory duty (oath of office to support the United States
Constitution and the Arizona Constitution) to protect and secure the
Freedoms and Liberties of my citizens, with or without the help of our
federal law enforcement partners/policy makers. No longer a debate by
those that live in the rural parts of the southwest border, the rural
parts of the Southwest Border are NOT secure and are vulnerable for ALL
types of transnational criminal activity.

Working with limited budgets and staffing, Sheriffs along the
southwest border struggle each and every day to find ways to enhance
the quality of life/safety for those they serve and bring a general
sense of deterrence for those choosing our border as a venue to promote
their criminal enterprises. The following bullet points are action-
driven solutions implemented in hopes of bringing some relief and sense
of security for those living in Cochise County:

Balanced Community Policing (Education, Prevention,
Enforcement)

Transparency + Time = Community Trust

Collaborated Efforts by all 3 levels of Government

Creation of a Southwest Border Security Facility in
Cochise County

Law and Order Partnership between Sheriff and County
Attorney

Safe Street Enforcement Programs

Private and Public Funding donations/grants to purchase
upgraded equipment/communications

Installation of New Radios/Towers/Consoles/Microwave

Portable Radios to Citizens/Ranchers/Farmers/Schools

Interoperability/Intelligence Sharing at all 3 levels

Regional Application for Law Enforcement

Financial Interdiction Unit

Regional Border Team by Sheriff supported by Border
Patrol, ICE, U.S. Forest

Ranch Advisory Team

Ranch Patrol

Financial Crime Unit

Consequence Driven Prosecution (all 3 levels)

Virtual Cameras, Sensors, ATVs, Thermal Vehicle, Off-Road
Vehicle, etc.

Factual Situational Awareness for Media, Elected
Officials, America

Quarterly Law Enforcement Leadership Meetings

Community Outreach Unit

Community Meet & Greets within Communities

Aviation Program (Helicopter & Drone)

Positive-Interactive Use of Media and Social Media

Recommendations Federal Government
The Federal Government (elected and policy makers) has been slow to
react to the voices and concerns of those living on the southwest
border. Cochise County and other counties along the border have become
VIP attractions, venues for those seeking to make a difference or
promising change only to become another community-public safety
disappointment.

The following comprehensive recommendations are directly linked to
our federal leaders:

Collective Message between Local, State and Federal

Shared Action Plans by Local, State and Federal Law
Enforcement

Remove ``Politics'' and Enforce the ``Rule of Law''

Hire more Immigration and Asylum Hearing Officers for all
POEs.

Re-evaluate the plan of the 90s and build upon successes

Political-Will required to make Border Security a Mandated
Program

Immediate need to address the Criminal Cartels
(Transnational Organizations)

Border Security First, Immigration Reform Second

Maximize Allocated Resources such as Staffing

Adequately Fund CBP

Support and Embrace First-line Agents that work the border
regions, they have a dangerous job and it's no secret that
their frustration is high based on the unknown complexities
reference their assignments, they have great ideas to share

Secondary Checkpoints only after Primary border
interdiction is satisfied by stakeholders

Quality in life/Citizens living on border supported by
Sheriffs and State Governors regarding improved security/
safety

Funding supplement for Local Law Enforcement/Prosecution/
Detention/Criminal Justice in support of border crimes

Continued Funding and Support for Stone Garden Program

Empowerment with action to Border Patrol Leadership/PAICs
(currently Cochise County has dedicated and solution-driven
leaders that work well with local law enforcement)

Enhanced Funding for Regional Communication and
Interoperability with local law enforcement

Bring local Law Enforcement to Border Security and
Immigration discussions

Summary

Our local efforts have proven to be very beneficial in bringing
over-due solutions to an unsecure border that has become a
discretionary program by those federally elected leaders and policy
makers that have been entrusted to protect our freedoms and liberties.
As a Sheriff elected by the good people of my county, my biggest fear
is another loss of life to one of my citizens and/or law enforcement
officers/agents contributed to a border that is NOT secure. One would
hope the priority of securing our border doesn't become just about a
price tag and/or political posturing, but rather the legal and moral
requirement to safeguard all of America, which so many heroic Americans
have already paid the ultimate price for.
Today's opportunity to address this group instills fresh hope that
our voice does matter and on behalf of the citizens of Cochise County,
Arizona, our nation's Sheriffs and beyond, we hope you won't forget us
and will do your Constitutional mandate to bring positive change to an
over-due vulnerable situation.
I will leave each one of you with an open invitation to visit
Cochise County along with a personal-guided tour and visit with our
citizens to hear/see first-hand America's true rural border.
Again, thank you very much for the opportunity to share this
information with you. I will be happy to answer any questions you may
have.

*****

The following documents were submitted as supplements to Mr. Dannels'
testimony. These documents are part of the hearing record and are being
retained in the Committee's official files:

--Sheriff Mark Dannels' Bio

--CCSO Annual Message 2024

--CCSO Annual Message 2023

--CCSO Annual Message 2022

--CCSO Border Related Issues in 2022

--CCSO Multi-Tier Border Operational Plan

--CCSO Detention Statistical Form 2023

--CCSO Detention Statistical Form 2022

--CCSO State of the Arizona--Sonora Border 2023

--Cochise County Mayors' Letter 2024

--Arizona House of Representatives 2023

--National Sheriffs Letter ref Call for Action at the Border Threat
Picture 2023

--Cochise County Multi-Agency Public Safety Announcement 2023

--National Sheriffs Letter ref Eradication of Drug Cartels 2023

--National Sheriffs Letter to White House 2023

--State of Arizona Legislative Proclamation 2022

--Arizona Sheriffs Vote of No Confidence V.P. Harris 2022

--Southwest Border Sheriffs Coalition Vote of No Confidence V.P.
Harris 2022

--Texas Border Sheriffs Coalition Vote of No Confidence V.P. Harris
2022

--Western States Sheriffs' Association Vote of No Confidence V.P.
Harris 2022

--Western States Sheriffs' Association Vote of No Confidence Sec.
Mayorkas

--National Sheriffs' Association Letter to White House 2021

--Wild life Photos on the International Border

These documents along with this testimony are available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II10/20240208/116752/HHRG-118-II10-
Wstate-DannelsM-20240208.pdf

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Sheriff Dannels. I appreciate your
testimony.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Art Del Cueto, Executive
Board Member of the National Border Patrol Council. Mr. Del
Cueto, you have 5 minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ART DEL CUETO, VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
BORDER PATROL COUNCIL, TUCSON, ARIZONA

Mr. Del Cueto. Thank you so much. First and foremost, I
want to say that I am a proud individual that grew up in
Cochise County, down in Douglas--Go Bulldogs.
I want to thank everyone for being here today. My name is
Art Del Cueto. I am on the Executive Board of the National
Border Patrol Council. It represents the interests of the
frontline Border Patrol agents. I am here because what we are
doing on the border is not working. Let me provide a few
statistics and put the numbers into perspective.
Since President Biden took office, in Fiscal Year 2022
through Fiscal Year 2023, we have apprehended 6.2 million
people on the southwest border. For context, the entire
population of the state of Arizona is a little over 7 million.
Last year alone, we apprehended almost 2.5 million people
illegally entering our country. Of last year's groups, over
35,000 had prior criminal convictions or outstanding warrants
for arrest in the United States. Approximately 170 of them were
on the terrorist watch list.
The number of got-aways is just as shocking. Since
President Biden took office, we have observed 1.7 million
people walk right into this country without being arrested.
Those are just what we know of. That is more people than live
in Phoenix, Philadelphia, San Antonio, or Dallas. They walked
into this country without being arrested because agents were
not available to arrest them.
All of this is to say, in the last 3 years of the Biden
administration, we have lost operational control of our border.
The drug cartels who control both narcotics and illegal alien
smuggling are in control of our southern border.
I want to be clear: this crisis is not just about illegal
immigration. The cartels that illegally smuggle migrants into
this country are the same ones that are smuggling drugs. Those
drugs impact every community nationwide. Over 100,000 Americans
have died of overdose in the last year. We will have another
100,000 deaths in 2024, and every year moving forward until we
secure our border.
And it is not just about the overdose deaths. The murders,
muggings, and carjackings that we see on the evening news are
largely a by-product of narcotics trafficking and drug
addiction. This violence will not stop until we secure our
border.
The question is, are we prepared to do something about it?
Winston Churchill once said Americans always do the right
thing, but only after we have exhausted every single option.
When it comes to border security, we have exhausted every
single option.
I know this hearing is about Federal lands and how the
Biden administration has failed, and they have failed, to
secure our southern border. Believe me, I could talk about that
all day. However, I want to use the remaining time to discuss
the border security supplement that was trying to get proposed
through the Senate. I know that it is completely gone and it
has imploded. But as many of you know, the National Border
Patrol Council supported this legislation, and I would like to
explain why.
As long as we continue to catch and release tens of
thousands of illegal aliens into this country every month the
crisis will not stop. As long as we allow illegals to game our
asylum system it will not stop. As long as we do not provide
Border Patrol, ICE, and USCIS with the resources and legal
authorities they need to do their jobs this will not stop.
The single biggest challenge we face right now is that just
about every illegal immigrant we arrest claims asylum. They are
doing this not because they have a valid claim but because they
know that as soon as they do that they can get released because
the capacity to hold them is not there. And our immigration
court system is completely overwhelmed. They know that we will
release them and give them a court date upwards of 10 years
from now.
The Senate legislation would have required asylum officers
to screen immigrants for credible fear under a significantly
higher standard. This standard was actually piloted under the
Trump administration in 2019 and 2020, and that led to about 80
percent of the illegals failing their credible fear interviews.
It also precludes illegal immigrants caught at the border from
having access to immigration courts. We would no longer be
releasing illegal immigrants with a court date 10 years from
now. Asylum officers would have decided and would deport those
who fail.
Equally important, the legislation would have provided a
mandatory trigger for closing the border. If the weekly average
of arrests would have exceeded 5,000, the border would have
been automatically closed. It does not say we would have been
releasing 5,000. Everyone is sent back to Mexico. If any
single-day arrest level exceeds 8,500, the border would have
been closed. Everyone is sent back to Mexico. Gone will be the
days of the cartels that would have been flooding and
overwhelming the system.
No bill is perfect. Are there things that I wish would have
been included? Of course. Are there things in the package such
as allowing the Administration to continue to parole migrants
through the ports of entry? I don't like it. Of course I don't
like it. However, on this issue, and it is an enormous issue,
earlier this week we arrested over 6,600 illegal immigrants.
Over 6,300 of them were released into this country within 48
hours. Tonight, we are going to apprehend a similar amount, and
again they are going to get released. We need Congress to act
now and give us the tools to secure our borders. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Del Cueto follows:]

Prepared Statement of Art Del Cueto, Executive Board, National Border
Patrol Council

I want to thank everyone for being here today. My name is Art Del
Cueto, and I am on the Executive Board of the National Border Patrol
Council, which represents the interests of the front-line Border Patrol
Agents. I am here because what we are doing on the border is not
working. Let me provide a few statistics and put these numbers into
perspective.
Since President Biden took office through Fiscal Year 2023, we
apprehended 6.2 million people along the southwest border. For context,
the entire population of the State of Arizona is a little over 7
million. Last fiscal year alone, we apprehended almost two-and-a-half
million people illegally entering our country. Of last year's group,
over 35,000 had prior criminal convictions or outstanding warrants for
their arrest in the United States. Approximately 170 of them were on
the terrorist watch list.
The number of gotaways is just as shocking. Since President Biden
took office, we have observed 1.7 million people walk right into this
country without being arrested. That is more people than live in
Phoenix, Philadelphia, San Antonio, or Dallas. They walked into this
country without being arrested because agents were not available to
arrest them.
All of this is to say, in the last three years of the Biden
Administration, we have lost operational control of our border. The
drug cartels who control both narcotics and illegal alien smuggling are
in control of our border.
I want to be clear: this crisis is not just about illegal
immigration. The cartels that illegally smuggle immigrants into this
country are the same ones smuggling drugs. Those drugs impact every
community nationwide--over 100,000 Americans died of overdoses last
year. We will have another 100,000 deaths in 2024 and every year moving
forward until we secure our border.
And it is not just about the overdose deaths. The murders,
muggings, and carjackings we see on the evening news are largely a
byproduct of narcotics trafficking and drug addiction. This violence
will not stop until we secure our border.
The question is, are we prepared to do something about it? Winston
Churchill once said Americans always do the right thing--but only after
we have exhausted every other option. When it comes to border security,
we have exhausted every other option.
I know this hearing is about federal lands and how the Biden
Administration failed to secure the border. Believe me, I could talk
about that all day. However, I want to use the remaining time to
discuss the border security supplemental that the Senate is scheduled
to vote on this week. I know that it has been reported that the
compromise deal is imploding. As many of you know, the NBPC supported
this legislation, and I would like to explain why.
As long as we continue to catch and release tens of thousands of
illegal immigrants into this country every month, this crisis will not
stop. As long as we allow illegal immigrants to game our asylum system,
this will not stop. As long as we do not provide Border Patrol, ICE,
and USCIS with the resources and legal authorities we need to do our
jobs, this will not stop.
The single biggest challenge we face right now is that just about
every illegal immigrant we arrest claims asylum. They are doing this
not because they have a valid claim but because they know we do not
have the detention capacity to hold them. And, that our immigration
court system is overwhelmed. They know that we will release them and
give them a court date upwards of 10 years from now. Our broken asylum
laws are driving illegal immigration and the chaos at the border.
The Senate legislation requires asylum officers to screen
immigrants for credible fear under a significantly higher standard.
This standard was actually piloted under the Trump Administration in
2019 and 2020 that led to about 80 percent of the illegal immigrants
failing their credible fear interviews. It also precludes illegal
immigrants caught at the border from having access to immigration
courts. We will no longer be releasing illegal immigrants with a court
date ten years from now. Asylum officers will quickly decide their
status, and we will deport those who fail.
Equally important, the legislation provides a mandatory trigger for
closing the border. If the weekly average of arrests exceeds 5,000, the
border is automatically closed. Everyone is sent back to Mexico. If any
single-day arrest level exceeds 8,500, the border is closed. Everyone
is sent back to Mexico. Gone will be the days of the cartels flooding
the zone and overwhelming the system.
No bill is perfect. Are there things that I wish were included in
this package and were not--yes. Are there things in the package such as
allowing the Administration to continue to parole migrants through the
ports of entry that I don't like--yes. However, the cost of inaction by
Congress on this issue is enormous. Earlier this week we arrested over
6,600 illegal immigrants. Over 6,300 of them were released into this
country within 48 hours. Tonight, we will apprehend a similar number
and do the same this. We need Congress to act now and give us the tools
we need to secure the border.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Mr. Del Cueto, for your
testimony.
Now, I would like to recognize Mr. John Boelts, the Vice
President of the Arizona Farm Bureau. Mr. Boelts, you have 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN BOELTS, VICE PRESIDENT, ARIZONA
FARM BUREAU, YUMA, ARIZONA

Mr. Boelts. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Chairman
Westerman, members of the House of Representatives, and members
of this Committee. Thank you for coming to southern Arizona,
and good afternoon.
I come before you today to thank you for your attention to
our man-made crisis at our southern border. Farmers and
ranchers in Arizona and neighboring states are in many ways on
the front lines of this public policy disaster, and I will
mention just a few of those ways in my limited time.
Ranchers, their families and employees raising livestock
and managing public and private lands in the areas near our
border with Mexico face extraordinary challenges with
inadequate support from our Federal Government. The safety of
these hardworking people, their families, and property is in
danger most days and nights due to the lack of law enforcement
by Federal agencies responsible for border security in these
areas. People seeking to enter our country without passing
through a legal port of entry are breaking Federal law. The
damage these people do to the public and private lands while
entering unlawfully is unacceptable, and the refuse they leave
behind is remarkable. Is it too much to ask that the ranchers
of southern Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Texas be able
to raise their livestock and families without being overrun by
illegal immigrants and drug runners?
Where I live in Yuma County, my neighbors and I grow fresh
produce such as lettuce, spinach, melons, broccoli, and
cauliflower in season this time of year. And the foods that we
are growing are mostly eaten raw by people all over the United
States and Canada. We have nearly 50,000 people working in
agriculture in my small community, of which over 8,000 workers
are H2-A workers, over 15,000 are commuter workers who travel
into the United States daily to work and return to Mexico each
night, and the rest of our workforce is comprised of citizens,
naturalized citizens, and permanent residents card holders. Our
workforce in Yuma County is legal, and we have an abundance of
legal commerce and activity in my community that is happening
daily. That is the backdrop to the mess that we observed since
December 2020. It has really been going on for decades, but it
has been particularly egregious since around December 2020.
We have individuals and families numbering in the thousands
entering our country through areas that are not ports of entry
on a daily basis. This humanitarian crisis is happening along
our county roads in rural areas of my county, just like it is
on the rest of the lands along our southern border. We face
unique challenges having food crops of the kind that are
normally eaten raw growing in open fields. We cannot have
trespassers entering these fields, passing through these
fields, leaving garbage in these fields, or even worse
defecating or urinating in or near these fields. These fresh
produce crops are unharvestable if they are exposed to these
sorts of risks of contamination from human pathogens, and if
they are contaminated in any way they are just simply not
usable. A huge waste of natural resources, energy, and money.
It has been a very commonplace situation the last few
years, especially in farmland, about 40,000 acres, that is very
close to our southern border, and this poses an enormous
liability risk and financial hardship to farmers and fresh
produce shippers, and it impacts our domestically grown food
supply in a big way. Is it too much to ask that the farmers of
southern Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Texas be able to
raise their crops without being overrun by illegal immigrants
and drug runners? I don't think it is.
Requiring asylum seekers to seek legal status to immigrate
at a Consulate of the U.S. State Department and to have robust
enforcement of our laws at the border would restore safety and
an environment only conducive to legal commerce in our border
regions. We have been facing an extraordinary level of illegal
entries into the United States along our southern border these
last few years. There were 371,036 encounters dealt with by
Customs and Border Protection just in December 2023.
I will close by calling on all of you, the Members of
Congress here, and your colleagues back in DC, and this
Administration to act, and act swiftly, to address the crisis
we have at the border. It is time to act and put forth
meaningful policies that address the problem and give our
border communities, law enforcement, and the families that live
along this border a reprieve. This is not, and should not be, a
political issue. It is time to put partisan politics aside and
solve our border crisis. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Boelts follows:]

Prepared Statement of John Boelts, Vice President, Arizona Farm Bureau

Good afternoon Chairman Tiffany and Members of the Committee. My
name is John Boelts, and I am a farmer from Yuma County, Arizona. I
volunteer as the First Vice President of Arizona Farm Bureau. I come
before you today to thank you for your attention to our man-made crisis
at our southern border. Farmers and ranchers in Arizona and neighboring
states are in many ways on the frontlines of this public policy
disaster, and I will mention just a few of those ways with my limited
time.
Ranchers, their families and employees raising livestock and
managing public and private lands in the areas near our border with
Mexico face extraordinary challenges with inadequate support from our
federal government. The safety of these hardworking people, their
families and property is in danger most days and nights due to the lack
of law enforcement by federal agencies responsible for border security
in these areas. People seeking to enter our country without passing
through a legal port of entry are breaking federal law. The damage
these people do to the public and private lands while entering
unlawfully is unacceptable and the refuse they leave behind is
remarkable. Is it too much to ask that the Ranchers of Southern
Arizona, California, New Mexico and Texas be able to raise their
livestock and families without being overrun by illegal immigrants and
drug runners?
Where I live and farm in Yuma County, my neighbors and I grow fresh
produce such as lettuce, spinach, melons, broccoli and cauliflower in
season which spans from August through July. These foods that we grow
are mostly eaten raw by people all over the US and Canada. We have
nearly 50,000 people working in agriculture in my community of which
over 8,000+ workers are H2-A program workers, over 15,000 are commuter
workers who travel to the U.S. daily to work and return to Mexico each
night and the rest of our workforce is comprised of citizens,
naturalized citizens and permanent residents card holders. Our
workforce is legal in Yuma County and we have and abundance of legal
commerce and activity in my community. That is the backdrop to the mess
we have observed since December 2020.
We have individuals and families numbering in the thousands
entering our country through areas that are not ports of entry on a
daily basis. This humanitarian crisis is happening along county roads
in rural areas of my county just like it is the rest of the lands along
our southern border. We face unique challenges having food crops that
are of the kind that are normally eaten raw growing in open fields. We
cannot have trespassers entering those fields, passing through these
fields, leaving garbage in those fields or even worse defecating or
urinating in those fields. These fresh produce crops are unharvestable
due to risks of contamination from human pathogens if they are
contaminated in any way, not to mention the extremely difficult
humanitarian situations that arise from people living or passing
through areas without adequate restroom facilities or shelter. These
sort of situations have become far too common these last few years, and
pose an enormous liability risk and financial hardship to farmers and
fresh produce shippers. Is it too much to ask that the farmers of
southern Arizona, California, New Mexico and Texas be able to raise
their crops and families without being overrun by illegal immigrants
and drug runners?
Requiring asylum seekers to seek legal status to immigrate at a
Consulate of the US State Department and to have robust enforcement of
our laws at the border would restore safety and an environment only
conducive to legal commerce in our border regions. We have been facing
an extraordinary level of illegal entries into the United States along
our southern border these last few years. It was January, 2021 the last
time we saw less than 10,000 entries per month on our southern border,
and in December 2023 there were 371,036 encounters dealt with by
Customs and Border Protection. The vast majority of these encounters
were at the southern border of the United States.
Farmers and farm workers, ranchers and ranch workers and all of our
families live and work on these lands along our southern border. If you
had over 300,000 people invading your place of work or your community
every month you too would feel this crisis. Probably the most
interesting group to discuss these matters with are first generation
immigrants like those that work for me on my farm and those who live in
my community. These people and their families have spent 10s and
sometimes hundreds of thousands of dollars of their own resources to
legally immigrate into our country. Sometimes that process took a
decade or more and was a financial challenge for multiple generations.
These first generation immigrants that I know shake their head in
disgust at what they see happening today.
We currently have bad public policy governing legal immigration
into our country that does not meet our needs. We lack adequate
resources for true border security. We have bad public policy for
handling asylum seekers that is creating havoc in our border
communities and on public and private property. We have had inadequate
legal pathways for most immigrants who would seek a legal path to
immigrate into the United States to work in agriculture and many other
fields of work. These are not new situations necessarily but our lack
of action to simply and definitively resolve these matters is why I
refer to these as a man-made crisis. We have the ability to address
these issues, but we simply choose not to.
I call on Congress and this administration to act and act swiftly
to address the crisis we have at the border. It is time to act and put
forth meaningful policies that address the problem and give our border
communities and families reprieve. This is not and should not be
political and it is time to put partisan politics aside and solve our
border crisis.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Boelts. I would like to
recognize Mr. James Chilton, a ranch owner from Arivaca,
Arizona. Mr. Chilton, good to have you back before the
Committee. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES CHILTON, RANCHER, ARIVACA,
ARIZONA

Mr. Chilton. My name is Jim Chilton. I am a fifth-
generation Arizona rancher from Arivaca, Arizona, a small town
approximately 55 miles southwest of Tucson. The ranch includes
private property, State School Trust lands, and Federal grazing
permits, in the Coronado National Forest. My ancestors drove
cattle from Texas to Arizona Territory in 1885, and our family
has been in the ranching business in Arizona for about 139
years.
My border concerns are similar to those of most ranchers in
the Tucson Sector, regardless of whether their ranch is located
adjacent to the international border or 100 miles inside the
border.
The ranch is roughly 50,000 acres, and the image that
Chairman Tiffany showed of this camp is adjacent to our ranch.
Our ranch has an exposure of about 14 miles to the
international boundary, and the wall crept out from the west,
east, and was stopped by President Biden on his first day in
office.
Are we going to show the film? OK. Thank you.
For about 10 years, I have collected film from hidden
motion-activated cameras of drug packers, previously deported
persons, and illegal crossers through our ranch. Of
approximately 100 trails traversing our ranch we have only five
cameras, so these video images are a small sample of the
persons entering through our ranch. Since January 2021, these
cameras have recorded 3,050 images of unlawful border crossers.
My testimony today hopefully can be given, on a thumb drive, to
each Congress Member for the record. It is hard evidence.
These filmed border crossers, as you can see, are wearing
camouflage clothes, carpet shoes, and have almost identical
backpacks. This is in stark contrast to other border crossers
reported in the news along the international boundary in
Arizona, California, and Texas, who wear casual street clothes
and include women and/or children. There are no images on my
cameras for the last decade of any women with children.
On the south end of the ranch, which is 5.5 miles of the
international border, there are now large numbers of people
coming across who are women and children, and they walk towards
the ``No More Deaths'' camp that you showed on your opening
statement.
Most critically, are any of the 3,050 terrorists? Not
knowing who is crossing is a national security matter. The
video documents a fivefold increase compared to what we were
documenting, on average, during the Trump and Obama years.
Mexican cartel scouts occupying our mountaintops guide these
border crossers. During the last 4 months I have not seen a
single Border Patrol agent patrolling these known border
entrance trails, since most agents are totally overwhelmed
processing undocumented migrants.
Please refer to my testimony for my specific
recommendations for securing the border at the border. We have
to secure the border at the border.
Thank you. I will be happy to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Chilton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jim Chilton, Rancher from Arivaca, Arizona

My name is Jim Chilton. I am a 5th generation rancher from Arivaca,
Arizona. Arivaca is a small rural town approximately 55 miles southwest
of Tucson, Arizona. Our ranch is adjacent to the town and extends south
to the international border with Mexico. The ranch includes private
property, State School Trust lands and three federal grazing permits in
the Coronado National Forest. Our entire family, my wife of 60 years,
are blessed to be able to preserve our western ranching customs,
culture, and heritage dating back to our pioneering ancestors who drove
cattle from Texas to Arizona Territory in 1885. Our family has been in
the cattle business in Arizona for about 139 years. We have a long-term
view of the necessity to be excellent stewards of the grasslands we
carefully manage. We are honored to have received various valued awards
for resource conservation and wildlife stewardship.

Chilton Ranch and the International Border

Our family ranch is in a corridor identified as among the most
active for drug smuggling and human trafficking in the Nation. My
comments generally relate specifically to the portion of the border at
the southern edge of our ranch extending from Nogales, AZ to Sasabe,
AZ. However, my border concerns are similar to those of most ranchers
in the Tucson Sector regardless of whether their ranch is located
adjacent to the international boundary or one hundred miles from the
border.
The following is a map of our beef-producing family ranch. Please
notice that the southern end of the eastern part of the ranch is the
international boundary for about five-and-one-half miles. Mexico is
just across the fence. Our ranch boundary goes north and west bordering
three other ranches. Border crossers on the western side of the ranch
go through our neighbors' grazing lands and then through our Federal
land pastures.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chilton Ranch boundaries--South of Arivaca, Arizona and west of
Nogales. Five-and-one half miles of the southern end of the ranch is
the United States/Mexico international border. The 50,000-acre ranch,
like many western ranches, is composed of U.S. Forest Service grazing
allotments, State Trust and private land. The blue line is the
international border with Mexico and the red line is the Ruby Road that
runs through much of the ranch.

International Border Crossers on Chilton Ranch

For about ten years, my wife Sue and I and my friends at Secure
Border Intel have collected motion activated camera film of drug
packers, previously deported persons, criminals and other illegals
crossing through our ranch. Of approximately 100 trails traversing our
ranch, only five have hidden motion-activated cameras. As a
consequence, our video images of crossers represent a small sample of
the probable border crossers trespassing through our ranch.
Since January 2021, these cameras on our ranch have recorded
evidence of 3,050 images of unlawful border crossers. Importantly, my
Testimony today includes a computer thumb drive of the 3,050
photographed crossers (the actual film footage can also be googled at:
https://youtu.be/j2pzKHRwmeY?feature=shared ).
On their way north through our southern pastures, illegal border
crossers are wearing camouflaged clothes, carpet shoes and often
identical backpacks. Almost all are men, in stark contrast to other
border crossers along the international boundary in Texas, who wear
casual street clothes and include women and/or children. There have
never been any women with small children observed on our motion
activated cameras during the last decade. Approximately only two
percent--of these 3,050 intruders--do appear to be women. Why would a
woman hike twenty to or more miles over this rugged mountainous terrain
when other women just walk across the border and look for immediate
apprehension, expecting to be released into the interior of the nation
with a court date five or more years in the future? Are they being
trafficked in the sex trade? Were they previously deported for an
adjudicated violation of our laws?
Who are the 3,050 individuals and why are they being allowed to
successfully sneak into our nation over rugged mountains and rough
terrain? One Border Patrol intelligence officer estimates 20% of these
crossers are drug packers while other knowledgeable individuals claim
the percentage of drug packers on our video evidence is likely
significantly greater than 20%. Most critically, are any of the 3,050
trespassers TERRORISTS entering our country to do Americans harm?
Securing the border at the border and vetting potential entrants is, in
fact, a national security issue. There are reports that over one
hundred seventy different countries' inhabitants have crossed into the
United States during the Biden years including Chinese, Russians,
Iranians and persons from middle eastern countries.
The aforementioned video documents approximately a five-fold
increase compared with what we were documenting during the Trump and
Obama years in the number of totally unknown international entrants
seeking to evade detection and interdiction by choosing this route.
During the last four months, as I was out on our place working,
checking cattle, waters and fences, I have not seen a single Border
Patrol agent patrolling these known border entrance trails on our ranch
since most agents are reassigned to immigrant-flooded and totally
overwhelmed locations. There, out of view of these drug routes on our
ranch, they struggle with the impossible requirement to deal with
economic asylum seekers whom they are mandated to release into the
nation under the catch and release policy. Since this is a rugged,
between-ports-of-entry route, it is highly probable that border
crossers choosing this rough, mountainous route are exceptionally
motivated to evade detection and know they are ineligible for asylum
status.

Mexican Cartel Scouts

What is most outrageous to me, is that Mexican Cartel scouts,
occupying our ranch mountain tops on US soil, guide these border
crossers. The scouts communicate with cartel operatives through
encrypted satellite phones with radio function. Scouts are also
equipped with the finest binoculars, night vision and backpack roll-
down solar panels. Their purpose is to know where the Border Patrol is
at all times and guide the Cartel drug packers or persons ineligible
for asylum to sites where Cartel operatives inside the United States
can pick up and then distribute the drugs and people throughout the
Nation.

Drugs Crisis

From my perspective, it is impossible to separate the drug crisis
from the immigration issue. Some border crossers are repeat
professionals who work for the Cartels and walk back to Mexico after
each fentanyl, heroin, methamphetamine or cocaine delivery. In
addition, the Cartel forces other undocumented persons to pay to
traverse the international boundary either in cash or at a discounted
rate if they pack drugs. Those crossing in this area are reportedly
charged about $3,000 if Mexican, $7,000 to $10,000 when from South
America or $25,000 to $75,000 for Asians. Some groups, after paying the
Cartel to cross, are unaware that they are being used as decoys and led
into probable detection to distract the Border Patrol while the Cartel
is running drugs into the United States five to ten miles away.
Government reports indicate a massive increase in fentanyl traffic
through the Arizona border. The precursors of this drug arrive from
China, are off-loaded at Mexican seaports to be processed in Mexican
labs, packaged and hidden for transport. This is chemical warfare. Many
Border Patrol officers who were formerly trying to put a dent in this
border disaster, have been dispatched to help handle the diversionary
tactic of floods of undocumented immigrants crossing the border in
other Tucson Sector locations and the Rio Grande River in Texas. This
tactic clearly opens the between-ports rural ranching trails with
unfinished border wall openings to nearly unimpeded passage. President
Biden has signed a bill to hire 87,000 new IRS agents to ``patrol''
Americans and zero new agents to patrol illegal immigration and drug
packing.

Need to complete the Wall

On our ranch, five miles of the Trump wall were well-started, but
still under construction, when President Biden was inaugurated on
January 20, 2021. One of President Biden's first executive orders was
to stop all construction on border security structures. At the end of
the Wall on our ranch, there is a four-strand barbed wire cattle fence
for over five more miles leaving a ``convenient'' gap of no wall at all
along the international boundary right in a favored entry point for the
Cartels. In addition, five additional large gaps, where gates were
designed to be installed across water gaps and international Boundary
markers, were left unfenced because of Biden's executive order.
This section of Arizona, including our ranch border, was just
described by a Trump-era highly informed, highly placed Border Patrol
spokesman as leading the entire border in ``got-aways''--crossers who
are not apprehended. In my opinion, President Biden must finish the
wall, including all of the planned fiber optic cable, electronics,
sensors and cameras. Then, ports of entry on the Mexican border need to
be staffed and equipped to interdict the flood of drugs over-whelming
these ports. The recent ``mobbing-Texas tactic'' and now the ``mobbing
strategically-selected California and Arizona entrance points tactic''
guaranteed that between-port ranches and farms along the entire
international boundary were likely to remain under Cartel control and
undefended from Cartel operations.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Jim Chilton and cousin Jerry Chilton at the end of Trump wall
on our ranch. Large gaps were unfinished and fiber optic cable,
electronics, sensors and cameras were not installed when the wall
construction ``stop order'' was given.

Border Crosser Human Tragedies

There are intolerable human tragedies and abuses faced by border
crossers, especially women. Crossers currently have no feasible option
but to cross in the hands of the Cartel. It is reported by Alvaro
Enciso, a Tucson citizen who puts crosses out to mark death sites, that
about 4,100 border crossers have died just in Southern Arizona since
1990. Huge numbers of near-death experiences are common along with
innumerable serious injuries. Women are often abused and raped. The
Border Patrol, which is a first-class search and rescue team, together
with humanitarian organizations spend much of their time saving mostly
lost and abandoned would-be crossers in distress. These human tragedies
could be avoided by securing the border at the border.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Trump wall construction was halted by President Biden on
January 20, 2021, leaving large gaps in the wall where numerous washes
cross the International Boundary. Five border gaps on the Chilton Ranch
are open doors for Cartel border crossers.

Need to Secure the Border at the Border

There are tremendous advantages to finishing construction of the
Wall and closing the gaps in the Wall between Yuma, Arizona and New
Mexico. To achieve border control, and ensure that rural Arizona is not
the ``sacrificed route,'' effective structures and strategies must also
be implemented all the way across Arizona's borderlands. Most
importantly, a completed Wall must be conscientiously patrolled 24/7
and must include surveillance technology. Congress needs to require the
Wall to be completed together with the appropriation of the necessary
funds.

Border Patrol

We want to emphasize that we support and deeply appreciate the
Border Patrol. The agents are polite, well trained and there is a
sincere effort by top officials in the Tucson and Nogales Stations to
listen to and try to address ranchers' border issues in our area. We,
however are incredibly concerned that due to the massive invasion of
economic asylum seekers, Border Patrol checkpoints along Arivaca Road,
Sasabe Road and along other roads heavily used by drug packers have
been closed for months and there is absolutely minimal presence of
agents along the border since agents are focused on processing border
crossers. I am concerned that drugs are flowing into the interior of
our Nation without an attempt to impede vehicles from transporting
drugs across our country from known crossing points.

Recommended Border Action

As a sovereign nation, the United States should have complete
control of its borders and therefore only accept legal immigration. In
my opinion, the following actions need to be considered:

1.  Complete the construction of the Wall, including all of the
planned fiber optic cable, electronics, cameras, and
sensors that alert Border Patrol to approaching persons in
time to interdict them.

2.  Hire and train enough Border Patrol Agents to secure the border
at the border, together with, if necessary, national guard
and military assistance and back-up.

3.  Require the Border Patrol to have complete presence at the Wall,
24/7, to arrest any person attempting to get over, under,
or through the Wall.

4.  Immediately deport apprehended arrested illegal intruders.

5.  Retain sufficient welders and other maintenance personnel 24/7 to
immediately repair any successful breaches or cuts in the
wall.

6.  Ports of entry on the Mexican border need to be staffed and fully
equipped to prevent, to the degree possible, drugs and
undocumented individuals from entering our country.

7.  Require true asylum claim seekers to be processed at United
States embassies, consulates or other government properties
in foreign nations utilizing the internet backup personnel
in the United States to assist in the processing.

8.  Persons seeking economic opportunity do not qualify under the
asylum category and need to return to their countries and
submit an application for legal admittance.

9.  As we understand the measure on border security currently being
considered in the U.S. Congress, it permits the flood of
economic opportunity claimants for asylum/admission to the
U.S. to continue virtually unabated. We need to stop this
end run around the legal immigration procedures and
limitations.

10.  Double or triple the current number of legal immigrants permitted
to gain qualified entrance into our nation with effective
vetting following the legally prescribed procedures. We
welcome LEGAL immigrants in a number that can be
assimilated and can contribute their future to this nation;
we oppose flooding the United States with completely
unvetted persons.

Advantages of Securing the Border at the Border

The following are some of the advantages to completing the wall
together with effective border patrolling and appropriate technology:

First, multiple reports state hundreds of people crossing the open
border sections of our Nation have been on the terrorist watch list.
How many border crossers from terrorist nations including Russia,
China, ISIS, Iran and other parts of the world have successfully
entered our country through routes like those on our ranch without
Homeland Security's knowledge. Where are they, what are their plans and
when and where will they strike? It took only 19 terrorists to demolish
the World Trade Center, and murder citizens and first-responders in New
York and attack the Pentagon and people working there.

Second, it is outrageous that Mexican Cartel scouts with satellite
phones and other military-grade equipment are free to occupy
strategically-selected hilltops for dozens of miles inside Arizona
including on our ranch. The cartel scouts know where the Border Patrol
is at all times so they can carefully guide drug packers, and people
whom they know are not eligible for asylum, through the steep wooded
canyons and along approximately one hundred smuggler trails on our
ranch. Border Patrol officers report that only 20% of the illegal
crossers on our ranch are apprehended while others argue that arrests
are fewer than 20%. Securing the border at the border would stop the
occupation of Arizona border ranchlands by these foreign cartel
operatives and their clients.

Third, environmental costs of the current failure to effectively
stop the flood of crossers are well-documented. Much of the border area
includes national forests, conservation areas, national monuments,
Indian reservations and wildernesses. These designated areas are open
routes most used by the cartel-led operations because they are the
least accessible to Border Patrol surveillance. The Border Patrol
reported at a meeting we attended that undocumented crossers have left
a reported average of 8.5 pounds of trash apiece on these lands. It is
estimated that over 25,000 tons of garbage have been dropped by
crossers in the Tucson Sector alone since 1992. Additionally, thousands
of miles of wildcat roads and trails have had severe adverse
environmental impacts.

Fourth, we have been burglarized twice by south-bound drug packers
who, after depositing their drug load at GPS sites or safe houses,
stole laptops, cameras, firearms, including historic pieces, and other
valuable items they steal to carry on their return to Mexico. This is a
typical situation for those of us near the border all across the Tucson
Sector. Ranchers in the border area cannot leave their homes unguarded
even for a few hours since their homes and ranch buildings are often
broken into if someone is not on guard duty. It can be hours before law
enforcement can respond to rural calls.

Fifth, Arizona borderland residents, ranchers and farmers as well
as national conservation areas have suffered hundreds of millions of
dollars in property damage due to major forest fires set intentionally
as decoy operations or accidentally by illegal crossers. The human and
property costs of these fires, like the Monument Fire, the Murphy
Complex Fire, Chiricahua Fire and the Horseshoe Fires and many other
fires, must also be figured into the cost of NOT securing the border at
the border. We have estimated that U.S. Forest Service costs in one
year to fight fires caused by border crossers just in Arizona
borderlands were about $600 million. We understand that illegal
crosser-caused Forest Service fires are accounted for on the Forest
Service books rather than more accurately charged to Homeland Security.
The actual cost of fighting crosser-caused forest fires is hidden from
the public.

Sixth, we are subjected to anti-ranching activist claims of over-
grazing resulting from the constant entrance of Mexican cattle through
the breached border. In order to try to reduce these devastating
impacts on my grazing program, I personally added barbed wire to the
Normandy barriers which were installed to reduce Cartel-managed vehicle
access where the Wall had been left unfinished, and cattle, as well as
Cartel ``clients'' were coming in (then that was cut and in came the
Mexican cattle), then I welded on reinforcing rod across major entrance
points (that was bent back and the crossers and the Mexican cattle came
right through), and finally, I spent a lot of money on inch-and-a-
quarter PIPE and took a skilled welder to one of these entrance points
where we worked all day welding pipe onto the Normandy barriers. So
far, this last step is still in place and is now limiting cattle
intrusion.
The emotional cost to our families is summarized by noting we are
all very much aware of what happened to rancher Larry Link the day
after he reported a load of drugs on his ranch and was then murdered
and to Sue Krentz's husband Rob when he went out to check his ranch
waters and was killed (including his dog) by an illegal who then
escaped into Mexico. Recently, myself and others in our area have been
called and told NOT to go to our border pastures because competing
factions of drug cartels were, at that point, conducting armed warfare
ON U.S. PROPERTY on this side or just south of the border over control
of these valuable unsurveilled drug trails.

Seventh, opponents of effective border control in rural areas
advocate prioritizing cross-border wildlife-roaming over interdiction
of cartel operatives. We disagree. The route through our portion of
southern Arizona, the drug traffic and the passage of potential
terrorists makes this today's Ho Chi Minh Trail .

Eighth, wildlife genetic diversity on both sides of the border can
be achieved along with border security by legally transporting animals
as scientifically deemed appropriate. Large mammals can be transported
with safe capture across the border to promote genetic diversity while
birds can fly over and small animals and reptiles can easily slip
through the bollard-style wall. In addition, American engineers can
create wildlife friendly, effectively managed passages at some parts of
the wall to facilitate wildlife connectivity with Mexico. The
``wildlife'' currently facilitated by these unguarded portions of the
border has two legs and is headquartered in Sinaloa, Mexico.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Chilton, thank you for your testimony. And
now Members of the dais, we are going to take 5 minutes for
each of you for questioning, and I am going to start out, and I
am going to start out with you, Mr. Chilton.
We talked about the environmental degradation, the garbage,
the pollution that is out there on lands here, including
Federal lands, in southern Arizona. Is that accurate that this
problem has been getting worse?
Mr. Chilton. It has been getting worse. It is an
environmental degradation. Witness Del Cueto stated that there
have been millions of people apprehended. Bottom line, if you
have 3 million people coming across the border at 8.5 pounds of
garbage apiece, that is 12,500 tons of trash. I get very tired
of riding through my ranch and seeing and observing trash left
by these crossers.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you have seen a massive increase over the
last couple of decades. Is that correct?
Mr. Chilton. That is correct.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much.
Mayor, I want to turn to you. You mentioned about social
media, about how they use that to be able to facilitate these
illegal crossings. We have a Federal law that prevents someone
from breaking the law. So, in other words, let's say you took
out an ad in a newspaper and you said, ``Hey, drive your car
down to the southern border and you can pick up a bunch of
people that are hauling fentanyl.'' That would be illegal under
Federal law. Do you think that law should be enforced in regard
to the social media companies?
Mr. McCaa. Chairman Tiffany, yes, sir, I definitely do, and
the Sheriff can talk for days on this one. That is how these
load car drivers get their marching orders. They get a text,
they get a phone call, meet here, the car is stationed probably
at Walmart or Target, keys are on the tire. Pick up the car,
drive south, pick up the load, and drive north.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes. So, we had a Vice President from
Microsoft say that, I believe it was one of the social media
companies that said that, yes, our platform gets used to be
able to facilitate these illegal crossings. I think it is about
time that the social media companies, who are quick to censor
some people, that they do their job to prevent these illegal
transactions from going on.
Sheriff Dannels, I want to talk about fentanyl for just a
second. What is the most significant action that happened over
the last few years that has led to increased fentanyl coming
into the United States of America?
Sheriff Dannels. Well, Mr. Chairman, let me just say this.
The biggest thing is when we defer our Border Patrol, who are
the frontline agents on the line, and put them in processing
and other duties assigned you shut down the checkpoints, you
shut down a lot of your aerostats along the border. Long story,
I call it the ``infrastructure fracture'' when it comes to CBP.
You have opened up the border, and the more agents you take off
the border, the more opportunities. The cartels are the true
winners in this, and they are exploiting our borders with that
knowledge.
Mr. Tiffany. So, in other words, Sheriff, on January 20,
2021, when President Biden, in effect, declared open borders,
that is largely what precipitated this massive increase of
fentanyl coming into our country. Is that right?
Sheriff Dannels. Yes, I would agree.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, and I stopped today at a Border Patrol
checkpoint. It has not been manned for a long time, and it is
not the fault of the Border Patrol. It is because they are
being babysitters at this point. It is terribly unfortunate.
And by the way, I asked Secretary Mayorkas in a hearing, I
sit on the Judiciary Committee. Sheriff Dannels was there, in
Washington, DC. He cited the same exact testimony. It has not
changed in the three times I have asked Sheriff Dannels this
question. And I asked, ``Who is not telling the truth?''
because Secretary Mayorkas said to us, ``No, the actions of
January 20, 2021, are not the reason why fentanyl has increased
the way it has.'' I said, ``Who is lying, the Sheriff or you?''
Of course, he would not go after Sheriff Dannels because he is
above repute amongst not just local citizens here in Arizona
but amongst the people of the United States who have worked
with him. Secretary Mayorkas was not telling us the truth.
The final thing I would say in my closing couple of seconds
is I really appreciate the testimony of Mr. Del Cueto, and I
understand the position that the Border Patrol took in regard
to the bill that was released by the Senate. But I would just
point out a couple of things to you in regard to the Senate
bill.
The President can declare an emergency under that bill at
any time and have open borders. Do you think for a second the
current President would not declare an emergency and allow open
borders to happen?
Furthermore, one of the lead authors said over the past
weekend, ``Under that bill the border never closes,'' and went
on to say, just today, that our priority is not American
citizens. It is the people who are here illegally.
I now recognize the Chairman, Mr. Westerman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and thank you
again to the witnesses for being here. I have read all of your
testimonies and I appreciate the time and the effort that you
put into it and the information that we were able to get from
your testimonies.
Sheriff Dannels, we received a briefing from you this
morning, and in your testimony you talked about the $9.4
million. But you had another stat that you didn't say today but
you said this morning that wasn't in your testimony about
nationwide, I believe you said a half a billion dollars of
costs have been incurred by local law enforcement because of
the failure to secure the border. Could you elaborate on that?
Sheriff Dannels. I can. It is called SCAAP, sir, State
Criminal Alien Assistance Program, which is money allocated by
the Federal Government, you all, Congress, that is to help
local and state jurisdictions offset costs for those that are
incarcerated that are illegally in the country. Since 2009, the
15 Arizona sheriffs are owed over half a billion dollars by you
all, and we would like to have our money. We get about 5 cents
to the dollar on SCAAP right now, which has been ineffective to
house, especially in a crisis over the last 3 years.
Thanks to the state of Arizona and the two governors I
mentioned, Governor Ducey and Governor Hobbs, and the money we
have set aside for our programs, they are helping us offset
those costs that otherwise my citizens there in Cochise County
would have absorbed.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Del Cueto, as I mentioned, it has been a
few years back since I made my first trip to the Arizona
border. We spent a lot of time out on the ground. I saw the
piles of trash, the camouflage clothes, the carpet-covered
shoes, the backpacks, the water bottles, all the trash that was
discarded. And I saw firsthand how the people coming across the
border were avoiding Customs and Border Patrol, that they had
lookouts in the mountains radioing down. I visited many other
places along the border. In Texas, it is a whole different
story. You see people in plain clothes walking up, and it is
almost like they finished the marathon when they see the Border
Patrol agent. That is who they are looking for. They want to
turn themselves in and claim asylum.
So, with everything that has happened with the mass numbers
in Texas, it appears that is where all the crossings are
happening, but on our visit this morning your colleague told us
that in 2020 there were 60,000 apprehensions in the Tucson
Sector. Today, there are 10 times more than that. I was shocked
to learn that, even with more wall being built, more access
along the border, and these are people that are trying to avoid
getting caught that come across this sector.
What do you think has caused the increase here, and why is
that not being focused on more than the masses that are
crossing in Texas? It is a tragedy everywhere it is happening.
Mr. Del Cueto. It is the lack of consequences from this
Administration. They realize that if they cross they just have
to claim asylum and they get released. So, what has been
happening in Arizona is you are still having the large groups
that are coming through here, and they are in more remote
areas. So, the drive from when agents arrest these individuals
to an area of processing is sometimes well over 1 or 2 hours
away, and I think that is some of the issue. So, that is 2
hours where the agent is now away from the line that allows the
drug smugglers to start bringing their drugs and everything
else into the country.
Now, realistically, you are seeing a lot more focus in
Texas because the governor in Texas has done a fantastic job of
allowing the media and having other law enforcement in those
areas that are able to talk about it and see what the problem
is. Out here in Arizona, it has been a little bit harder for
individuals to see what is happening. And I can tell you
specifically, I think it is approximately right over 60 linear
miles with Mexico, and it is very limited access to media or
anyone else to go out there.
As an example, when you are seeing the mass groups that
were coming in, in Texas or in areas of Lukeville at the same
time, that area, particularly an area called the San Miguel
gate, was experiencing over 1,000 individuals that were
entering every single morning, and all they had in that area
were two agents to watch over 1,000 people.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you. Mayor, I was shocked in your
testimony, you are the Mayor, you grew up here, and you have
actually advised your family to stay off the main
thoroughfares. We are almost out of time but I can only imagine
what it is like if you used to recreate on the Federal lands
here how much of a discouragement it would be to use the public
lands. And to our ranchers and farmers, thank you for what you
do. Much of what our Committee works on deals with rural
America.
I will leave with you a quote by a famous writer named Aldo
Leopold. He said, ``There are two great spiritual dangers of
not living on a farm. The first is when you think food comes
from the grocery, and the second is when you think heat comes
from the furnace.'' I know it is hard to get young people to go
into farming today and into ranching, and it makes it
exponentially more difficult when you are in an area dealing
with the things you are dealing with, with the border crisis.
So, thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields.
I want to correct one statement. Earlier I attributed a
quote which was to Senator Murphy, who is one of the authors of
the Senate bill, and I want to be precise in what he said. He
said, ``Our strategy has failed to deliver for the people we
care about most, the undocumented Americans that are in this
country.''
Now I would like to recognize Mr. Curtis for 5 minutes.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I have reflected,
waiting for my turn, I don't want to be too dramatic, but this
just may be the most important hearing that I have attended in
my 7 years in Congress. If you think about 100,000 lives lost
to fentanyl, if you think about the many impacts that we have
talked about today, this is incredibly important, and I hope
the American people are watching.
This is my third trip to the border in several years. I
have been under President Trump's administration and President
Biden's administration, and I came today with the specific
purpose to learn about the control of the border. And what I
learned is that the border is controlled, not by the U.S.
Government but by the cartels. They control who comes, they
control when they come, and where they come into the United
States. I thought that was our job in the United States. They
even control if they come. I was shocked to learn that if those
who want to cross the border are not willing to pay the
thousands and thousands of dollars that they could be shot by
the cartel coming across the border.
Every fact here points to the complete failure of President
Biden and his policies, or perhaps a better way to describe it
is lack of policies.
As just one example, as we arrived at the border today we
were greeted by a wall, almost as far as the eye could see.
Imagine my surprise to learn that that was President Obama's
wall, the 20-foot wall. Towards the end of the wall you could
see where it climbed to 30 feet, President Trump's wall, and
then, symbolically after that, no wall, representing no
policies, no effort, no ability to deal with what is happening
here. And, of course, the piles and piles and piles of
unconstructed wall laid on the ground next to the wall.
Sheriff, it was quoted earlier, but I want to restate this
because all of us were impacted by this. You said, ``We are not
dealing with an immigration issue. We are dealing with an
organized crime issue.'' Could you explain that a little bit so
that everybody else can understand what you meant by that?
Sheriff Dannels. Well, Congressman, we are dealing with an
issue where the border, our southern border and northern
border, let's not be absent to that, is controlled, ingress and
egress, by these criminal cartels for violence, fear, and
greed. There is just no other way around it. CBP knows it.
Locals know it. Law enforcement knows it. We see it every day.
And I talk to my fellow sheriffs, the crime, the tragedies that
they are bringing to our country, not just the borders; this is
America's problem, the criminal cartels, these organized
transnational organizations are destroying our country, one
pill at a time, one entry at a time.
Mr. Curtis. We talked about the millions of crossings. Is
it fair to say that at the low numbers people are paying
$5,000, $6,000 per crossing?
Sheriff Dannels. That is correct, Congressman.
Mr. Curtis. And those are the low numbers.
Sheriff Dannels. The higher countries of interest, the
higher the price. We have seen it all the way up to $21,000 and
plus.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you. Mr. Del Cueto, tell me why Utahns
should care about what is happening here. We live a long way
away from this, but could you help Utahns understand why this
impacts them and how this impacts them?
Mr. Del Cueto. Because the drug cartels are not just
operating here. They are not just making their money off of
what they sell on our southern border or in border states. They
are making their money off of what they sell throughout the
entire country. And when you are looking at what is being
apprehended or where these individuals are being apprehended,
it is known that the drug cartels operate in over 160 different
countries worldwide. And because of that, they are going to
continue to operate in different states within the United
States, including Utah.
Mr. Curtis. Yes, that has been a fact. Our fentanyl deaths
in our state have increased dramatically in correspondence with
the numbers coming across the border.
Mayor, I was the mayor of Provo, Utah, for 8 years, and
listen, I think anybody that is a mayor walks on water, and I
appreciate that.
Mr. McCaa. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Curtis. I can't imagine financially how you budget for
the impact of this. Do you have any sense how this impacts your
budget?
Mr. McCaa. Sir, my police chief, the deputy chief is here.
When we have load cars that come through town we have 66 sworn,
but all those 66 sworn are sectioned out when we have a load
car come through town, because we don't know when they are
coming, where they are coming. The Sheriff and the deputies do
an amazing job of trying to keep the load cars out of town, but
some come through town and we have to man all posts because we
have a lot of intersections, we have a lot of families.
As a matter of fact, one load car came down to our high
school, which we had to lock down the high school, lock down
the schools, so that takes away our resources.
Mr. Curtis. And we are out of time, but I can't even
imagine. That is one aspect of it. Health care, every aspect of
this has to impact your budget.
Mr. McCaa. Yes, sir.
Mr. Curtis. Let me just say quickly, I have introduced
recently into the House a bill that would actually reimburse
states who send law enforcement help to Texas, and we hear you
loud and clear that you can't afford this, and I certainly,
with my colleagues, will look for ways to get you help.
Mr. Chairman, I yield my time.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for your questions, Mr. Curtis. Now
I would like to recognize the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Stauber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, for holding
this important hearing, and Representative Ciscomani, thanks
for having us down here. Your staff is doing a great job.
We talk about the southern border. What is happening at the
southern border also affects the northern border. I represent
northeastern Minnesota, so if you are looking at a map, the
farthest right, eastern part of Minnesota, almost to that
little notch and beyond. And that is the Grand Forks Sector,
and you know that, Mr. Del Cueto. There are two agents on duty
tonight, two, in over 500 miles. Do you know why? Because they
are down here processing, or they are in their offices
processing for what is happening down here.
So, we have two borders, folks. And this is my third time,
as well, coming down here, and I will just share with you a
terrorist on the watch list got through the border of
California, ended up in Minnesota, was there for almost a year
before we realized that he was on the terror watch list, and
took him into custody. But in that 8 or 9 months it is alleged
he was involved in arms sales. And then when you talk about the
1.7 million got-aways, 1.7 million got-aways, I want to remind
the people that it took 19 terrorists to do that bastardly
attack, 9/11. So, we don't know who they are, where they went,
and what their intentions are, and that doesn't count the
85,000 children, we don't know where they are.
And to the men and women in law enforcement who are wearing
the uniform today, and in plain clothes, we thank you from the
bottom of our hearts for what you are doing. As one of only a
few Members in Congress that has ever worn the uniform, I have
a good idea what you are going through. And Sheriff, when your
folks are chasing, that is the most dangerous thing they can
do, but the men and women put their lives on the line for the
safety of us.
Representative Fischbach, myself, and others from the
Minnesota Delegation, we sent a letter to Secretary Mayorkas,
asking how did that terrorist get into the state of Minnesota.
And Mr. Chair, I want to put that in the record, if I may.
Mr. Tiffany. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

Congress of the United States

Washington, DC

February 2, 2024

Hon. Alejandro Mayorkas, Secretary
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
300 7th St SW
Washington, DC 20024

Dear Secretary Mayorkas:

We are writing to you with extreme concern about an internal
federal memorandum, obtained by the Daily Caller, which revealed that
an Al-Shabaab terrorist entered the United States illegally and lived
freely in Minnesota for nearly a year until he was recently arrested on
January 20, 2024. Secretary Mayorkas, your southern border policies,
which encourage the free entry of military-aged, foreign national men,
are directly endangering Minnesotans and all Americans.

While this unnamed terro1ist was apprehended in January 2024, he
had been in the country since March 13, 2023, after illegally crossing
the southern border in San Ysidro, California. When apprehended at the
border, the Terrorist Screening Center determined that the screening
results concluded this individual was misidentified as an affiliate of
Al-Shabaab and he was subsequently released. On January 18, 2024, the
Terrorist Screening Center corrected its mistake and redetermined that
the individual is a confirmed member of Al-Shabaab. Throughout the ten
months this terrorist was loose in the United States, reports state
that he was involved in arms trafficking.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Taer, J. (2024, January 29). Exclusive: Terrorist caught
illegally crossing the border was allowed to roam free for nearly a
year, Memo says. The Daily Caller. https://dailycaller.com/2024/01/29/
exclusive-terrorist-caught-illegally-crossing-border-allowed-roam-free-
nearly-year-memo-says/

It is unacceptable that the Department of Homeland Security wrongly
allowed this terrorist into our country through the southern border
after identification concluded he was on the terrorist watch list.
Sadly, this is just one example of the Biden Administration's policies
that have led to this crisis. Since President Biden took office, 361
individuals on the terrorist watchlist have been encountered at the
country's border.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ U.S. Customs and Border Protection.(2024, January 26) CBP
Enforcement Statistics. https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/cbp-
enforcement-statistics

However, these statistics are only from individuals who were
screened at the border and do not account for all the illegal
immigrants who were not. Since the Biden Administration took office,
there have been 1.7 million individuals who evaded apprehension and
entered our country, their affiliations unknown.\3\ Bad actors are
exposing vulnerabilities in national security policies created by the
Biden Administration and our constituents, as well as everyday
Americans, have to pay the price.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Border Sector Chiefs confirm operational impacts of Border
Chaos: Increased Gotaways, closed checkpoints, and empowered cartels.
Committee on Homeland Security. (2023, December 20). https://
homeland.house.gov/2023/12/20/border-sector-chiefs-confirm-operational-
impacts-of-border-chaos-increased-gotaways-closed-checkpoints-and-
empowered

Given the news of the apprehension of the Al-Shabaab terrorist in
Minnesota, we respectfully request the answers to the following
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
questions:

1.  To provide transparency, will the Department of Homeland Security
release the internal federal memorandum that the Daily
Caller obtained to Congress?

2.  What factors led the Terrorist Screening Center to conclude the
individual was misidentified as an Al-Shabaab terrorist at
the southern border and justified his release?

3.  What factors led the Terrorist Screening Center to determine that
their initial assessment at the border was incorrect and a
reassessment was needed?

4.  Does the Department of Homeland Security have any information of
what the Al-Shabaab terrorist was doing in the United
States, including his activities in the State of Minnesota
or his involvement in arms trafficking, between entering
the country in March 2023 and his arrest in January 2024?

5.  Are you willing to provide a briefing, either classified or
unclassified, to the Minnesota congressional delegation
about the events surrounding the arrest of the Al-Shabaab
terrorist?

6.  What steps is the Department of Homeland Security taking to
prohibit this from occurring again and to ensure terrorists
are detained at the border?

Again, we are extremely troubled by the recent news of the known
Al-Shabaab terrorist being in the country for almost a year. We thank
you for your prompt consideration of our questions to provide
transparency to our constituents and the American people.

Sincerely,

Tom Emmer                     Brad Finstad
Member of Congress            Member of Congress

Michelle Fischbach            Pete Stauber
Member of Congress            Member of Congress

______

Mr. Stauber. Sheriff Dannels, first off, this is the first
time you and I met.
Sheriff Dannels. Correct.
Mr. Stauber. You are impressive.
Sheriff Dannels. Thank you.
Mr. Stauber. Your service, your get-it-done attitude, and
your truthfulness, and I am appalled that as a leader, a law
enforcement leader, in this county that you have not received a
response from our President, from the National Sheriffs'
Association, to meet with him. That is appalling.
Sheriff Dannels. It is.
Mr. Stauber. Sheriff Dannels, can you elaborate on any
instances of red tape, whether it be permitting challenges or
otherwise, that is holding back your department from taking
necessary action or making necessary investments to better
respond to this border crisis?
Sheriff Dannels. Yes, and thank you for the fine comments.
Thank you. I am humbled.
Let me say this. We have presented a 16-point action plan
to Secretary Mayorkas. I actually hand-carried that to him,
accompanied by about 10 other sheriffs. Four months later, I
asked him where we were at with that 16-point action plan,
which was put together by the nation's sheriffs around the
country. He stated to me, ``Did you give me something,
Sheriff?'' We have never heard back since. We have sent a
minimum of four letters to the White House to meet President
Biden on behalf of the four major county sheriffs'
associations, with no response. And that has been reconfirmed
over and over, to meet with us. This is the first President in
modern-day history not to meet with one sheriff in this
country, and we call that insulting.
The other thing that is really hurting us is a failure to
prioritize our southern border by this Administration, the
failure to follow the rule of law, the failure to have judicial
oversight, and most important is the failure to have our CBP
agents working alongside us because they have been redeployed
for other administrative duties. We need our agents back and
our officers back from the Federal Government, and to be
allowed to do their job.
Mr. Stauber. Totally agreed.
Mr. Boelts, Mr. Chilton, thanks for your testimony. I only
have 20 seconds left. Mr. Chilton, with the number of people
crossing your lands and wreaking havoc on your crops and the
garbage, what does it cost you personally?
Mr. Chilton. We have tried to answer that question and it
costs me, personally, about $60,000 a year. But the real cost
is the concern that my cowboys and my family might be violated,
get caught between Border Patrol and the illegals in a
gunfight.
Mr. Stauber. Mr. Chair, can I use 30 more seconds?
This President today, without any legislation, by executive
action, can end catch-and-release, re-instate Remain in Mexico,
enter into asylum cooperative agreements, end parole abuses,
detain inadmissible aliens, use expedited removal, rein in
taxpayer-funded benefits for illegal aliens, and issue a
proclamation to suspend or restrict entry. This is the exact
same thing that Chairman Westerman just said. He can do that in
5 minutes by Executive Order, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. I believe the gentleman from Minnesota
directed the question to both Mr. Chilton and Mr. Boelts. Mr.
Boelts, do you want to address that question of the cost to
your operation as a result of illegal immigration?
Mr. Boelts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Representative
Stauber, myself and my neighbors, it costs those of us
operating roughly the 40,000 acres that are closest to our
international boundary anywhere from a couple hundred thousand
a year in cleanup to several million dollars a year. It just
depends.
We had a unique situation where a whole group of Haitian
immigrants, who were a little bit unique compared to most
immigrants and asylum seekers, folks entering the country
illegally. They camped out alongside one of our fresh produce
fields and one of my neighbors', and stayed there for a couple
of days. They were unique in that they weren't walking across
the border and saying, ``Here I am. Where is my free bus
ticket, my free meal ticket, my free airline ticket, and my
hotel room?'' They were less trusting of Federal and local
authorities, so they camped out for a couple of days, mostly
women and children. You don't want people sitting next to your
fresh produce field who you can't get to leave. So, that was a
unique situation. But yes, unbelievable quantity of trash,
refuse, trampling of crops. It is extraordinary.
And the worst part about it is most of the folks that I
mentioned in my testimony that legally work in agricultural
fields in my community, the first- and second-generation
immigrants, ask them what they think about what is going on
today. They are appalled. These are people that spent tens of
thousands of their own hard-earned dollars. Sometimes it
impacted multiple generations. And they sit there and work
every day and watch our government. They worked hard to become
part of this country, a legal part of this country. They pass
through checkpoints. They pass through ports of entry. They did
it legally, and they are extremely appalled. Many of them are
the ones out here picking up the trash, refuse, and trying to
make use of the crops behind this tragedy.
Mr. Tiffany. I would now like to recognize the gentleman
from Guam, Mr. Moylan, for his questioning.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
everyone, for being here today to participate in this very
important hearing. I just wanted to expand a little bit more in
talking about the financial side of this impact we are seeing
from this influx of migrants.
My district is from Guam, and it is not as impacted exactly
as the issues you are facing, but my constituents know all too
well the feeling of being left to deal with a large number of
migrants without adequate financing support from the Federal
Government.
My first question is for Mayor McCaa. Thank you for your
extensive Army service, sir, by the way, and thank you for
coming today to discuss how your community has been impacted by
this migrant crisis. You mentioned some of the numbers, but I
just really want you to expand and help us see it even clearer,
the impact that your local town budget that you are using to
provide the services, such as police, fire, and
hospitalization, that is being taken away from your residents.
This money has been taken away from your budget.
What is being neglected? How can you continue on this way
without the Federal Government coming in and giving you that
support?
Mr. McCaa. Chairman Tiffany, Representative Moylan, thank
you. Our budget is being impacted. We have our CEO of the
hospital; he is in the room as well. He had said that our
hospitals are overcrowded. Emergency rooms are overcrowded. Our
resources, again, our police resources, we only have 66 sworn,
but when load cars come through town, again, every sworn
detective, even our own deputy chief, have to go out on the
road. That takes away from our citizens. That takes away from
our communities.
Our budget, I don't have the hard numbers but I can get
those to you after this is concluded.
Mr. Moylan. That is fine. I am actually thinking, are you
having to neglect basic services for your residents because of
the lack of budget, or the amount of budget that you have to
use in order to provide these services to these illegal
migrants?
Mr. McCaa. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moylan. For example, what other things are being
neglected?
Mr. McCaa. Just regular patrols around town, sir, regular
patrols that keep our communities safe.
Mr. Moylan. Sheriff, do you want to add onto that?
Sheriff Dannels. Yes, if I could add a collective statement
on that. Under just the jail bookings I shared earlier, over 3
years ago our percentage of border-related crimes in our jail
estimated were 5 to 10 percent. We are pushing 44 percent of
all the crime in our jail is border related. That is a
collective statement of every community in this county for law
enforcement, that is what they are addressing in their
communities too. It is relevant.
Mr. Moylan. How is your retention rate with your officers,
and new recruits as well?
Sheriff Dannels. It is a serious challenge because we spend
40 to 45 percent of our time dealing with some kind of border
crime. When you guys were at the border down there, I got back
in my car and they were looking for a load vehicle, as you were
sitting at the border. We deal with it all day long. Whether it
is a death, whether it is a tragedy, whether it is a high-risk
pursuit, we are dealing with it.
And let me just say, and it hasn't been discussed, I think
it is really important, if I get the privilege on this is the
threats towards law enforcement, I have seen agents where they
tried to cut their throats, I have seen troopers drug by the
smuggler drivers, I had two deputies almost killed last year.
One is still off the job, and I am sitting there at the
hospital. They didn't think he was going to live, from an
incident from a load driver going 100 miles an hour. Are we
sick of it? Yes, we are real sick of it. We are sick of it, and
we are asking for answers. But these officers, these deputies,
these agents, and these troopers are putting their lives on the
line, and thank you all for supporting that. Thank you, sir,
for what you said on that, wearing the badge with us. We need
your help on that.
Mr. Moylan. I would be happy to help, but I just wish our
President would be more involved in this. You expressed some
dangerous situations going on here. You are pleading for help.
You have the facts in front of you. Yet, I don't understand why
the Biden administration hasn't taken the time to come and
stand by your side and do what is right.
Sheriff Dannels. And just to add on that, I was on
President Biden's transition team on behalf of National
Sheriffs'. I shared the stories and the good efforts that we
are doing, the reality of our conversation. I was shocked,
disappointed, and, again, frustrated that on Day 1, the first
week, he declared the southwest border a non-emergency, which
puts us in this position even worse than we have ever seen it.
It is frustrating.
I spoke to the White House, Tom Perez, along with four
other sheriffs just recently. I begged for a meeting with the
national sheriff leadership, and it has been crickets ever
since.
Mr. Moylan. I thank you for your service, and the rest of
the panel and those coming here today.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize Mr. LaMalfa, from California, for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
gathering here today for us to be able to interact with you. I
have made a couple of trips to the border, and today just
underlines how futile what we are doing, or what this Federal
Government is doing, is. It is appalling. And my wish is not to
politicize this per se. But for President Biden to come on the
TV and say, ``Well, the Republicans could have been doing
something about this.'' Hogwash. I mean, they held all three
branches from 2000 to 2022. They could have done anything they
want on the Democrat side with their dominance. Any legislation
they wanted, they could have done it, all right. And they did
not act. Instead, they have opened the gates even wider.
Nobody wants to hear this partisan stuff. I get it. But you
have to lay the problem where it is. So, for us to be taking up
this situation with Secretary Mayorkas, a lot of people say,
``Oh, it is just a political stunt. You are going to impeach
this guy, right?'' He has earned it, OK. He has lied to the
public. He has lied to Congress. He has not done his job. No,
maybe you-know-what rolls downhill. Maybe the orders are coming
from the top. But he could do honorable things and either speak
against it or resign himself if he finds what is going on, what
his orders are, so abhorrent.
So, we will be doing that again this coming week, and maybe
we can get our act together and actually see that through, and
make the statement on that, and hold him accountable. That is
what it is about. It is not a political stunt.
With that, I am a farmer in Northern California in my real
life, and I wanted to ask a couple of questions of Mr. Boelts
and one of Mr. Chilton, as well. Mr. Chilton, let me start with
you. Again, we were out there a minute ago looking at the fence
line, and all that fence material that we paid millions and
millions of dollars for, a lot of them have date codes on it.
They are like from October/November 2020, that material has
been laying there.
Did I not hear there was a situation for a while where
people with private property right up against the border, that
there were folks helping fund and put up fence on private lands
and the ability to do that? Mr. Chilton, was that something
that was offered to you or available to you, or has that since
been tossed out by a court or something? Do you have that
availability of somebody building privately and getting the
funding to fence off your land?
Mr. Chilton. The 5.5 miles of international border on my
ranch is all Federal land. The problem is they cross Federal
land and then cross my private property. Private people have a
difficult time getting the approval of the Federal Government
to put in walls.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, thank you. Yes, I knew it was going to be
tough. Well, we still have these gaps in it, and we couldn't
see them all where we were, but we know about them. On our
previous trip down to the Yuma area, you could see the gaps. It
is ridiculous, people just streaming across. Biden promised
about 2 years ago, ``We are going to fill in the gaps.'' I
guess they have done a little bit of it now, but it is
ridiculous.
Mr. Boelts, when you are talking about the people trampling
through the fields there, I would like to give you more time to
emphasize on what the losses are on that, because in
California, we have implemented very tough, what is it,
phytotoxicity rules on the leafy green crops and such. You
can't get anything out of them. They are even talking about
screening over orchards there so if birds are flying over you
don't get bird feces on the fruit, and stuff like that. I mean,
they don't live in the real world sometimes. But what do you
have to deal with as far as the cost, the other preventative
measures, because they are out there anyway, in order to
protect your crops and get your crops so they can pass health
and food inspection to get them to market? And what is the cost
to your industry?
Mr. Boelts. Mr. Chairman, Representative LaMalfa, yes, it
is an extraordinary situation. Basically, if we have any animal
or any human being, these are where pathogens come from, right?
Human pathogens are carried by people, and they are carried by
wildlife and domesticated animals.
So, we are very cognizant of it. We are evaluating fields
before they are planted, at planting. During the growing of the
crop we are especially attentive. And then immediately prior to
harvest evaluations happen.
On a field-by-field basis, roughly an acre of fresh produce
can be worth $5,000 to $6,000 before a knife is put to it and
it is harvested. So, we are obviously trying to make the best
use that we can of----
Mr. LaMalfa. Like talking for your industry, are we talking
tens of millions in losses? Are farmers looking at what they
are dealing with there and saying, ``Maybe I am just not going
to plant these particular crops by the border.'' That sort of
thing?
Mr. Boelts. There are definitely some lands that are not
put into fresh vegetable production. They are left in other
crops for that specific reason. There is fencing going in.
There is crop lost every year because they are not just being
physically trampled but just when folks that are not properly
trained enter a field you have to section off that area of the
field.
It is an ongoing issue. Our particular issue is largest in
the very western part of our county on or near the Cocopah
Reservation. There is no fencing on the Cocopah Reservation.
That is a unique situation for our State Department, the
Cocopah Tribe. It is not just a problem for us farmers that are
farming Cocopah land. It is an extraordinary problem for the
Border Patrol. There is a concentration up there, resources
dedicated there because of there being no wall.
There is some Normandy fencing, but even that has been
penetrated with vehicles running people and smuggling drugs.
So, it is an extraordinary problem. It has been going on for
decades.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK, thank you. If you are not growing it here,
and I am not growing it in the Central Valley because they are
taking the water away and giving it to fish, or in my district
where the marijuana cartels, because of the border, are making
water and land unusable, we have a gigantic problem. Thank you.
Mr. Westerman [presiding]. The gentleman's time has
expired. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Oklahoma,
who is also the Chairman of the House Republican Study
Committee, Mr. Hern, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hern. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, but I really want to
recognize your new Congressman, Congressman Ciscomani. He has
done a fantastic job for you all representing this most
important issue in Congress to us all. I often say, and I said
it certainly this morning, there are a lot of people in
Congress that talk about things they know nothing about. It is
wonderful to have somebody there that actually has lived it and
seen it in his entire life. So, thank you, Juan.
[Applause.]
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, my friend.
Mr. Hern. You are hearing us all, and it is so great for us
to be here and to be able to vent to people that live this
every single day. And I know in your hearts and in your minds
you are saying, ``They are here. What are they going to do?''
We are on your side, and this is almost like us just talking to
each other. And it is so great. You have a great sheriff here,
as was mentioned earlier, you know, all law enforcement. It is
so refreshing across the country. And I want you to know that
he is backed by county sheriffs across this nation.
I just had a roundtable this past week in my district, back
in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and this same narrative, it is everywhere.
``Congressman, what are we going to do about the southern
border? We have fentanyl issues. It is killing our people. And
it is a travesty. We have human trafficking. Homeland
Investigation Services are just turning people loose. They are
not letting us arrest people.''
And, unfortunately, Mr. Boelts, I think you said this
earlier, it should not be a partisan issue, but it is, and it
is sad. It is not a partisan issue to go through that precheck
line at the airport and make sure there are not criminals when
you are sitting beside somebody, but you all, every single day,
are living the same kind of threat in your towns, your
communities, your homes. Many of us up here have been to the
southern border numerous times, in Texas that gets the most
highlight. But as the CBP Chief said a minute ago, we are seven
times, eight times worse than that, anyplace on the Texas
border. It is a travesty what is going on across this nation's
southern border, a travesty.
We saw an article, and I think more and more people, I
think we can thank Governor Abbott for what he has done to send
or allow people to leave Texas and go to these sanctuary cities
because now you have our colleagues on the other side of the
aisle that are putting pressure on this, and in Washington, DC.
There is nothing more impactful than politics. And the
President knows that there is a real problem now, and he is
trying to figure out how to do it.
And you heard my colleagues talk about the eight items out
there. Sheriff or anybody up here, of those eight items which
would have the biggest impact on the invasion across our
southern border.
And before you answer that I just want to say one thing. If
you haven't seen how people now are starting to report this, if
you saw ``60 Minutes'' on Sunday night talk about what was
happening 60 miles east of San Diego, where TikTok was
instructing people around the world on how to come to this
particular point, something as similar as the end of the wall
that we just saw out here just a minute ago, just droves of
them. And CBS ``60 Minutes'' reported that there were 600
Chinese illegal immigrants that came across that one hole in
the wall in a 3-day period, and TikTok instructed them on how
to do that, how to bring them 7,000 miles away.
So, Sheriff, if you could talk to us about the eight items,
which one of them that the President could implement quickly,
and what impact it would have.
Sheriff Dannels. Well, the biggest thing I would say is
this, and I have said this for the last several years, is you
have to acknowledge that there is a problem. We just finally
heard that several weeks ago from President Biden that the
border is not secured. We have the Vice President, the border
czar, that has not engaged with the border communities, mayors,
sheriffs, and beyond. So, he has acknowledged it. Now let's
prioritize it. Let's engage our community leaders to get to the
table, and we can fix it.
At the beginning of the day, we wake up with the
communities. At the end of the day, we go to bed with the
communities. But the more you neglect communities, the worse
this is going to get. We need to prioritize and enforce the
rule of law.
And I have to say one last thing that I think is so
important, that Secretary Mayorkas and I spoke about 3 years
ago. I said, ``We have to have enhanced judicial oversight on
credible fear, asylum claims, because right now they are
exploiting it.'' He said, ``I 100 percent agree with you,
Sheriff.'' That was 3 years ago. We are nowhere different than
we were 3 years ago. I will leave it at that.
Mr. Hern. If you saw what the President said today, which
proves what my colleagues have said, nothing has changed since
President Trump was in office. The only thing that has changed
is that President Biden has undone all the things that
President Trump did that started slowing the crossings of the
border. He said today that ``since Congress cannot do
something, I guess I am going to have to implement Executive
Orders.'' So, he has known all along that he has had the
ability to do this, and that they have been discussing this for
months. And there have been people dying across this country
because of illegal fentanyl flowing, and you all have been
suffering.
So, I just want you to know, those are the facts, and he
was the one that put that out today that he was going to have
to do Executive Orders.
I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany [presiding]. The gentleman yields. I would now
like to recognize the gentlelady from Wyoming, Ms. Hageman.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you. Mr. Boelts, I had the pleasure of
visiting the Yuma area last year, although unfortunately it was
for the purpose of understanding the scope of this crisis. I
want to discuss how the current failure to defend Federal
borderlands and secure the southern border is impacting you,
and I want to focus on the impact it has on Yuma agriculture.
I was incredibly fascinated to learn that between November
and March, as much as 90 percent of our nation's leafy
vegetables like lettuce are grown in Yuma. Mr. Boelts, you
touch on this in your testimony, but I want to give you more
time to discuss the burden of individuals crossing through non-
ports of entry has on agriculture in your community. What does
this do for crop production? What I specifically would like to
get to is can crossing through your fields result in mandatory
significant crop destruction?
Mr. Boelts. Mr. Chairman, Representative Hageman, thank you
for attending and visiting our area down in Yuma and for being
here. I hope it has proved extraordinarily educational.
Yes, I think the most impactful thing is just the sheer
numbers that Customs and Border Protection is trying to deal
with, and then us, as farmers, that are operating those public
and private lands in the proximity to the border.
When folks enter into a field if they are not properly
trained that pretty much ends the harvestability of that
particular area. At $5,000 to $6,000 an acre, that is roughly
the size of a football field. We are talking about tens of
thousands of acres that immediately border our international
boundary, and that is just in that one part of our county where
the traffic is heaviest.
Again, I urge the Federal Government to work with the
Cocopah Tribe. If they were to work with the Cocopah Tribe and
then get some additional wall, get some additional resources
put there, and then if we were able to handle the asylum
seekers differently, we would dramatically cut the number of
people that Customs and Border Protection is having to
interdict that are not crossing through ports of entry, and
that would be extraordinary.
And the unusual thing is that in our community we are short
of workers every day to do work in our fields. A good friend of
mine recently approached Border Patrol about visiting some of
the folks who are seeking asylum and who have entered our
country without documentation that are being held temporarily.
He approached them about asking them if they wanted to join the
H2-A program. He addressed over 900 folks that had entered our
country illegally, awaiting transportation or appointments with
courts, and he received zero takers on his opportunity to go to
work.
Ms. Hageman. They are not here for jobs. They are not here
for opportunity.
Mr. Boelts. At least not in the areas where they are
crossing, for sure.
Ms. Hageman. OK. I am going to give a couple of metrics I
would love to have more time to address the Ag issue. I grew up
in Wyoming, on a ranch. I have been farming, handling water
issues pretty much my entire life, so I feel for both of you.
But I want to give a few metrics on something that I think is
very important for what we are discussing today, and that is
specifically the environmental impact of the illegal crossing.
For a NEPA environmental review process it takes
approximately 6.1 years. To obtain a 404 permit under the Clean
Water Act it takes 10 or more years and costs hundreds of
thousands of dollars. Over $1.7 billion is spent each year by
the private and public sectors obtaining wetlands permits to be
allowed to undertake even the slightest disturbance to a creek
or waterway.
I had a case several years ago, I am a water attorney and I
had a lawsuit in Wyoming where one of my clients cleaned out an
irrigation ditch, affected 2.1 acres of land on his own
property. The EPA concluded that that was a navigable water of
the United States, brought a lawsuit against him, and when we
went to trial he was facing penalties of almost $65 million for
cleaning out an irrigation ditch on his own property.
The irony is that none of the individuals or companies
undertaking a NEPA analysis or a 404 permit would ever be
allowed to cause the type of environmental degradation and
destruction that the cartels and illegals are causing
throughout the southern border, as shown in the photographs
that we saw today.
I think we have to acknowledge something, and that is that
the Biden administration has gone to war with the American
public. They have elevated the financial interests of the
cartels above and against us. They are turning a blind eye to
the environmental destruction that is being caused by the
cartels and the illegals, and we are being punished for it. We
not only have the economic impact, we not only have the impact
on our farms and our ranches, our communities, our law
enforcement officers, but our creeks, our waterways, our
Federal lands, and our private lands are being destroyed by
illegal immigration, and this Administration is doing nothing
about it.
Again, I wish I had more time to discuss all of these
issues with you, but it is something that we, as Congress, have
to address to make sure that we are not losing some of our most
valuable resources because this Administration refuses to
secure our border.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The Representative from Wyoming yields. I
would now like to recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
allowing me to waive onto this Committee. Gentleman, I do not
serve on the Natural Resources Committee but I do serve on the
Energy and Commerce Committee as well as the Budget Committee.
Let me tell you about the Energy and Commerce Committee.
Just recently, I have been honored to be chosen as Chair of the
Subcommittee on Environment and Critical Materials and
Manufacturing. Well, I will be quite honest with you. I have
set a number of goals with my priorities of what I want to
accomplish in the environment setting but I haven't really
thought about this until I got here, and then all of a sudden I
hear about the impact that this is having on our environment.
So, know that you have influenced another Committee of Congress
to take action on things that we need to be taking action on,
and that is very important.
I also serve, within the Energy and Commerce Committee, on
the Communications and Technology Subcommittee, and I
understand that this is a problem, Sheriff, where we are
hearing that the cartels are using the internet to get people
and to bring people in to help the people across the border and
to do all kinds of things, that we need to address Section 230.
And we have known for a long time, but not because of this.
This was not one of the reasons why. And we need to address
that as well.
On the Budget Committee that I serve on, and Mr. Mayor, I
was a mayor in a former life too, and you heard Mr. Curtis say
that. You better be careful. They may sentence you to Congress
one day. But I know the budget impact. I know the impact that
this can have on the budget.
I say all that to tell you that, yes, this is the Natural
Resources Committee, but it is much more than that. This issue
is impacting all of America. I represent the entire coast of
Georgia. I am not sure you can get any further away from this
area than you can where I represent. But this is a big issue
for us.
By profession I am a pharmacist, and I will tell you that
the fentanyl problem, the crisis that we have in the country,
killing 200 people every day, the No. 1 killer, as the Chairman
told you, of adults 18 to 45. As a pharmacist, I was
embarrassed. I made a mistake. I was in a town hall meeting and
I referred to it as fentanyl addiction. And a mother stood up
and corrected me, as she should have, and she said, ``No, sir.
It is not fentanyl addiction.'' She said, ``My son took one
pill and he's dead. It's fentanyl poisoning.'' It is poisoning
our citizens.
And then I hear, Sheriff, that the price of fentanyl has
plummeted. And you know, it is simple economics. It is just
telling you, supply and demand, the supply in America right now
is decreasing the price. What can we do to help you in that
respect? I know we need to address it, Sheriff, on the
internet. Now I am going to do that when I get back to
Washington. I am going to do that. I am going to address that
and explain to my colleagues why we need to do this. How else
can we help you?
Sheriff Dannels. Well, Congressman, I will say two things.
The war on drugs needs to be re-addressed. We are losing so
many good Americans every day, especially our young ones, that
are attached, best friends, to social media. That is a tragedy.
That is a true tragedy.
The second thing is this. We have to hold social media
accountable. And I appreciate the hearing you all just did in
DC recently. I think you made an impact on that. And I will say
this to you. When you can go on social media right now, anyone
in this room, to include yourselves, and buy a fentanyl pill
and it is delivered to your house, in our community we call
that a drug dealer, but for some reason they are immune from
doing that. Something has to change on that, and thank you for
doing what you are doing.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, and thank you for bringing that to
my attention.
Folks, this is the eighth time in the 10 years that I have
been a Member of Congress that I have been to the border. Every
time it has gotten worse, and now it is worse. I want to tell
you what I have learned since I have been here, and this is
important. First of all, I want to continue to thank Customs
and Border Patrol agents for the outstanding work that they are
doing, the outstanding work that they continue to do.
I learned today, during this trip, that we have more non-
Mexicans coming across the border than we do Mexicans. I didn't
know that before I came down here. That has to be of concern to
us.
I also learned that the price of fentanyl has plummeted.
That tells us the supply.
But Sheriff, you made a comment that I think all of us are
going to take with us, and that is that this is not an
immigration problem; this is an organized crime problem. And
until we realize that in this country, we are not going to be
able to do anything about it. We are at war with the cartels,
and we need to start acting that way and responding that way.
I can't thank you all enough for what you do for our
country. Thank you, Mr. Chilton. Thank you all for being here,
and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the Chairman of the Western Caucus, Mr. Newhouse, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank everyone
for being here. Thank you for allowing me and other members of
the Western Caucus to sit in on what has turned out to be a
very important conversation.
I don't think it is too bold of a statement to say that I
think this topic that we are talking about today is the No. 1
issue facing our nation today. And I just want to thank
everybody here, all of our panelists for participating, all of
the Members of Congress for being here, and all of you in the
audience for taking an interest in helping to solve this
problem. I can't imagine what it would be like living in what
we have been told is the best city in the country, and I will
not dispute that, but you must have a heck of a challenge every
single day, and I want to tell you, we appreciate what you are
going through. And we want to be helpful. That is the point of
this hearing today, to try to be helpful.
The alarming rate of illegal border crossings and the
impact that it is having across this nation just proves every
single day that whether you are in northern Wisconsin, as the
Chairman is, or southwestern Arkansas, where our Committee
Chairman is, or whether you are in central Washington, or
anywhere in the country, we now join southern Arizona as being
a border state. The impacts are felt everywhere.
We are very frustrated in central Washington. We, like
everybody else, have seen a dramatic increase in the number of
people dying from fentanyl and fentanyl poisoning. I put
together what I call my Central Washington Fentanyl Task Force.
We brought together members of law enforcement, judges, medical
professionals, counselors, educators, even drug addicts, to try
to come together with ideas to help solve this problem.
And certainly education and prevention are important, but
one thing that we have been told by some people is you might as
well forget about trying to stop the flow of drugs into the
country. We can't touch that. We can't deal with that. We are
not going to be able to make any difference there. And I want
to ask Sheriff Dannels, maybe Mr. Del Cueto, what you think
about that. Is that a futile effort on our part, as a country,
to stop this?
Sheriff Dannels. The return on that, Congressman, is going
to be a challenge. I agree with that. But we can do it. We
truly can do it. This is a social problem in our country that
we have to address at the homeland first, but we can't address
it here until we secure our borders. There is no other way to
say that.
And this is not just a government problem. This is a
citizen problem. The good Congressman from California asked
about the border and the private funds and if I can answer
that. Long story short is we had a fundraiser several years ago
where the citizens of this great state put money forward. We
took those funds here in Cochise County and put in a virtual
system that covers the whole state of Arizona and parts of New
Mexico, 1,300 cameras strong, that is watched 24/7 here.
We all have to do our part, just like you mentioned, and if
we can't recognize that people are dying every day because an
illicit drug and a criminal cartel is killing us, then shame on
us, as this country. We can do a better job.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you.
Mr. Del Cueto. There are tons of drugs coming across the
border because there aren't enough agents out there watching
the line. I know often it has been said if you hire more agents
you can put them out there on the line. Under this
Administration, the more agents you are going to hire they are
just going to put them in the processing centers so they can
process individuals faster.
The only way you are going to stop this is if you stop
giving the incentives and you actually have some type of
consequence for the individuals that are crossing. The cartels,
yes, they control the border. They realize that they can flood
one area of the border, send as many individuals as they can.
They know all the agents in that area are going to be forced to
go into the processing centers, and that is when it gives them
the opportunity to bring their drugs across.
Now you have seen some of the camera footage that Mr.
Chilton has put up. I know Sheriff Dannels has camera footage,
videos, that I am sure he has shown you. But the reality is you
don't have cameras across that entire border, and the drug
cartels are very much aware of that. So, there are tons that
are coming in that we don't even know are coming in. There are
individuals that are coming in that have been apprehended on
the terrorist watch list, but at the same times those
individuals have been apprehended with other large groups, and
the other individuals in that same group may come from the same
area of the world that they have come through, but if they are
not on the terrorist watch list they are asking for asylum and
they are getting released as well. You need to stop just
allowing them to be released, and you have to have true
consequences for the crimes that are being committed.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you. This is a hearing on the impact of
public lands. I am a farmer myself in central Washington, so I
really relate to the testimony of you two gentlemen as it
relates to the impact on your farms. I can only imagine, Mr.
Chilton, you mentioned the safety of your family, of your
workers, trying to farm, trying to ranch under these
circumstances has to be challenging. I hear it is expensive.
And I wish we could spend another hearing just on this subject
alone because it is so important.
But thank you all for being here. Thanks for being part of
the solution. And I see this as just a start of the
conversation between us. We need to stay closely in touch, so
thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the gentlelady from Minnesota, Ms. Fischbach, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you, Mr. Chair. First of all, I just
want to say thank you, Representative Ciscomani, for the
invitation down, and thank you to the Western Caucus, and thank
you to the Chair, because I think it is so important that we
have these meetings and we are out and about and we are
actually looking at the border, not just talking about it, and
we know what is going on, and we are talking to the people that
it affects.
And I also thank you for waiving me onto the Committee. I
actually sit on Ways and Means, but we are doing the field
hearings too, and I see such great value in them. So, I really
appreciate the community welcoming us and such hospitality. And
I also really am pleased to see that you are all together on
this. This is a huge issue for you, and you want to make sure
that we are helping you and not hindering what is going. So, I
appreciate you all being here, and actually, I have
constituents here, if you can believe, because they are just so
excited to come down and see me.
I am just teasing. They are here for other reasons than to
see me. But they are concerned about the border too, and that
is one thing. Representative Stauber represents one-half of the
northern border in Minnesota. I represent the other half in
Minnesota. And I mentioned this to the Sheriff earlier. We are
already getting reports that we are having illegal crossing
there. So, maybe very soon we are going to be seeing the same
problems, unfortunately, so we need to make sure that we are
doing what we can to help you secure and do what you can so
that we can do the same when we need to.
But I think there have been a lot of great questions, a lot
of great comments. And since I am second to last, what I want
to do is give everybody, I have 3 minutes, if you have anything
that you wanted to say that you weren't offered the opportunity
to, here to just finish up. If there a comment you want to
make, kind of last chance, unless Representative Collins
decides to turn over some time. And it looks like Mr. Del Cueto
has something?
Mr. Del Cueto. Yes, ma'am. Look, we understand that there
are things that President Biden can do, but we know he is not
going to do them. And that is why we need bills and laws to
come through so we can actually hold him accountable and
actually get things done. H.R. 2 happened to be the perfect
bill. There was no attacking it. But we need to pass bills. We
can't just say, hey, he can do this, or he can do that, because
we are aware of what he can do, but we are also aware of what
he is not going to do. We need Congress to work together and
get bills across so we can stop what is happening on our
southern border.
It doesn't matter if you are right wing or left wing. The
drug cartels do not care. They just want to come into the
United States, harm American citizens, and if we continue just
pointing a finger at one way or the other, we are never going
to get anything done. Thank you.
Ms. Fischbach. And Mr. Del Cueto, can I ask, are you
engaged with both parties in Congress or whoever is on that?
Because we need your engagement before it gets to that point if
there is a bill, but the input on the policy. So, I would love
to see you engaged with that as it is produced.
Mr. Del Cueto. The National Border Patrol Council is
engaged with both sides, and we do have a good relationship and
we are able to talk to certain individuals on either side.
Obviously, we have better relationships with some than with
others, but yes, we are engaged with different sides to try to
get the right things done.
Also, aside from your question, I want to thank Congressman
Ciscomani for putting this together and coming down here. I
will add that he is one of the Congressmen in Arizona that has
continuously been engaged and continuously makes phone calls,
asking not just what is going on with the border but also
asking how the Border Patrol agents themselves are doing. So, I
want to thank you for that.
Ms. Fischbach. And I appreciate making sure you are engaged
in making those suggestions on policy because that is what we
need. And I believe someone else had another comment. There you
go. I am sorry.
Mr. Chilton. I am stunned that nobody has talked about
securing the border at the border, finishing the wall. You
can't tell me that the U.S. Government can't secure the border
if it wants to. We need to complete the wall. We need to put
the fiberoptic communications in, the sensors in, the
electricity, and put the military, if necessary, or the
National Guard on the border. We need to secure the border at
the border.
[Applause.]
Ms. Fischbach. Thank you very much. And does anybody else
want the last word?
Sheriff Dannels. As elected sheriff, you know I am going to
say something. I will say this. I did the meeting interview a
while back and they asked me, similar to what you have all
made, and I appreciate the kind comments to all of us here on
the panel, but, ``Sheriff, why do you do what you do?'' No. 1,
we signed up for it, just like you all have. But they really
hit that hard, you know, we have given up, we are not going to
do it anymore, we are not going to do it anymore. And I made a
comment and I want to share it with the people in the audience
today and you all today, that is, I was elected to promote this
quality of life of the citizens of this county, to enforce the
rule of law. The day I give up hope is the day we are in a hell
of a lot of trouble here in Cochise County, and we are never
going to give up hope. We, as leaders today, have to stand
united, state, local, and Federal. If we can do that in this
country, this problem will go away.
So, thank you for the opportunity to address that.
Ms. Fischbach. And thank you very much, and thank you all
for being here. I appreciate it. Thank you to the whole
community coming together to address this. And you heard so
many folks have been here numerous times, have been to the
border. I know that we have to address it, and I know that
these folks continue to come down. And the fact that, what, 12
or 13 of us showed up to come down here to see what is going
on, we will do our best, we will do what we can, and we
appreciate your support and help too.
So, thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. I now would like to
recognize the other gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As an old trucker
from Georgia in his first term in Congress, I ran on several
different things, and the border issue was right up there as
No. 1, securing that border. Mr. Chilton, you took the words
right out of my mouth, that walls work, and we need to finish
that wall.
When I have been up here over a year, I have had the
opportunity to go, I think this may be my seventh or eighth
field hearing. And most of the time we sit in DC, and we hold
these hearings, and haul these intellectuals in from Harvard
and Yale, you know, the ones that know everything. But that
isn't where the real story is at. And it is nice to come out
here to see real people, and to look out there and see on your
face the concern that you have, not just for you but for your
family and for your kids.
I represent about 20 counties, and we have a county that is
barely 1,500 people. Man, they are losing a person, more than
one person a month, to fentanyl. And this is up in the North
Georgia Mountains, good blue-collar people.
Sheriff, sometimes I like to rant and don't ask questions,
but I have to know something because I am like Representative
Buddy Carter here. I did not know, I thought that when you
wanted to cross the border you shelled out, I don't know how
these folks have $8,000 to $10,000. I thought they were poor
and couldn't afford nothing. But I thought that you just came
here, shelled out money, and you went across the border. But
from what I understand, and I want you to elaborate just to
tell the American people exactly how this works. Because
apparently there are certain sections of the border that you go
across, depending on who you are, what you are, and this thing
is way more organized than just a ferry boat ride across the
river.
Sheriff Dannels. Congressman, you are exactly right on
that, and thanks to your sheriff and your district that came
out and spent some time with us too, Sheriff Long. But it is
true. It is the gatekeepers by the cartels that control the
fees, control who comes across the country. As my friend here
from Border Patrol will tell you, too, it is $7,000 and up,
based on who you are and who is taking the money from you. And
a lot of those people, Congressman, don't have the money, so
they become servants. And that is where that word, the modern-
day slavery, and it is amazing that we are allowing that to
happen, to come to the country. They are servants to the
cartels for labor, sex, enforcement, whatever the case may be.
We have to address the cartels, not as a political body but a
criminal body. And you have heard me talk about that earlier
today too.
So, it is a tragedy what is going on with these cartels,
and it is sad that we are down here, state, local, community
leaders, doing everything we can while the White House and
Members of Congress are turning their back on that criminal
cartel, because they are the ones winning here.
Mr. Collins. I appreciate that. The criminals that are
coming across, they don't respect our borders. They don't
respect that trash or the firewood. They don't respect our law
enforcement or our laws.
I want to tell you all something. The hearings I have been
on, the Federal Government doesn't give a rat's butt what you
think. It is complete overreach. It is completely out of
control. It is dominance. It is dominance over the American
people to push us far left into a socialistic society. And if
they can import people, like the people you have seen out there
with these protests, that don't have any respect for law
enforcement, then they have more voters in the country.
The thing I think I want to get across today is, and I want
two things to come across. No. 1, by God, the political winds
are changing in this country. Sir, you are exactly right. That
border bill the Senate put out there, it was crap. I am glad
they didn't take it up. H.R. 2 has been sitting over there in
the Senate for almost a year. Hell, it has enough dirt on it
you could plant produce in it. But they are not going to take
that up. Of course, they are not. They are not going to take up
anything. They are not going to do those eight suggestions. I
have them posted outside my wall. They are not going to do
that. That would interfere with their agenda.
But I tell you what, November is coming quick. Biden had
all three houses when he first came in. If they wanted to
really pass a border law they could have done it then. What
chamber were they missing? Nothing. We can fix that in
November. If we put the right people in place up there, and by
God, we will let these folks know that came into this country
illegal, it is time to go home, because if you don't want to go
home, we are going to pick you up and we are going to send you
home, because it is time to take our country back.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back with that.
[Applause.]
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Ciscomani for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and well, again, I am
the last one. I just want to thank again everyone here on the
table for being here, for listening so attentively to the
witnesses. That is what I do. This is where I get my
information, so now you know. If you like what I am saying up
there, it is because I listen to the right people here.
I am not sure, though, if I totally appreciate Mr. Carter
trying to encourage Mr. McCaa over there running for Congress.
I mean, I just got here. OK. But Mr. McCaa, thank you for what
you do.
Mayor, I will start with you real quick. I have a few
questions and only 5 minutes left, of course. But, we often
hear about the partisanship on the border issues, and one thing
I talk about in Washington all the time, that it may be
partisan in Washington, and it is. We have seen it. But I
always say that at home it is not. At home, we have mayors on
both sides of the aisle, county supervisors on both sides of
the aisle, constituents on both sides of the aisle that care
about this. And I think by this panel we have a clear example
of that. By people in the audience we have a clear example of
that.
Can you talk about that, how this issue is not a partisan
issue here at home?
Mr. McCaa. Yes, sir. Chairman Tiffany, Congressman
Ciscomani, the letter that we wrote to President Biden on
January 5, it doesn't have Republican or Democrat on it. We
have seven mayors here in Cochise County that have gathered a
coalition, Democrats, Independents, as well as Republicans, to
back our sheriff, to back our police chiefs, and our Federal
partners. We wrote a letter to him. We haven't heard. The only
person I heard from was Representative Ciscomani. We carbon-
copied the Vice President, Mr. Mike Johnson, Senator Sinema,
Senator Kelly, Representative Juan Ciscomani, Governor Katie
Hobbs, my dear sheriff, we always talk every day, but I have
not heard a squeaking wheel from anyone else.
Mr. Ciscomani. That is a shame.
Mr. McCaa. We, as mayors in this county, are gathered
together because we have an issue here. We have a problem, and
we are going to back our sheriff and our police chiefs, and we
are going to make sure that Washington hears our voices.
Mr. Ciscomani. I love that, and if there is something that
I want my colleagues to take away from this is that example,
that this is not a partisan issue at home. At the border it is
not. In Washington, where we fight every day, it is, but right
here it is not.
Sheriff Dannels, real quick, we met back in December, we
discussed the burden of the border crisis on the County
Attorney's Office and the increasing crime rates here. Can you
elaborate a little bit on what crime you see and how the county
is dealing with it?
Sheriff Dannels. First of all, Congressman, thank you. We
are honored to have you serving us here. And I will say in the
short tenure you have been in Congress you have been the most
engaged U.S. Congressman I have ever dealt with, so thank you
so much for leading us and everything you are doing. We are
honored to have you, I will say it again.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you.
Sheriff Dannels. Our biggest threat is the international
draw to Cochise County by the cartels, through social media,
coming down here. They are bringing their criminal baggage,
their stolen cars, their warrants, teenagers. We had a case out
of Ohio where a fugitive came down here with a 17-year-old
missing and exploited child from the state of Ohio. We see it
all here, and the murders and the tragedies from our citizens
and death along our highways.
We had a third-grader walking to school and came across a
migrant that had come across the border illegally, died in the
back seat of the smuggler's car. They rolled his body out along
the highway, and here comes a third-grader going to school. You
name it, we see it, Congressman, and that is what I am saying.
We have to do something different because we are changing lives
every day in this country because we are doing nothing. Thank
you.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you, Sheriff. I have been spending the
night tour with you, and you are still very active out there,
making stops yourself, and I appreciate that.
Speaking of that, I will go to Mr. Del Cueto here. On that
same note, on the agents, and today you are wearing a really
nice suit and a tie, and I appreciate that.
Mr. Del Cueto. Thank you.
Mr. Ciscomani. But every time I see you, though, you are
working out in the field. You have actually been injured on the
job due to the attacks that you have received yourself. The
same goes for the agents that work there, that you represent so
fervently every single day, and you speak on their behalf. And
you and I have talked about this before.
My last question here will go to you. Can you talk a little
bit about the morale of the agents right now, and what they are
facing? What is happening in terms of the turnover, and what
that means for the force, as well.
Mr. Del Cueto. The morale is the lowest that I have ever
seen it. I remember when I first started I would see agents
that would get near the point of retirement and many of them
would ask for extensions so they could stay. Many other agents
would stay until it was time for them, mandatory, to leave the
job. Right now, you are getting so many agents that the first
thing they do, as soon as they are eligible, they are leaving
the job. They are just saying they cannot deal with it. A lot
of it is because they have an Administration, they have
leadership within the agency that has not backed them up. We
have talked about it, and we have seen what happened with the
horse patrol and everything else. It is getting so difficult
for agents to be out there and actually do their job, and do it
knowing they are doing the right thing, but obviously always
underneath a microscope, and we have an Administration that
just will not back them up for what they are doing. The morale
is the lowest I have ever seen in my entire career.
Mr. Ciscomani. Thank you for what you do, and thanks to
everybody on the panel. With that, I yield.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Mr. LaMalfa, you asked
for 1 more minute. I will give you 1 more minute.
Mr. LaMalfa. It is just an action I will throw, an action
people can take. Mr. Del Cueto, I appreciate your passion on
that. We passed legislation in DC to do these things. On
September 29, under Speaker McCarthy, we had in a continuing
resolution tough border policy, and we were shot down by some
of our own dummies on that one.
But previously, last May, on May 11, H.R. 2 passed the
House on a partisan vote, 219 to 213, and it is sitting over in
the Senate. So, if people want something to do, call your
United States Senators from Arizona that profess to be
moderate, and ask them, ``Where is H.R. 2? Why is that not
moving in order to fix this?''
One more thing you can do is call the White House on the
eight points that Mr. Stauber listed, that the President could
do without having to pass a bill through Congress or blame us
or anything. He could do that by executive action and it
wouldn't even be unconstitutional. On those eight points he
could take action. Folks, demand those actions and we will see
some results.
Thank you, and God bless you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. And we are going to
conclude this hearing, but first the Chairman of the Natural
Resources Committee made a commitment at the start of this
session to have hearings across the United States of America,
and we have been fulfilling that commitment, including we went
to Guam earlier, in 2023. We have been having hearings across
the United States of America, and I appreciate him keeping that
commitment. And I would like to give the Chairman of the Full
Committee another little bit of time for brief closing remarks.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you again, Chairman Tiffany, and thank
you to everyone here today for the hospitality that you have
shown to us, for the interest you have, to all of our
panelists, and to all the Members who took time from very, very
busy schedules, from all parts of the country to come here
today.
And the reason we are here is because this is important.
This is extremely important. And I can tell you, when I became
first Ranking Member of the Natural Resources Committee and
then Chairman of the Committee, hearings on border security
weren't what you would think the Natural Resources Committee
would be addressing. But this problem infiltrates all of our
country, from sea to shining sea, and Alaska and Hawaii and our
territories as well.
And to illustrate that, I ended up in New York City, of all
places, on National Park Service land in Brooklyn, where this
Administration waived every environmental law, they waived
NEPA, they waived the Endangered Species Act, they waived the
Historical Preservation Act, in 1 week to build migrant
shelters to process illegal migrants in New York City. So,
don't tell me that this doesn't affect every nook and cranny of
our country.
We all took an oath to uphold the Constitution. Our
Committee has full jurisdiction over Federal lands, 35 percent
of the southern border is Federal lands, and things happen on
those lands from the actions of illegal migrants that American
citizens would be arrested for, would be fined or arrested for.
That is not right.
This sounds partisan. A lot of the things we say sound
partisan, but I want to try to be as nonpartisan as I can be
and just talk about the facts and the data.
Since 2020, the number of illegal crossings has gone up
exponentially. We saw it right here in the data that we learned
today that in 2020, 60,000 people were being apprehended. It is
10 times that much today.
The facts are when President Biden came into office, he
undid every policy that was there that was aimed at securing
our border and opened up the border. Why he did that, I have no
idea. I don't see who benefits from that. Mr. Del Cueto, you
made an excellent point. I don't think this President is going
to do anything that he is not forced to do, and that is why we
passed H.R. 2, because Congress wanted to force him to do the
right thing. That is also why the Senate will not take it up
and why he would never sign it into law, and it is also why
anything that he would sign into law would not force him to do
anything that he doesn't want to do.
So, we are going to continue fighting for you, we are going
to continue fighting for our constituents across this country,
and we are going to continue to make sure that Americans
control Americans, not Mexican cartels and drug lords and
despicable people that are controlling it right now.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes. Thank you, Chairman Westerman. And just a
public service announcement, on Sunday down at the Chilton
Ranch you are welcome to join them. They are going to be
installing more cameras. Is that correct?
Mr. Chilton. Sounds correct, sir.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you are welcome to join them down there as
they install more cameras down on the ranch.
OK. I would like to thank all the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and the Members for their questions. Members
of the Committee may have some additional questions for our
witnesses today, and we will ask that they respond to them in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5 p.m. on Tuesday,
February 13, 2024. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for your responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:59 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submission for the Record by Rep. Tiffany

Chilton Ranch LLC

Arivaca, Arizona

February 13, 2024

Hon. Thomas P. Tiffany, Chairman
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany:

Thank you for permitting me to present Testimony at your Committee
hearing in Sierra Vista, Arizona, February 8, 2024. Recently, a
reporter called my attention to an answer I provided to your important
question about the cost to me, a border rancher, resulting from the
thousands of illegal trespassers crossing through my ranch. A portion
of my answer included the annual cost of the trespassers was $60,000.

May I respectfully explain the estimated $60,000 per year cost to
me:

1.  Fixing 13.5 miles of surface pipelines cut by unlawful aliens
seeking water; these water infrastructure improvements are
the only reliable source of water for cattle or wildlife on
the entire ranch.

2.  Picking up trash left by border crossers;

3.  Cattle dying due to their ingesting of plastic bags discarded by
intruders;

4.  Regularly (roughly every 48 hours) inspecting twenty-four
different wells by two cowboys rather than one cowboy due
to border safety concerns; and

5.  Ensuring 32 wildlife and stockwater troughs/float valves have not
been damaged by crossers and then repairing the frequently
encountered damage.

Please consider sharing this letter with the Honorable Members of
the Committee.

If the international border were secure at the border, I would not
have the aforementioned costs.

Thank you for all you do for all of us all of the time.

Respectfully,

Jim Chilton

[all]
