- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 674, TO CODIFY THE AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE AND THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO CONDUCT CERTAIN LANDSCAPE-SCALE FOREST RESTORATION PROJECTS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "ROOT AND STEM PROJECT AUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2023"; H.R. 4297, TO AMEND THE JOHN D. DINGELL, JR. CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT, AND RECREATION ACT TO ALLOW FOR ADDITIONAL ENTITIES TO BE ELIGIBLE TO COMPLETE THE MAINTENANCE WORK ON BOLTS DITCH AND THE BOLTS DITCH HEADGATE WITHIN THE HOLY CROSS WILDERNESS, COLORADO, "BOLTS DITCH ACT"; H.R. 5443, TO ESTABLISH A POLICY REGARDING APPRAISAL AND VALUATION SERVICES FOR REAL PROPERTY FOR A TRANSACTION OVER WHICH THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR HAS JURISDICTION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "ACCELERATING APPRAISALS AND CONSERVATION EFFORTS ACT" OR "AACE ACT"; H.R. 6994, TO REQUIRE THE REOPENING OF COVERED RECREATION SITES CLOSED DUE TO A NATURAL DISASTER, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "RESTORING OUR UNOPENED TRAILS FOR ENJOYMENT AND SAFETY ACT" OR "ROUTES ACT"; AND H.R. 7072, TO REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TO CONVEY CERTAIN NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LAND IN THE CHEQUAMEGON-NICOLET NATIONAL FOREST TO TONY'S WABENO REDI-MIX, LLC, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "WABENO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACT OF 2024"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 674, H.R. 4297, H.R. 5443,
H.R. 6994, AND H.R. 7072

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Wednesday, January 31, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-94
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-710 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jared Huffman, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Garret Graves, LA                    Joe Neguse, CO
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Mike Levin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Katie Porter, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Pete Stauber, MN                     Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
John R. Curtis, UT                   Kevin Mullin, CA
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Val T. Hoyle, OR
Jerry Carl, AL                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Ed Case, HI
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Debbie Dingell, MI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mike Levin, CA
John R. Curtis, UT                   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Jim Moylan, GU
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, January 31, 2024......................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     2

Panel I:

Newhouse, Hon. Dan, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     5

Neguse, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado................................................     6

Lee, Hon. Susie, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Nevada..................................................     7

Kim, Hon. Young, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California..............................................     9

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Smith, Greg, Associate Deputy Chief, National Forest System,
U.S. Forest Service, Washington, DC........................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16

Panel III:

Tallier, Hon. Tom, Supervisor, Forest County Board of
Supervisors, District 8, Wabeno, Wisconsin.................    24
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Munsey, Dan, Fire Chief, San Bernardino County Fire
Department, San Bernardino, California.....................    27
Prepared statement of....................................    28

Adomatis, Sandy, President, The Appraisal Institute, Chicago,
Illinois...................................................    30
Prepared statement of....................................    31
Roman, Siri, General Manager, Eagle River Water and
Sanitation District, Vail, Colorado........................    33
Prepared statement of....................................    34
Downey, Hannah, Policy Director, Property and Environment
Research Center, Bozeman, Montana..........................    38
Prepared statement of....................................    39

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

Wabeno Chamber of Commerce, the Forest County Economic
Development Partnership, and the Town of Wabeno,
Letters of support.....................................     3
Submissions for the Record by Representative Kim

Motorcycle Industry Council, Specialty Vehicle Institute
of America, and Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle
Association, Letter to Rep. Kim........................    10

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 674, TO CODIFY THE AUTHORITY OF THE
SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE AND THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR TO
CONDUCT CERTAIN LANDSCAPE-SCALE FOREST RESTORATION PROJECTS,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``ROOT AND STEM PROJECT AUTHORIZATION
ACT OF 2023''; H.R. 4297, TO AMEND THE JOHN D. DINGELL, JR.
CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT, AND RECREATION ACT TO ALLOW FOR
ADDITIONAL ENTITIES TO BE ELIGIBLE TO COMPLETE THE MAINTENANCE
WORK ON BOLTS DITCH AND THE BOLTS DITCH HEADGATE WITHIN THE
HOLY CROSS WILDERNESS, COLORADO, ``BOLTS DITCH ACT''; H.R.
5443, TO ESTABLISH A POLICY REGARDING APPRAISAL AND VALUATION
SERVICES FOR REAL PROPERTY FOR A TRANSACTION OVER WHICH THE
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR HAS JURISDICTION, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES, ``ACCELERATING APPRAISALS AND CONSERVATION EFFORTS
ACT'' OR ``AACE ACT''; H.R. 6994, TO REQUIRE THE REOPENING OF
COVERED RECREATION SITES CLOSED DUE TO A NATURAL DISASTER, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``RESTORING OUR UNOPENED TRAILS FOR
ENJOYMENT AND SAFETY ACT'' OR ``ROUTES ACT''; AND H.R. 7072, TO
REQUIRE THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TO CONVEY CERTAIN NATIONAL
FOREST SYSTEM LAND IN THE CHEQUAMEGON-NICOLET NATIONAL FOREST
TO TONY'S WABENO REDI-MIX, LLC, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES,
``WABENO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACT OF 2024''

----------

Wednesday, January 31, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Tiffany, Fulcher, Stauber, Bentz;
Neguse, and Peltola.
Also present: Representatives Kim, Newhouse; and Lee.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
I hope it is not me why there aren't people around the dais
here. I suspect they will be coming in as we move along here
from the witching hour.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to consider five bills:
H.R. 674, the Root and Stem Authorization Act of 2023 from
Representative Newhouse; H.R. 4297, the Bolts Ditch Act from
Ranking Member Neguse; H.R. 5443 by Representative Lee of
Nevada, the Accelerating Appraisals Act; H.R. 6994,
Representative Kim of California, the ROUTES Act; and my
legislation, the Wabeno Economic Development Act of 2024, H.R.
7072.
I ask unanimous consent that the following Members be
allowed to participate in today's hearing from the dais: the
gentlewoman from Nevada, Ms. Lee; the gentleman from
Washington, Mr. Newhouse; and the gentlewoman from California,
Mrs. Kim.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made a part of the hearing
record if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule
3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Thank you very much, Mr. Fulcher, for coming in and joining
us. I was feeling lonely.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. Today's hearing focuses on several pieces of
legislation that aim to enhance rural economies and improve
Federal land management. From outdoor recreation to mining and
timber harvesting, our Federal lands offer significant
potential for economic development.
However, for decades, this potential has been hampered by
poor Federal land management that limits multiple use and
leaves rural communities struggling to survive. This is
particularly true in counties and states where the Federal
Government is the primary landowner. I represent many of these
counties in northern Wisconsin, including Forest County, a
historic logging community. Roughly 50 percent of the land in
Forest County is federally owned, and only about 10 percent of
the land is fully taxable.
Located in Forest County, Tony's Wabeno Ready Mix is a
small ready mix company that has supplied the surrounding
community with concrete for more than 22 years. The company's
concrete has been used to build homes, fire and rescue
buildings, shops and offices, and even barns for local farmers.
This small business in my district has been pursuing a land
exchange with the Forest Service for the past 7 years to
acquire a mere 14 acres of Forest Service land. Without this
parcel, Tony's will run out of necessary aggregate and needs to
produce concrete in the next 2 to 3 years.
Wabeno is a small town, with a population of just over
1,100. This company employs 17 hard-working people who could
lose their jobs if this bill does not pass. That may not seem
like much for somebody coming from a big city, but I can assure
you the jobs and economic benefit provided by this small
business are critically important to this rural community. That
is why I introduced the Wabeno Economic Development Act of
2024, which would expedite this conveyance and ensure that
Tony's stays in business for years to come.
This is an important conveyance that will provide much-
needed economic growth and jobs for the people in Wabeno. It
has strong local support, and I would like to ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record letters of support from the
Wabeno Chamber of Commerce, the Forest County Economic
Development Partnership, and the Town of Wabeno.
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information follows:]

WABENO AREA

Chamber of Commerce

September 8, 2023

To Whom it May Concern:

This letter from the Wabeno Area Chamber of Commerce is written in
support of the sale or trade of land between Tony Smith, owner of
Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix LLC and the U.S. Forest Service. It was brought
to our attention that his purchase or trade is needed to provide the
materials needed to continue production in the future.
Tony's Redi-Mix has been in our community for over 20 years and is
currently providing employment for approximately 25 employees, which
enables them to provide for their families. Tony and his employees are
active community members and essential to the economic growth of
Wabeno. We support all efforts that will help him to sustain his
business.

Sincerely,

Dawn Jakubiec,
Treasurer

______

FOREST COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP

Re: Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix

Greetings,

The Forest County Economic Development Partnership is pleased to
support the request of Tony Smith, OBA Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix, with the
purchase or trade of U.S. Forest Service to ensure the sustainability
of his business and employment opportunities in Forest County,
Wisconsin.
The need for expansion was highlighted in 2022, revealing only a
few years of sustainable sand and gravel to continue production and
employment for his business. He has been in contact with Forest County
in discussions on land purchases or trades to sustain the demand of
sand and gravel for business purposes. Currently his site will only
sustain his business until late 2025 or early 2026.
With the success of land purchase or trade between Tony's Wabeno
Redi-Mix and the U.S. Forest Service he will be able to provide Forest
County with steady employment and growth of his company. The company
currently employees around 25 individuals from around the area, and
works on many jobs that increase the growth of the county. Sustaining
this business for Forest County and its economic development is
critical to the success and growth of the County as a solid unit.

Sincerely,

Chris Shafer,
Executive Director

______

TOWN OF WABENO

The Town of Wabeno is in support of the request to purchase or
trade of the U.S. Forest Service land to Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix LLC
Tony Smith owner.
The need was brought to our attention last year, revealing only a
few years of sand and gravel to continue production and the employment
of approximately 25 employees and their families.
Tony has been actively searching for property and so far has not
found any other options.
With this purchase or trade between Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix and the
U.S.Forest Service he will be able to provide steady employment and
growth for his company and our community. Tony's Redi-Mix LLC is one of
the largest employers in the community and we would to support him any
way we can.

Jim Smith,
Chair

Randy Johnson,                Benjamin Hermus,
Supervisor                    Supervisor

______

Mr. Tiffany. Unfortunately, this is not the first time this
Subcommittee has heard the story of a local community
struggling to develop because the Federal Government is
dragging its feet conveying land. In many instances, this
process can take years before local communities have to resort
to passing an entire Act of Congress to get their simple land
exchanges done. This is unacceptable, and we need to find ways
to streamline and enhance this process. That is why I am glad
to see bipartisan legislation being considered today from
Representatives Lee and Joyce that would reduce red tape that
is holding up the appraisal process for land conveyances.
We will also be examining two bills today that streamline
processes for improving forest management while boosting rural
economies. The Root and Stem Act, which is being led by
Congressman Newhouse, promotes an innovative new model to
finance forest restoration that reduces fire risk while
encouraging more timber harvesting.
This is truly a win-win for rural communities with fire-
prone, overgrown forests, as well as for local sawmills that
struggle to get a steady supply of timber from our Federal
lands.
We will also consider the ROUTES Act from Representative
Kim that would expedite forest restoration work after wildfires
in order to reopen popular recreation sites. The outdoor
recreation economy grew to $1.1 trillion this year, and the
backbone of that economy is made up of the small businesses
that rely on access to Federal lands. When these lands are
closed indefinitely due to wildfires, those businesses suffer
greatly as visitors stop coming and spending money in nearby
gateway communities.
Representative Kim introduced this legislation in response
to an overwhelming amount of feedback she received in her
district about closed trails in the Cleveland National Forest.
Her leadership on this issue will not only help improve
recreation access in her district, but in districts across
America.
Both the Root and Stem Act and ROUTES Act remind us of an
important fact: There is no amount of funding that will solve
our need for greater forest management achievements. Rather, we
must address the regulatory impediments and litigation hurdles
preventing that work if we ever want to make meaningful
progress.
I would like to thank all the Members on both sides of our
dais for their leadership on the bills before us today. I also
want to thank all the witnesses for being here and traveling
long distances to provide your expert testimony. I look forward
to hearing from each of you.
When Representative Neguse arrives, we will get his opening
statement.
For now, we will now move on to our first panel, which
consists of Members who are sponsoring today's bills. I will
now recognize Representative Newhouse for 5 minutes on H.R.
674.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DAN NEWHOUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, and good morning, Chairman
Tiffany. And when Ranking Member Neguse comes, also I would bid
him good morning. I appreciate the opportunity to testify in
support of my bill, H.R. 674, which is called the Root and Stem
Project Authorization Act.
In short, it would allow the Forest Service and the Bureau
of Land Management to efficiently treat forests through a
collaborative process.
I want to start off with a little background to the bill.
In 2013, the Forest Service announced a forest restoration
project of about 54,000 acres in the Colville National Forest
in my home state of Washington. In most projects of this
nature, Federal lands are sold only after the Forest Service
has conducted a necessary environmental analysis, as required
by NEPA, or the National Environmental Policy Act. The Forest
Service decided for this project, however, to contract out its
NEPA responsibilities. They awarded the contract for a 10-year
ecosystem restoration project to a local lumber company. Under
this contract, the lumber company selected and paid a third-
party contractor to prepare the environmental assessment
required of them. The Forest Service approved the subcontractor
and the subcontractors environmental assessment.
This concept became known as the A to Z Project, because
the entire restoration process became the responsibility of the
timber contractor. This arrangement was challenged, but
ultimately was upheld in Federal District Court in 2018.
My bill, the Root and Stem Project Authorization Act, works
to provide clear statutory authority for the Forest Service and
the Bureau of Land Management to continue this type of
collaborative forest management. By authorizing these agencies
to propose and enter into collaborative stewardship contracts
and agreements, this legislation will allow them to accomplish
more hazardous fuels reduction, and empower the agencies to
engage with state, local, and tribal partners to ensure forest
management projects complement ongoing conservation efforts,
benefit communities, and protect local ecosystems.
These collaborative projects have extraordinary benefits to
both local economies and the environment. The Root and Stem Act
will be helpful in accelerating these forest management
projects to restore Federal forests that have suffered from
years of poor or even, in some cases, non-existent management.
Wildfires are absolutely getting worse and more frequent
across the United States, and we need to do all that we can to
improve our forest management and add tools to our toolbox, and
this bill is just one way of doing that.
I appreciate your time today again, Mr. Chairman. I also
thank Mr. Neguse, now that he has arrived. Thank you for your
consideration of my legislation.
Mr. Tiffany. I appreciate your testimony, Mr. Newhouse.
Now, I would like to turn to the Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse,
for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE NEGUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and I am glad to
be here, and certainly glad to see once again a slate of
several bipartisan bills on the agenda for today's legislative
hearing.
And welcome to the members of the Committee who have joined
us.
I certainly appreciate the opportunity to talk, in
particular, to the Forest Service and our panel of witnesses
about a variety of different pieces of legislation related to
public land management. Of course, in particular, I want to
welcome a witness from my home district, Ms. Siri Roman, the
General Manager of Eagle River Water and Sanitation District,
who will be speaking on legislation that I have introduced,
H.R. 4297.
I am delighted to partner with my Colorado and Natural
Resources Committee colleague, Representative Lamborn, on the
bill. It is the Bolts and Ditch Act, which just by way of
background, Bolts Ditch is located in the White River National
Forest, which is part of the 2nd Congressional District that I
have the privilege of representing. The ditch was mistakenly
included in the boundaries of the Holy Cross Wilderness when it
was originally designated, which prevented the maintenance and
the use of this particular ditch.
In 2019, we passed, as some of you will recall, the John D.
Dingell, Jr. Conservation Act. It included a variety of
different pieces of legislation, including legislation that I
had authored to authorize non-motorized access to the town of
Minturn to use, maintain, and repair the Bolts Ditch structure.
This bill is a much-needed amendment to that legislation,
authorizing the Eagle River Water and Sanitation District and
the Upper Eagle Regional Water Authority to also access that
headgate for maintenance and repairs.
I know that the sanitation district has been working in
partnership with the town of Minturn, which both support the
legislation, so I am glad to see it on today's agenda, and I am
hoping we can move it swiftly out of this Committee.
And I want to thank Ms. Roman and the representatives from
the town of Minturn for making the long journey here to testify
and be here with us today.
There are several other bills that we are considering today
which I strongly support, and am grateful that we are
considering. They relate to the authority of the Federal land
management agencies to undertake various projects in their
jurisdictions.
I am certainly encouraged by the recent Forest Service
report that summarizes and celebrates the historic investments
made across the National Forest System in 2023. I serve as one
of the co-Chairs of the Bipartisan Wildfire Caucus, and I know
I speak for many when I say we were proud to support
investments that were made last Congress to increase forest
resilience, respond to the increasing threat of longer and more
intense wildfire seasons in Colorado, in Utah, in Nevada, in
Idaho, Rocky Mountain West. As Members of Congress, it is our
No. 1 responsibility to continue supporting their efforts, in
my view, and to provide further resources to our Federal land
management agencies as they prepare for the wildfires to come,
and plan for long-term forest resilience.
I also think it is an important moment to recognize the
work done by the Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management
Commission which was established through the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. The Commission recently
released a report. Many of you attended a briefing that we
conducted just a few weeks ago to review the 148 consensus
recommendations that they made, so I am certainly excited at
the potential of this Committee taking some of those
recommendations up.
Finally, I just want to thank one of my colleagues in
particular for her strong leadership, and that is
Representative Lee of the great state of Nevada, for her bill,
H.R. 5443, the Accelerating Appraisals and Conservation Efforts
Act. It is just a great example of common-sense legislating
that cuts through the partisan divide.
The bill would allow private appraisers to contract outside
of their credentialed state to perform appraisals and valuation
services on the Department of the Interior's behalf. I think it
is just a great example of proactive legislation, non-partisan
legislation that cuts through red tape. So, I credit
Representative Lee for her initiative in that regard, and I am
excited to consider that bill, as well as the others.
With that, I will yield back to you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ranking Member Neguse, and now I
recognize representative Lee from Nevada for 5 minutes on her
bill, H.R. 5443.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SUSIE LEE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEVADA

Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member. It is a privilege to join you today as you consider my
bipartisan bill to cut through government red tape for the
benefit of public lands stakeholders nationwide, as well as the
Department of the Interior itself.
The Accelerating Appraisals and Conservation Efforts Act,
or the AACE Act, is legislation that I was pleased to write,
together with my good friend from Ohio, Representative David
Joyce. It is a bill that we believe would better position
America's principal land management agency to complete land
transactions of all kinds more effectively and more
efficiently.
Members of this Subcommittee know well that DOI oversees
hundreds of millions of acres of public lands nationwide. The
Bureau of Land Management alone stewards roughly 70 percent of
the lands in my home state of Nevada. But before DOI is able to
buy, sell, lease, trade, or conduct any type of land-related
transaction, it must first make sure that these activities are
done at a fair market value to protect the public trust.
However, while full-time appraisers are able to work
quickly and easily across state lines, the private appraisers
on whom DOI must rely to satisfy the growing demands on the
agency can only work in the specific states or territories in
which they are individually credentialed. This is slowing
progress throughout the United States on a range of
conservation, economic, and infrastructure goals all dependent
upon DOI's ability to complete land transactions promptly.
The AACE Act would help alleviate and prevent appraisal
bottlenecks by building upon a decades-old precedent of limited
license reciprocity for appraisers that was established under
the Bush-Quayle administration. It would enable DOI to contract
with private appraisers who are appropriately credentialed in
one state to perform an appraisal and valuation services on
DOI's behalf in any state.
Importantly, it would require DOI to continue to prioritize
working with local appraisers, unlocking the enhanced
flexibility provided by this bill only when no assignment
qualified or cost competitive local appraisers are available.
In short, this legislation would maximize DOI's efficiency
without spending a single additional dollar of taxpayers'
money, benefiting everyone from conservationists to developers,
who all now find themselves waiting at the back of the same
Federal appraisals line. That is why the bill has the support
of the DOI and organizations ranging from the Conservation
Lands Foundation to Trout Unlimited to the Nevada Housing
Coalition and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
It is also why I am pleased to be able to join the Chairman
and the Ranking Member in welcoming Sandy Adomatis of the
Appraisal Institute here today, as she provides her unique
expertise and perspective in detailing the Institute's own
support of this bill.
Thank you, Ms. Adomatis, for being here, and thanks again
to all of my colleagues for your consideration of the AACE Act,
and I yield.

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you much, Representative Lee. Now, we
will move on to Representative Kim for 5 minutes in regards to
H.R. 6994.
Welcome to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. YOUNG KIM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member
Neguse for holding this hearing, and I want to thank Chairman
Westerman and your staff for your leadership on the issues
before us today.
I represent California's 40th District that covers parts of
Orange, San Bernardino, and Riverside Counties in Southern
California, and my district includes unincorporated areas
spanning several canyon communities in Cleveland National
Forest, Trabuco District. I am proud to see that H.R. 6994, the
Restoring Our Unopened Trails for Enjoyment and Safety Act--in
short, the ROUTES Act--is being considered in today's hearing.
The ROUTES Act requires Federal land management agencies to
reopen trails, roads, campgrounds, and recreation sites that
are damaged and closed by natural disasters like wildfires
within 2 years of the disaster. To do so, my bill streamlines
the resources needed to restore Federal trails and roads, and
expedite certain activities like hazard tree removal, soil
erosion mitigation, and drainage pattern and site restoration.
It also codifies existing emergency hazard tree removal
authorities that can be used prior to a full NEPA review.
Region 5 of the U.S. Forest Service had previously used these
authorities across multiple national forests, allowing
recreation sites to reopen years sooner.
In my district, the 2018 Holy Fire burned through more than
23,000 acres of the Cleveland National Forest, severely
damaging trails, campsites, and recreational areas. More than 5
years later, several of the most popular trails remain closed.
Prolonged closures of our Federal recreation sites and roads
can negatively impact the local economy, impede firefighters'
access to wildland fires, and trigger post-fire hazards. Less
trail-based recreational means fewer visitors to small
businesses in the area, and damaged roads may limit fire truck
access to put out a fire or bulldozer access to clear debris
and heavy rocks blocking a path.
Routine trail maintenance is also essential for post-fire
and non-fire related risk mitigation efforts. Burn areas are
subject to soil erosion, flooding, and destructive debris flows
that endanger nearby homes and civilian lives. For example, the
2020 Bond fire which burned through parts of Silverado Canyon
in my district weakened the soil and, years later, left the
nearby residential area vulnerable to mudslides and debris
flows during the unprecedented storms and heavy rains that we
saw last year.
Restoring and reopening our Federal roads and trails in a
safe and timely manner are essential to community and forest
health. Federal land management agencies have been appropriated
significant amounts of funding in these past few years, and we
need to ensure they prioritize funds for areas that need it the
most, and use their existing authorities to complete their
duties safely and expeditiously.
I want to thank the Committee for considering my bill, H.R.
6994, and I also want to thank Representative LaMalfa for co-
leading this bill with me to ensure our Federal land management
partners have all the tools they need to take care of our
forests in Southern California and across the nation.
I also ask for unanimous consent to insert into the record
a support letter from the Motorcycle Industry Council,
Specialty Vehicle Institute of America, and Recreational Off-
Highway Vehicle Association.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. In regards to the unanimous consent, so
ordered.

[The information follows:]

MOTORCYCLE INDUSTRY COUNCIL

SPECIALTY VEHICLE INSTITUTE OF AMERICA

RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE ASSOCIATION

January 29, 2024

Hon. Young Kim,
U.S. House of Representatives
1306 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Representative Kim:

On behalf of the Motorcycle Industry Council \1\ (MIC), Specialty
Vehicle Institute of America \2\ (SVIA), and Recreational Off-Highway
Vehicle Association \3\ (ROHVA)--together referenced as the
Associations, I write in support of H.R. 6994, the Restoring Our
Unopened Trails for Enjoyment and Safety Act (ROUTES Act).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC) is a not-for-profit,
national trade association representing several hundred manufacturers,
distributors, dealers and retailers of motorcycles, scooters,
motorcycle parts, accessories and related goods, and allied trades.
\2\ The Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA) is the
national not-for-profit trade association representing manufacturers,
dealers, and distributors of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) in the United
States. SVIA's primary goal is to promote safe and responsible use of
ATVs.
\3\ The Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) is a
national, not-for-profit trade association formed to promote the safe
and responsible use of recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs--
sometimes referred to as side-by-sides or UTVs) manufactured or
distributed in North America. ROHVA is also accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) to serve as the Standards
Developing Organization for ROVs. More information on the standard can
be found at https://rohva.org/ansi-standard/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The powersports industry (motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
and recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs)) are a $47.7 billion/year
industry in the United States with a significant majority of the
vehicles being utilized off-road. This includes dual sport and
adventure touring motorcycles which are the quickest growing segment of
motorcycle sales. As a result, the Associations strongly support
ensuring sustainable off-highway vehicle (OHV) recreation opportunities
continue to be available on our public lands.
We support the ROUTES Act provisions requiring the Forest Service
to restore and reopen trails, roads, campgrounds, and recreation sites
that have been closed from the impacts of natural disasters no later
than two years after the end of the disaster. This includes renovating
trails and removing hazard trees to be performed under a Categorical
Exclusion, instead of requiring a complex Environmental Assessment
under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
The OHV community has faced closures of recreational opportunities
due to natural disasters in the past that unnecessarily took years to
reopen and yet others remain closed to this day. That is not prudent
use of federal lands that we as taxpayers support. The ROUTES Act would
fix that by ensuring the Forest Service acts in a timely manner after a
natural disaster and provides the tools to ensure that necessary on-
the-ground efforts needn't become mired in lengthy environmental
reviews. It is important to remember that trails, campgrounds, and
recreation sites closed by natural disasters were subject to NEPA
analysis prior to being designated, and simply restoring the
opportunity shouldn't require a duplicative analysis.
The Associations would also like to call attention to
recreationists who serve as volunteers that can help in any number of
ways with restoring opportunities after a natural disaster. As
examples, we highlight RestoreTrails.org and the Post Wildfire OHV
Recovery Alliance (PWORA). RestoreTrails.org is a non-profit
organization that focuses on protecting and restoring sustainable
multi-use trail recreation from the damaging impacts of intense
wildfires and other natural disasters. PWORA, RestoreTrails.org's
official partner, develops alliances with local user groups that
streamlines the creation of volunteer events with our federal agency
partners. These events typically remove downed trees, replace damaged
signage, and trail barriers, and repairs other recreational
infrastructure such as staging areas and campgrounds. Recovery efforts
often include re-establishing watershed protections, monitoring
environmental conditions, conducting general trail maintenance along
with minor reforestation if necessary. In short, the OHV and broader
recreation communities stand ready to help ensure the timely reopening
of recreational opportunities.
Thank you for introducing this important legislation and please
feel to reach out if there is anything we can do to help ensure its
ultimate passage.

Sincerely,

Duane Taylor,
Director of Safe and Responsible Use Programs

______

Mr. Tiffany. And thank you for your testimony,
Representative Kim.
Next, we are going to move on to our second panel, and I
think the gentleman that is before us knows the drill quite
well.
You will have 5 minutes, Mr. Smith, to give your testimony.
Mr. Greg Smith is with us. He is the Associate Deputy Chief
of the National Forest System.
Associate Deputy Chief Smith, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREG SMITH, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY CHIEF, NATIONAL
FOREST SYSTEM, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Smith. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany and Ranking
Member Neguse and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to share the USDA Forest Service's perspective
on the four public land bills that are under consideration for
today.
Again, my name is Greg Smith. I have been with the Forest
Service for approximately 30 years, and currently serve as the
Associate Deputy Chief of the National Forest System.
The Forest Service, as you know, manages 193 million acres
of national forest and grasslands across the country for many
purposes, including clean drinking water, timber, recreational
opportunities for the American public. This wide-ranging nature
of the bills we are discussing today demonstrates the breadth
of the agency's work, which is both local and community-
centered, as well as national in scope and impact.
The first piece of legislation, H.R. 674, the Root Stem
Project Authorization Act, would authorize the Forest Service
to enter into agreements with external parties to advance
collaboratively designed Federal land projects. The Act would
enable outside entities to provide funding to enlist
contractors to conduct environmental analysis and
implementation of the work, and allow the Forest Service to
repay those cooperators with receipts revenues from the
projects.
We support the goals of H.R. 674, but we would like to work
with the Committee to better understand how the project would
work, and to offer technical assistance to ensure authorities
do not already exist to achieve the bill's intent.
The second piece of legislation, the Restoring Our Unopened
Trails for Enjoyment and Safety Act, this would require the
Forest Service to reopen such sites as campgrounds, day use
facilities, roads on the National Forest System lands that have
been closed due to natural disasters within 2 years. The bill
would establish a categorical exclusion under the National
Policy Environmental Act for addressing repair and restoration
of covered recreation sites.
The Forest Service currently has the legal authority it
needs, including categorical exclusions, to reopen recreation
infrastructure closed by natural disasters. Because the ROUTES
Act would mandate reopening closed sites within 2 years without
exception, and regardless of whether critical safety mitigation
is completed, the agency has significant concerns about the
risk of exposure for the recreating public and the liability
for the U.S. Government. We do not support the bill as
currently drafted, but would welcome an opportunity to continue
working with the Committee to address the goals of quickly
reopening recreation sites following natural disasters.
The third bill, H.R. 4297, the Bolts Ditch, seeks to
resolve issues associated with the use and maintenance of Bolts
Ditch, a headgate and a ditch near Minturn, Colorado. Bolts
Ditch is located within the Holy Cross Wilderness Area of the
White River National Forest, and on a creek that has been
identified by the Forest Service as an eligible Wild and Scenic
River. The bill, if passed, would amend the Dingell Act
requiring the Secretary to issue special use permits for non-
motorized access to local water providers in order to maintain,
repair, and operate these facilities.
We do not oppose H.R. 4297, but we do anticipate minor
impacts to wilderness resources and the potential impact to
Wild and Scenic River suitability if the bill is passed.
The final bill, H.R. 7072, the Wabeno Economic Development
Act, would require the Forest Service to convey a 14-acre
parcel located on the Chequamegon-Nicolet Forest to a local
company for market value.
We look forward to working with the Chairman and the
Committee as these bills move forward.
Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my testimony. I look forward to
answering any questions that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
Prepared Statement of Greg Smith, Associate Deputy Chief, National
Forest System, U.S. Department of Agriculture--Forest Service
on H.R. 674, H.R. 4297, H.R. 6994, and H.R. 7072

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to present the views of the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service, regarding
various Federal land management bills.
H.R. 674, ``Root and Stem Project Authorization Act of 2023''

H.R. 674 authorizes the Forest Service and BLM to enter into an
agreement with a person for a project on federal land that was
developed through a collaborative process and that meets local and
rural community needs. The person entering into the agreement would
initially provide all or a portion of funding necessary to complete any
necessary environmental analysis. The Secretary would use this funding
to select and pay a contractor on a set list to conduct the analysis,
and if choosing to move forward with the project the Secretary would
solicit bids and then enter into a Stewardship contract or agreement
(16 U.S.C. 6591c) to carry out the project. Any receipts generated by
the project that would normally go to the Treasury would be used to
repay the person providing initial funding for the environmental
analysis.
The Administration is supportive of increasing capacity and working
collaboratively with partners to facilitate efficient and science-based
forest management but would like to work with the committee to better
understand how a root to stem project would work and to offer
additional technical assistance to ensure authorities do not already
exist to achieve the intent of the proposed legislation and that we are
able to implement it effectively.
For example, requiring the agencies to use a list of contractors
provided to Congress would provide less flexibility to the agencies in
fulfilling their environmental analysis obligations. We would like to
better understand the intent of creating such a list and discuss
possible issues including setting fair and transparent criteria and
vetting of contractors to be on the list, ensuring a contract with a
person on the list is the best value for the government in terms of
price reasonableness, quality control, and liability for unfinished or
poorly done environmental analysis. We would also like to better
understand if this authority is intended to supplant the new Section
107(f) in NEPA that allows project sponsors to prepare NEPA documents
under the supervision of the agency.
Additionally, we would like to better understand the committee's
intent concerning repayment of initial funding for the environmental
analysis, and work with the committee to understand the benefits and
challenges for federal land managers associated with full versus
partial upfront payment. For most projects using contracts or
agreements under the stewardship authority, either revenue is not
generated or any revenue that is generated becomes retained receipts
for use on additional stewardship contracting projects, rather than
being deposited into the Treasury.
The Stewardship authority requires that stewardship contracting
projects achieve land management goals for the national forests, and
that they meet local and rural community needs. Because H.R. 674
requires that any project that moves forward will use a Stewardship
contract or agreement to carry out the project, we recommend clarifying
in the bill language that when a person submits a proposal for a root
and stem project, it should not only meet local and rural community
needs but also help achieve tribal interests and the land management
goals for the national forests. We believe this will lead to more
projects being carried out under this potential future authority.
Finally, we would like to work with the sponsor to clarify the role
that participants in the collaborative process have in settlement
negotiations. A participant in the collaborative process may not be a
necessary party to litigation and therefore not a necessary party to a
settlement. Guaranteeing participation in settlement negotiations may
therefore result in unnecessary complication and delay. We also want to
ensure the conflict-of-interest requirements appropriately safeguard
against self-dealing on the part of the person submitting the proposal.
We also believe that defining the term ``person'' could avoid future
confusion about the ability of an organization or business entity to
submit a proposal.
The Administration also recommends that the Committee seek
Department of Interior (DOI) input on provisions that apply to DOI.
H.R. 4297, ``Bolts Ditch Act''

H.R. 4297, the ``Bolts Ditch Act,'' seeks to resolve issues
associated with the use and maintenance of Bolts Ditch near the Town of
Minturn, Colorado. The headgate and approximately 450 lineal feet of
the ditch are located within the Holy Cross Wilderness Area on the
White River National Forest. These features were included within the
Holy Cross Wilderness Area when Congress passed the Colorado Wilderness
Act designating this Wilderness Area in 1980. The structure and ditch
were constructed in 1882 and previously delivered water to Bolts Lake
via Bolts Ditch. Section 1101(a) of the John D. Dingell, Jr.
Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act (the ``Dingell Act,''
Public Law 116-9) was enacted in 2019, requiring the Secretary of
Agriculture to issue a special use authorization to the Town of Minturn
for nonmotorized access and use for the purposes of the diversion of
water and use, maintenance, and repair of Bolts Ditch and Bolts Ditch
headgate. Presently, the Town of Minturn has no right to water from
Bolt's Ditch. In 2021, the Town of Minturn filed an Application for
Water Rights and Approval of Plan for Augmentation and Exchange in Case
No. 21CW3030. This application includes the Bolts Ditch. No decree
concerning water rights has been issued for this case as of January
2024.
H.R. 4297, the ``Bolts Ditch Act,'' would amend Section 1101(a) of
the Dingell Act to additionally require the Secretary of Agriculture to
issue special use authorizations to the Upper Eagle River Regional
Water Authority and Eagle River Water and Sanitation District for the
same use and access as currently mandated for the Town of Minturn, i.e.
nonmotorized access and use of the Bolts Ditch Headgate and the Bolts
Ditch, for the purposes of the diversion of water and use, maintenance,
and repair of the ditch and headgate.
Given the location of these features within the Holy Cross
Wilderness, maintenance, repair, and operation of these permanent
facilities may have minor impacts on the Wilderness character of the
area. Additionally, Bolt's Ditch is located on Cross Creek, which was
identified as an eligible Wild and Scenic River by the White River
National Forest Plan in 2002. The plan directs that each eligible
stream identified will be managed to maintain eligibility until a
suitability study can be completed. Individual suitability studies can
be initiated when a project is proposed that may alter the free-flowing
character or would affect the resources that made the stream eligible.
The action of diverting water to Bolt's Ditch may impact the
suitability of Cross Creek, but no study has yet been undertaken to
confirm that potential outcome.
USDA does not oppose H.R. 4297 but anticipates minor impacts to
Wilderness resources and a potential impact to Wild and Scenic River
suitability if the bill is enacted.
H.R. 6994, ``Restoring Our Unopened Trails for Enjoyment and Safety
(ROUTES) Act''

H.R. 6994, the Restoring Our Unopened Trails for Enjoyment and
Safety Act or ``ROUTES Act,'' requires the reopening of covered
recreation sites closed due to natural disasters. The Administration
does not support the bill as currently drafted, but we would like to
continue working with the bill sponsor and the Subcommittee to address
the goal of expediting the restoration of recreation opportunities for
public use and enjoyment following natural disasters.
The ROUTES Act would apply to ``covered recreation sites,'' which
the bill defines as a trail, campground, developed day-use recreation
site, or road that is located on ``Interior recreational lands'' or
National Forest System (NFS) lands and operated by the Secretary
concerned. As defined, the scope of this bill would affect all roads
(not just those providing primary recreation access) and all trails
under Federal jurisdiction in all types of areas, including wilderness
areas and campgrounds and developed day-use recreation sites. If a
covered recreation site were fully or partially closed to public use
due to a natural disaster, the bill would mandate the reopening of the
site within two years after the date on which the natural disaster
ends. The bill would establish a categorical exclusion (CE) from
documentation in an environmental assessment or an environmental impact
statement under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) for repair
and restoration of covered recreation sites and hazard tree removal at
or along covered recreation sites. The bill would specify that the CE
would still be subject to the extraordinary circumstances provisions of
40 CFR 1501.4 that would limit the ability to rely on the CE and would
authorize use of emergency response provisions in 36 CFR 220.4(b) for
hazard tree removal at or along covered recreation sites for up to two
years following a natural disaster. Additionally, the bill would
require the Secretary to report to Congress not later than two years
after its enactment on the number of covered recreation sites that are
closed due to natural disasters and the number of covered recreation
sites reopened utilizing authorities in the bill.
The Forest Service manages 193 million acres of national forests
and grasslands across 43 States and territories. These lands include
more than 370,000 miles of NFS roads, 13,400 bridges, 163,000 miles of
NFS trails, and 30,000 recreation sites (10,700 of which are developed
recreation sites). Forest Service units prioritize keeping recreation
sites, NFS trails, and NFS roads open to the best of their ability with
the resources available to them. The primary challenges NFS units face
in providing safe, accessible recreation opportunities following a
natural disaster are financial resources and staff capacity, rather
than a lack of legal authorities.
As with lands managed by other Federal agencies, not all roads,
trails, and recreation sites are located in sustainable locations.
Natural disasters can lead to dramatic changes to local environments,
and as drafted the bill lacks flexibility to address circumstances
where repairs may be complex, such as altering design or site location
for rebuilding, or where a recreational site may be totally destroyed
or eliminated, or where conservation of fish, wildlife and their
habitats are impacted. For example, if roads, trails, campgrounds or
other facilities are completely washed away, rebuilding could result in
campgrounds existing in a flood plain, or reconstituted trails that
would now border a newly created cliff face. Additionally, recreational
lands as described in the bill may be managed by third parties,
including concessioners or lessees. And on certain federal lands,
habitat restoration and other conservation priorities may have to be
initially addressed prior to any repair work. In all these cases, it
may not be feasible or even desirable to reopen and may not be possible
within the time frame provided in the bill. Likewise, there may be
safety issues that necessitate longer term closures.
The Forest Service currently has the legal authorities it needs,
including CEs, to reopen NFS trails, NFS roads, and federally owned
campgrounds and day-use developed recreation sites closed by wildfire
and other natural disasters. These existing authorities include CEs for
repair and maintenance of trails (36 CFR 220.6(d)(4)); repair and
maintenance of recreation sites and facilities (36 CFR 220.6(d)(5));
post-fire rehabilitation activities on roads, trails, and facilities
(36 CFR 220.6(e)(11)); and removal of debris after other disturbances
(36 CFR 220.6(e)(19)). Hazard tree removal is covered by existing CEs
at 36 CFR 220.6(d)(4) (roads and trails) and (d)(5) (recreation sites
and facilities). The emergency response provision requires further
clarification of its scope, intent, and avoidance of conflicts with
existing law and other provisions of this bill to achieve its intended
effect.
Because the ROUTES Act would mandate reopening of closed recreation
sites by an arbitrary two-year deadline, without exception and
regardless of whether all needed safety mitigation work has been
completed, the Administration has significant concerns about risk
exposure for the recreating public and liability exposure for the
United States. This bill would remove agency discretion to consider
other management options or approaches to fit the local circumstances.
The arbitrary deadline would also create additional risk to Federal
employees and contractors by constraining risk management decisions
regarding whether to remove hazards, including hazard trees.
While the Administration does not support the bill as currently
drafted, we would be pleased to work with the bill sponsor and the
Subcommittee to address the goals of the bill and the underlying
challenge of adequate agency resources and capacity to manage and
expedite the provision of recreation opportunities to the public
following natural disasters. The Administration also recommends that
the Committee seek Department of Interior (DOI) input on provisions
that apply to DOI.
H.R. 7072, ``Wabeno Economic Development Act''

H.R. 7072, the Wabeno Economic Development Act, would require the
Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest
Service, to convey a parcel of approximately 14 acres of National
Forest System (NFS) land located in the Chequamegon-Nicolet National
Forest to Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix, LLC. The parcel, located on the
Lakewood-Laona Ranger District, is adjacent to and southwest of the
Town of Wabeno and can be accessed off of Smith Rd. The parcel is
surrounded on three sides by private land and adjacent to other Forest
Service land on the fourth side to the south. It contains upland
northern hardwood with a year of origin of 1927.
Subject to provisions in this Act, if the Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix,
LLC offers to acquire the NFS property for market value, the Secretary
shall, not later than 180 days after receiving the offer, convey to
Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix, LLC all right, title, and interest of the
United States in and to the property as described in the Act. As a
condition of the conveyance, Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix, LLC would be
required to pay an amount equal to the market value of the land to be
conveyed and all costs associated with the conveyance including for
surveys, appraisals, and any environmental analysis required by Federal
law.
The Act would also require the Department of Interior (DOI), in
consultation with other federal agencies, industry stakeholders, and
states to review federal permitting processes related to stone, sand,
and gravel development on federal land, and to submit a report on this
topic to the committee within 180 days of enactment. This report would
overview current federal permitting processes and associated economic
impacts, identify inefficiencies, and recommend legislative or
administrative actions to streamline processes.
We look forward to working with the Chairman and committee as H.R.
7072 moves forward and recommend the Committee seek DOI input on
provisions under their jurisdiction.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Greg Smith, Associate Deputy
Chief--National Forest System, U.S. Forest Service, Washington DC

Mr. Smith did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. I have heard from various interested stakeholders that
there has been a notable delay in processing the National Environmental
Policy Act review for the Mount Magazine State Park campground
expansion in the Ozark National Forest. This project will expand the
state park campground onto U.S. Forest Service land in the Ozark
National Forest.

Mount Magazine is Arkansas's highest point at 2,753 feet. Mount
Magazine State Park is located within the Ozark National Forest and is
a destination for outdoor sports, extreme adventures, rock climbing,
horseback riding, and more.

A categorical exclusion (CE) was applied for in January 2023, and
there has been little progress made since that time frame. I am
concerned with how long the review process is taking.

1a) Will you please provide an update on where the process
currently stands?

1b) Will you commit to providing the necessary USFS personnel and
resources to meet timelines to review this permitting application?

1c) Please provide a list of any other special project requests
that are currently undergoing a NEPA review within the Ozark National
Forest, and the current status of each of those projects.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Associate Deputy Chief Smith. We
appreciate you being here today and your testimony. Next, we
are going to recognize Members for questions, and I would turn
to Representative Fulcher first for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Fulcher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, thank you for being here, and we have
communicated before.
In my home state of Idaho, unlike most other states--not
all, but most--we have a very significant presence of Federal
land, and a lot of that is under the auspice of the Forest
Service Department of Ag. So, these types of pieces of
legislation are very impactful for us. Unlike states where most
of it is privately controlled, everything we do seemingly runs
through Federal channels because basically two-thirds of our
land mass falls under that category.
So, I appreciate Mr. Newhouse's legislation. I think this
is going to be helpful to us. But it seems like, especially on
this Subcommittee, we always come back to trying to nibble
around the edges to figure out legislative workarounds to just
simply make things more manageable.
You did mention briefly H.R. 674, but I would like to have
you go just a little bit further on that. How do you anticipate
that being a benefit for states and locals to help work through
some of these NEPA problems that we all have right now?
Mr. Smith. Certainly, we always are going to consider
collaboration, so you look at the locals. They are best knowing
what is happening in the local area, in the sawmills and the
towns. So, it is imperative that we work and have a
collaborative relationship with them so that we can work out
those issues so that it is not falling back on environmental
analysis, which people tend to blame that is the case. But we
want to work collaboratively with those individuals because
they have the experience, they have been there, so that is the
whole purpose of doing that.
As you know, we have talked about the A to Z, so we have
looked at opportunities where we said, OK, we will let the
cooperators take care of the environmental analysis and pay for
the cost, and then we can see how we could reimburse at a later
date, which this bill is talking about. So, we have already
been doing it for a while. We think that is very important
because we always want to be collaborative to work those
situations out.
Mr. Fulcher. OK. My follow-up to that, which came to mind
just as a function of your response, is let's say that we have
a successful collaboration, and the project or whatever is
being jointly worked on goes through. How often do you then run
into some kind of a litigation-related problem, that next step,
how often is the frequency of a litigation problem after a
collaboration takes place?
Mr. Smith. I don't have an exact percentage of how that is.
Mr. Fulcher. If you could just generalize, I mean, are we
talking, is it rare? Is it frequent?
Mr. Smith. I think somewhere in between, I would say. I
don't think it is always we get litigated, but it depends on--
--
Mr. Fulcher. It is certainly fair to say it is not
uncommon.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I would agree with that.
Mr. Fulcher. OK. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee,
the legislation we have before us, I think, is going to be
helpful. I really do.
As we, as a Subcommittee, continue to work with the
challenges of interacting with Federal lands, we are going to
have to continue to take steps to empower, I think, our locals
more when it comes to areas and regions around the country
where it is dominated by Federal lands, because that control is
being choked off either through the process or through
litigation after the process.
And it is a much bigger problem we are trying to address
today, but the legislation we have before us is a helpful step,
so I want to thank the sponsors for that.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would turn next to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Smith, for both your written testimony and
your oral testimony. I, like my former Ranking Member, Mr.
Fulcher, represent a state that has significant Federal public
lands, as you know, the state of Colorado. Roughly half of my
congressional district, which is larger than nine states, is
Federal land.
And we have a good relationship with our Forest Service
supervisors, with the BLM, a variety of the different land
management agencies that, of course, play a pivotal role in the
management of those lands in our district. And I will just say
I am grateful to you and to the work that the Forest Service is
doing and has done over the course of the last several years in
terms of implementing the laws that we have passed and the
resources that we and the Congress provided to do critical
wildfire resiliency work and trail restoration efforts, and so
much more.
That doesn't mean that there aren't significant challenges,
and I am going to talk about one that I would like to have an
exchange with you about. But nonetheless, I think it is
important to preface my remarks with a note of gratitude to the
folks at the Forest Service, to the Chief on down.
I also, of course, with respect to the bills that we are
considering today, appreciate the Forest Service's position on
the Bolts Ditch Act, and I think it is a common-sense bill, and
my hope would be that we can move that quickly through the
Committee.
Mr. Smith, I know you are not here to testify about
wildland firefighter pay issues, and I suspect that that may be
out of your province or your jurisdiction. But nonetheless, as
a representative for the Forest Service, I do want to ask you a
particular question about housing.
We have received some pretty disturbing reports from a
variety of different public sources, and also individuals, that
housing costs in terms of housing that is being managed by the
Forest Service for wildland firefighters have gone up
dramatically--a series of announcements made in just the last,
I think, several weeks to months about, in particular, housing
rents that have in some cases doubled, in other cases gone up
100 percent.
I wonder if you might be able to, I suspect you are aware
of this, and if you could provide maybe the Committee some
clarity on that front.
Mr. Smith. Housing is certainly a priority. And we have
been engaged in several opportunities to try to correct that,
whether we are allowing some pay for some of our firefighter
employees or some of our lower grade employees. So, that is
ongoing. I don't have the specifics, but I know that it is a
high priority, and I do know the agency is responding to that.
Mr. Neguse. OK. Well, I would just simply say I am going to
read something here that we found online, and again, perhaps
you can confirm the veracity of this. We are working on a
letter that we intend to send to your agency, and we hope that
you will provide us an answer forthwith.
But this particular example, it is a new rental market
survey and change in a rural Forest Service district where the
previous net daily tenant rent was $23.73, the new net daily
tenant rent $52.76, which means an $871 monthly increase in
rent for wildland firefighters that can barely afford to live
and survive in these communities that they are serving.
Again, I am hoping that you all can provide some further
clarity as to the veracity of this, and I am hoping it is not
true. In the event that it is true, I think the Forest Service
is going to have to take some significant, immediate actions to
ensure that these Federal wildland firefighters are not
negatively impacted.
And we can talk with you. And I suspect that there would be
interest on a bipartisan basis, and perhaps we can engage some
of our appropriators about how to best mitigate this kind of
increase. But as I am sure you could imagine, it would be
untenable for a wildland firefighter in Colorado or any other
western state to all of a sudden face a $900 or $800 monthly
rent increase. Pay isn't going up, as you know, I am sure.
We have been fighting here in Congress, myself and several
others, to try to get wildland firefighters paid a decent wage,
the wage that they deserve. We have a bill, Tim's Act, I know
you are familiar with, that we have been pushing every day for
the last several years. And you will pardon my frustrations
here, but on behalf of these Federal wildland firefighters, as
we prepare for what is likely to be another tough year, we have
to get this right.
So, I would just ask for your commitment to work with us on
that, and we will follow up via letter.
Mr. Smith. Ranking Member Neguse, I assure you that is one
of the highest priorities in the agency, and we will be happy
to work with the Committee to do so.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Next, Representative
Newhouse, you have 5 minutes for questioning of our witness.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the
opportunity.
And thank you, Mr. Smith, for your comments on the Root and
Stem Act. I appreciate your positive comments, but also look
forward to working with you to make sure it accomplishes what
we want it to, which is basically to codify the ability of the
Forest Service to use this authority on forest restoration
projects.
We have seen a lot of successful collaboration efforts,
absolutely, but we have also seen challenges. So, I think Mr.
Fulcher's point was well taken that this would be a good
opportunity for us to ensure that the Department continues to
have a successful program moving forward.
So, maybe a question along the lines of, in your
estimation, and maybe this will point to some of the potential
solutions that we could come up with, why do you think that
these projects are not used more often?
What are some of the challenges that we should be
overcoming?
And maybe we could do that through this Act.
Mr. Smith. I generally think that what we can do--we have a
lot of tools and opportunities to do that. We have lots of CEs
that we can work, as you already know, and our major priority,
the wildfire crisis strategy, is to make sure that we get into
areas and treat areas, thin areas, do burning, and all that.
So, I think that we have the tools and the opportunities.
The length and the difficulty sometimes is depending on the
environmental analysis that we are doing, whether you are
talking about a categorical exclusion or EA, whatever we think
the appropriate analysis is, and that can take some time.
There is also cost on both sides. You are talking about
cost for environmental analysis, and you are talking about
project costs. So, those things can run a course, and sometimes
you can get obstacles in those.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, again, I appreciate your support of the
concept, and look forward to working with you to make this
something that will be a benefit for the agency and for our
national forests. So, thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. Next, Mr. Bentz, you
have 5 minutes if you choose.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thanks for being here today, and this gives me an
opportunity to talk about some events of just last week when I
was down in southern Oregon, in my district, and we were
talking about the challenges that the Medford and Grants Pass
communities in that area face every summer now because of
smoke.
And the challenges are extraordinarily difficult for many
of the businesses that either have vineyards or have any type
of recreational activity. For example, the Shakespeare Festival
in Ashland, which has national notoriety for being an
excellent, incredible production facility, has been hugely
damaged, as have all outdoor activities by virtue of the smoke
that now comes into those valleys during the summer. You can
almost set your clock by knowing when this is going to happen.
And it has been so damaging.
The question, of course, is what can we do about it? And
they are surrounded by, the Klamath forest, of course, is to
the south, and the Rogue-Siskiyou is adjacent. We have these
bills before us today that try to help, but these bills address
thousands of acres when the problem is in the millions. So, my
question to you, Mr. Smith, is, in your opinion, after your
years of service, what is the solution that actually is working
on the ground right now?
Mr. Smith. I think the 10-year wildfire crisis strategy
that we are doing will address a lot of that. We are looking at
the most vulnerable areas, and trying to treat those in the
priority landscapes. So, I think that is the best effort that
we have going. It has been very successful. We were able to cut
more timber, thin more areas under that particular strategy.
So, I think the current strategy that we have in place,
which our No. 1 priority in the agency is the wildfire crisis
strategy, is trying to address that, and we will address that.
Mr. Bentz. And I am happy to hear that. But I guess my
question to you would be what would you recommend we do to
accelerate your excellent efforts in that regard?
I have heard good things about that program, but the
numbers, the time--it is almost as though, as good of work as
you are doing, we are all falling behind. So, what do you need?
Mr. Smith. I don't have an answer right now, but we would
certainly be willing to work with you and the Committee to come
up with some ideas if there are some things that we should be
doing that we are not currently addressing.
Mr. Bentz. Let me make it easier. To whom should I address
the question? Awkward for you to answer it in this environment,
I understand that, but tell me who would you point us toward?
And by the way, I work with every group you can imagine.
All you have to do is suggest which ones you think are the most
effective in trying to actually do something, because I want to
emphasize this. The people I met with last week, this is an
existential issue for them. This is destroying the opportunity
for economic advancement. But worse, it is harming people who
have to breathe that air, the little kids and everybody else.
This is real. So, who would you point us toward?
Mr. Smith. I know that our Secretary Vilsack is very
supportive of the efforts that we are doing. So, if you wanted
to start somewhere, I would start with the Secretary of
Agriculture, Tom Vilsack.
Mr. Bentz. Let me shift to another issue. Thank you for
that. We will follow up.
One of the things that is not often spoken about in
following these terrific and horrific hundreds of thousands-of-
acre fires that are happening out in Oregon and California,
Washington, Idaho, Montana areas is what happens after the fire
is over and that timber does not get removed. And in a couple
of years, no one can go into the space for fear of some of this
rotting timber falling on them and crushing them.
At the Forest Service, do you have a record, a map that
shows areas that now are off limits by virtue of the sheer
danger of going into that space with all of this standing and
rotting timber?
Mr. Smith. I am not aware of that. I certainly will get
back to you to answer to that question. I am sure some of our
experts in state and private forestry probably have a better
handle on that. But I could certainly get you that information.
Mr. Bentz. It would seem to me that you would have it
readily available because it is so hazardous not to have it.
And you guys are in charge of that space. And even a new
lawyer, and I am definitely not a new lawyer, an older lawyer,
knows that if someone came in and asked if it was foreseeable
that a tree would fall down in that forest, the answer is yes.
It is extraordinarily foreseeable, they are going to fall down.
So, I look forward to you getting back to me on that, and
we will reach out to the Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to take a
couple of minutes for questioning here. I have a couple of
specific questions, Mr. Smith, and then I want to get into some
more general stuff.
We heard the testimony from Representative Kim in regards
to the Cleveland National Forest being closed. And if I heard
you correctly, you said 2 years is not going to be enough to do
the repairs to make sure that it is safe for people to be able
to go in there. Did I hear that accurately?
Mr. Smith. Yes. We think that the 2-year limit may be
limiting, because the first priority is to make sure that it is
safe for the recreation public, and also liability for the
Forest Service and U.S. Government in general.
Mr. Tiffany. Why does it take so long?
Mr. Smith. It really depends on the situation, a case by
case. And based on what the analysis is, we try to prepare to
do what we need to do based on analysis that we got.
So, if you are talking about environmental analysis, that
takes a while. You are talking about cost. Those costs are not
necessarily readily available, so we have to plan for those
costs to do those type of treatments. That is part of it.
Mr. Tiffany. So, when you say ``analysis,'' are you
referencing to NEPA?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. OK. So, NEPA is an impediment here for being
able to expeditiously go in and be able to get this cleaned up
and make it safe?
Mr. Smith. I don't think it is an impediment. We have lots
of CEs and we have emergency authorities to get in and take
care of stuff after disasters and fires.
Mr. Tiffany. OK, so NEPA is not a problem. You have a
categorical exclusion, right? Why not exercise it?
Mr. Smith. We do. We very often do. And I know we have been
utilizing it particularly under this new wildfire crisis
strategy we have. We are using all the tools that we have,
including emergency authorities, including the CEs that we
already have.
Mr. Tiffany. It was said that this Bolts Ditch headgate was
mistakenly put in a wilderness area. Is that right?
Mr. Smith. I think it was located there before the
wilderness area.
Mr. Tiffany. But it was mistakenly put in the wilderness
area.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Isn't that an indictment of wilderness areas,
which are the most restrictive designation that is out there,
and that we must be really careful before we put properties
with the wilderness designation?
Mr. Smith. Before we do a wilderness designation, there is
a lot of public involvement, so you have lots of comments and
opportunities before we make such decisions. So, we try to take
that into account before we designate those areas. That is why
you have a study and suitability for those areas.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you do the consultation and stuff like
that with the local communities. You say you hear from them,
all the rest. Do you coordinate with the local municipalities
that are affected by something like this?
Do you go in and do an official coordination as stipulated
under Federal law, and review with the municipalities not just
the consultation, not just hearing from people, but where you
sit down and really figure out what the concerns are, and then
help alleviate those concerns before executing something like
placing land into a wilderness?
Mr. Smith. Well, that is certainly supposed to be the
outcome of that collaboration. That should be the outcome, that
you have considered all that, that you have had those
conversations with the locals, how would it affect them, what
it is going to affect. So, I would assume that is what we would
be doing.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you believe coordination and collaboration
are two different things under the Federal law?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. So, they are two different things, right?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, OK. I appreciate it very much. We really
appreciate the work you have done with us, my office and our
staff here in regards to the Forest County Wabeno project. Do
you have any concerns, I didn't hear them in the testimony, are
there any immediate concerns you have with this?
Mr. Smith. The land transfer?
Mr. Tiffany. With the land, yes, thank you.
Mr. Smith. No, not at this time.
Mr. Tiffany. So, should we expect that to be able to
advance here, provided we choose to do that, I understand you
can't control that, but what I am seeing and hearing here is
that there really aren't any concerns with the conveyance
happening. Is that accurate, from the Forest Service's
perspective?
Mr. Smith. Yes. I mean, there are always technicalities
that we need to work out, but we try to be as judicious and
expeditious as we can.
Mr. Tiffany. Well, I appreciate that very much, because we
will hear from the local testimony that we will get how
important this is, and you certainly heard the comments that I
shared.
I want to follow up on Mr. Bentz's question. I am going to
take the liberty of taking a few more seconds here. Are there
specific impediments that are preventing the Forest Service
from completing more of these land conveyances administratively
that require congressional action?
I mean, do we need to be more active in this area as
Congress?
Mr. Smith. I don't think so. I think we have the authority
to do it. Again, when you are talking about doing these type of
activities, you first must make sure that it is suitable within
the current forest plan, you need to consider whether there are
any enhancement activities under the CERCLA, you need to
consider any Wild and Scenic Rivers, you need to consider any
endangered species. So, there are a lot of factors that we look
at.
I think we have the authority that we need already, it is
just when you do the analysis sometimes it takes time.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, my time has expired. Thank you very much
for appearing today, Mr. Smith, and we look forward to
continuing to work with you on all of these bills. And we
appreciate you and your staff joining us today.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. OK. With no further questions, I don't see
anyone else around the dais, we will now move on to our third
panel. Thank you, Associate Deputy Chief Smith.
And while the Clerk resets our witness table, I will remind
the witnesses, under Committee Rules, they must limit their
oral statements to 5 minutes, but their entire statement will
appear in the hearing record.
I would also like to remind our witnesses of the timing
lights, which will turn red at the end of your 5-minute
statement, and to please remember to turn on your microphone.
As with the second panel, I will allow all witnesses to
testify before we have Member questioning.
It is good to have you all here today. Thank you very much
for joining us, and with the Chairman's prerogative, of course,
I am going to call the gentleman from Wisconsin first, as you
can only imagine.
And I would now like to introduce the honorable Tom
Tallier. He is the District 8 Supervisor at the Forest County
Board of Supervisors.
Supervisor Tallier, you have 5 minutes to share your
testimony, and it is good to have you visiting us here in the
nation's capital.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TALLIER, SUPERVISOR, FOREST COUNTY
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS, DISTRICT 8, WABENO, WISCONSIN

Mr. Tallier. Thank you and good morning, Congressman
Tiffany. And good morning also to all the members of the
Natural Resources Committee.
First of all, I want to really thank everyone for the
invite and the opportunity to come to Washington, DC, our
nation's capital, and present my testimony on H.R. 7072.
But I would kind of like to tell you a few facts about
Forest County and the town of Wabeno, first of all. Of course,
I think you all know it is located in northern Wisconsin, and
Forest County, it got its name because of all the trees. It has
been reported that Forest County has more trees in it than
stars in the sky. And I think that is factual, to be truthful.
And on the subject of numbers, Forest County only has about
9,000 people in the entire county. So, we don't have a lot of
numbers up there, but I just want to say our representation is
very good. Congressman Tiffany was at a Forest County
Supervisors Committee meeting about 3 weeks ago or so. We have
had both Senators from Wisconsin come and talk to us up there
in northern Wisconsin. So, I think our representation does a
good job for us.
The other thing about Forest County, I think, that is
really interesting, we have two federally recognized tribes in
Forest County, and I believe we are the only county in the
Lower 48 states that can say two federally recognized tribes
call Forest County their home. I think it is rather
interesting.
One of the main concerns, really, about Forest County is a
lack of private land. And we have heard this a number of times
in this statement today. The Forest Service controls pretty
much 50 percent of our county, 50 percent of the land. That is
roughly 340,000 acres that they control. We are talking about
14 acres in this bill. Just think about that. But we will go
from there.
The other important fact about Forest County with the non-
taxable land between the Federal, the tribes, the state, a lot
of the agricultural lands, and whatever, we are down to 10
percent taxable land. And we have to try to provide services,
law enforcement, health, social services, all of this on this
amount of land. It is very, very difficult. It is very trying.
So, here we are. We are coming to Tony's Ready Mix. And I
want to talk just a little bit about this because we have to
look at every business in Forest County, small businesses or
whatever. He employs roughly 18 full-time people. Think about
this, 18 full-time people, but our community is only about
1,000 people. I mean, you start taking 18 full-time jobs out of
1,000 people, where are we going to go?
I mean, right now Tony is very reputable. He is not a fly-
by-night operator by any means. He has a home and a family, his
kids go to school there. I think that we really need to keep
this business in Forest County and in Wabeno to keep things
moving forward.
I can see I am getting close on my time, so I just want to
add one point here. I am the Supervisor of Forest County. This
land is in my district. I really think we need this bill to
pass. Without it, I am really afraid. And as I think
Congressman Tiffany had mentioned, we have some letters from
the Chamber of Commerce, and the Forest County Economic
Development Partnership, and the town board.
Again, I see my time is just about done, so I had better
say thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Tallier follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tom Tallier, Forest County Board of Supervisors
District 8
on H.R. 7072

Honorable Congressman Tom Tiffany and members of the Natural
Resource Committee:

First I would like to thank everyone for the invite and the
opportunity to come to Washington, D.C. our Nation's capital to present
my Testimony on H.R. Bill #7072.
I also would like to tell you some facts about Forest County and
the Town of Wabeno, which is located in northern Wisconsin. Forest
County got its name because of all its trees. It has been reported that
Forest County has more trees than stars in the sky. On the subject of
numbers, approximately 9,000 people call Forest County their home.
Forest County is also home of two federally recognized tribes
(Potawatomi and Sokaogon Chippewa) and is the only county in the lower
48 states that have two tribes within their boundaries.
A main concern in Forest County is the lack of private land. The
major landowner is the United States Forest Service which controls
approximately 50% of the land. When you put together all non paying
taxable lands it comes to approximately 90%, which means only 10% of
the land in Forest County is fully taxable.
Here lies the problem. To help solve the problem I offer the
following. Tony's Ready-Mix is a sand gravel ready-mix company, a small
business by some big city standards. But here in Forest County we need
every business to survive. Tony's Ready-Mix has been in business for
20+ years and hires 16-18 full time employees and has a yearly outlay
of capital of approximately 1 million dollars. Forest County and the
Town of Wabeno need this business to keep moving forward. We need this
14 acres of land so local residents can keep working, living and
sending their kids to school here in Forest County.
I would be happy to answer any questions on this matter. Attached
are letters of support from the Wabeno Chamber of Commerce, Town of
Wabeno, and the Forest County Economic Development Partnership.

*****

ATTACHMENTS

WABENO AREA

Chamber of Commerce

September 8, 2023

To Whom it May Concern:

This letter from the Wabeno Area Chamber of Commerce is written in
support of the sale or trade of land between Tony Smith, owner of
Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix LLC and the U.S. Forest Service. It was brought
to our attention that his purchase or trade is needed to provide the
materials needed to continue production in the future.
Tony's Redi-Mix has been in our community for over 20 years and is
currently providing employment for approximately 25 employees, which
enables them to provide for their families. Tony and his employees are
active community members and essential to the economic growth of
Wabeno. We support all efforts that will help him to sustain his
business.

Sincerely,

Dawn Jakubiec,
Treasurer

______

TOWN OF WABENO

The Town of Wabeno is in support of the request to purchase or
trade of the U.S. Forest Service land to Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix LLC
Tony Smith owner.
The need was brought to our attention last year, revealing only a
few years of sand and gravel to continue production and the employment
of approximately 25 employees and their families.
Tony has been actively searching for property and so far has not
found any other options.
With this purchase or trade between Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix and the
U.S.Forest Service he will be able to provide steady employment and
growth for his company and our community. Tony's Redi-Mix LLC is one of
the largest employers in the community and we would to support him any
way we can.

Jim Smith,
Chair

Randy Johnson,                Benjamin Hermus,
Supervisor                    Supervisor

______

FOREST COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP

Re: Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix

Greetings,

The Forest County Economic Development Partnership is pleased to
support the request of Tony Smith, OBA Tony's Wabeno Redi-Mix, with the
purchase or trade of U.S. Forest Service to ensure the sustainability
of his business and employment opportunities in Forest County,
Wisconsin.
The need for expansion was highlighted in 2022, revealing only a
few years of sustainable sand and gravel to continue production and
employment for his business. He has been in contact with Forest County
in discussions on land purchases or trades to sustain the demand of
sand and gravel for business purposes. Currently his site will only
sustain his business until late 2025 or early 2026.
With the success of land purchase or trade between Tony's Wabeno
Redi-Mix and the U.S. Forest Service he will be able to provide Forest
County with steady employment and growth of his company. The company
currently employees around 25 individuals from around the area, and
works on many jobs that increase the growth of the county. Sustaining
this business for Forest County and its economic development is
critical to the success and growth of the County as a solid unit.

Sincerely,

Chris Shafer,
Executive Director

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for your testimony, Supervisor
Tallier. Next, I would like to recognize Representative Kim for
an introduction of one of our witnesses.
Representative Kim.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Chairman. I am pleased to introduce
the next witness, San Bernardino County Fire Chief Dan Munsey,
to testify on our ROUTES Act.
Chief Munsey has nearly 30 years of experience in the fire
service, and his fire district serves the largest county in the
United States. And he is also the Vice President of California
Metro Chiefs Association and the Fire School Board of Directors
which works to advance the fire service in California. Our
local firefighting agencies in Southern California work
tirelessly on the ground to keep our communities safe, and they
are at the forefront of wildfire technology innovation, and
they know first-hand the importance of active forest management
and wildfire mitigation on Federal lands.
So, I want to thank Chief Munsey for joining us today to
testify in support of the ROUTES Act.

STATEMENT OF DAN MUNSEY, FIRE CHIEF, SAN BERNARDINO
COUNTY FIRE DEPARTMENT, SAN BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Munsey. Thank you. Of 12,800,000,000 Federal acres
within San Bernardino County, we serve 20,000 square miles.
Eighty percent of our land mass is Federal. We respond with
seven different Federal agencies.
Mr. Neguse, I appreciate your comments on the firefighter
pay. One correction is there are no firefighters in the Federal
Government. There are forestry technicians. This has become
very apparent to us as we responded to 8,133 calls on an annual
basis into Federal land. This is $13 million of local funds
that are spent on this expenditure. We are your all-hazard fire
department. Your U.S. Forest Service and other fire departments
by charter, unless there is a FEMA declaration, can only
respond to wildfire. We found that out during our February
storms that buried our communities in 10 feet of snow as we
asked for their assistance.
I want to thank Congresswoman Young Kim, along with
Congressman LaMalfa, for introducing this Act.
I mentioned we are fairly large. We responded to 196,000
all-hazard calls. Our men and women are amongst the hardest
working in the nation. They are often rated in the top 10
busiest companies but, see, 196,000 calls are also 196,000
failures. Because my job, my primary job, isn't to respond to
calls; my primary job is to prevent those calls.
This Act is important to recreation, certainly, but it is
more important to your local fire service who is responding
after hours, who is responding off season into Federal lands.
If we cannot access fires, fires will continue to grow. If we
can't get in there and mitigate certain things like flood
control channels, then secondary emergencies will occur.
We are known in San Bernardino County for having large,
destructive wildfires. Last year, we had the largest fire in
California with the York Fire. The Old and Grand Prix Fires
destroyed 993 homes and caused 6 civilian deaths. And then, in
2020, the El Dorado Fire resulted in a Federal firefighter
fatality. In each one of these fires, like fires throughout our
nation, the fire has damaged roads, trails, campgrounds, and
other infrastructure.
And I appreciate Mr. Smith's comments on ensuring the
public safety is maintained in 2 years may be difficult, but I
will ask. How long is long enough?
When I was on the Ranch 2 Fire in the Angeles National
Forest, I spent 4 days trying to open a road so I can access
the firefighters edge. This year, when we had our snowstorm,
because the road was not maintained that was critical to 911
calls, we were forced to send in helicopters with fuel to fuel
back-up generators. We need the ability to get in there and fix
these roads. If the Federal Government is not able to do that,
we will certainly undertake that task to prevent emergencies.
Debris flows are common examples of the secondary
emergencies that we try to prevent. A great example occurred in
Forest Falls, California, within our communities after the El
Dorado Fire. Our wildland crews removed 60 tons of debris from
natural flood channels to prevent blockage. However, there
still were several incidents that occurred that resulted in
flooding in September 2022. The flooding, unfortunately, buried
a house and a civilian.
In August 2023, a similar incident occurred in the nearby
Seven Oaks community, and an elderly resident was swept away.
It has been frustrating to watch fires get bigger, and it has
been frustrating to not allow local resources to respond to
assist the Federal Government in preventing these emergencies.
In closing, San Bernardino County in our jurisdiction we
represent 66 communities, 80 percent of our land mass is
Federal land. These communities are surrounded by your land
areas. It is very important to us that we have access to these
Federal lands in order to effectively respond and prevent
emergencies.
Thank you for your time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Munsey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dan Munsey, Fire Chief and Fire Warden, San
Bernardino County Fire Protection District
on H.R. 6994

I am the Dan Munsey, the Fire Chief and Fire Warden for San
Bernardino County Fire Protection District. I am here today in response
to the Committee's invitation to testify in support of H.R. 6994. I
have 28 years of experience in the fire service, and for the last four
years I have served as the fire chief of the largest fire district in
our nation. I have served with Federal Incident Management Teams for
over two decades facing some of the most complex emergency incidents in
history. Incidents that have killed firefighters, civilians, and caused
massive losses to public infrastructure. I serve as a director on
FIRESCOPE, a board that provides recommendations and technical
assistance to the fire service including the FIRESCOPE Incident Command
System (ICS) and the Multi-Agency Coordination System. I am also the
vice-president of the California Metro Chief Association, an
association that is inclusive of the largest fire departments in the
nation.
I want to thank our Congresswoman, Young Kim, along with
Congressman Doug LaMalfa for introducing this act. This bill would
benefit us by allowing improved maintenance on roads and trail networks
used by our firefighters and by restoring public land in ways to
prevent secondary emergencies.
San Bernardino is the largest county in the continental United
States, with a land mass of almost 20,000 square miles, larger than New
Jersey, Connecticut, Delaware, and Rhode Island put together. The
County is a diverse geographical region with large coastal valleys,
mountainous terrain, and expansive desert areas. San Bernardino County
is home to two of the most populated and recreated national forests,
the Angeles National Forest, and the San Bernardino National Forest.
Almost 80% of the county's land mass is made up of federal lands. The
2.2 million citizens we serve in sixty-six communities are often
largely isolated and surrounded by federal land, both mountain and
desert areas. This means that San Bernardino County Fire is often
impacted by all-hazard emergencies, such as wildfires, originating on
federal lands.
San Bernardino County has a history of large-scale destructive
wildfires and natural disasters that pose significant challenges for
our responders. This includes the largest fire in California last year,
the York Fire, 2003's Old Fire/Grand Prix Fire that destroyed 993 homes
and caused six civilian deaths; and the 2020 El Dorado Fire which
resulted in a federal firefighter fatality.
Each of these fires, like so many others throughout our nation,
have resulted in damaged roads, trails, campgrounds, and other
infrastructure. The ROUTES Act would require these areas to be restored
and reopened. This infrastructure's restoration is important to the
local community, not only for recreation, but for firefighting. Many of
the fires fought in our federal lands burn in areas that had previously
burned where infrastructure has been damaged and not restored or
reopened.
A lot of the same roads used for recreation are used for
firefighting. In my 10 years commanding geographical areas of wildfires
as a division supervisor or operations, I spent many days ``opening''
roads, which means repairing previously damaged roads, to the point
that they could be used to transport firefighters, fire engines, and
heavy equipment like bulldozers. In areas where vegetation has been
burned, roads are often blocked by debris flow, such as rocks,
boulders, and large dead trees caused by water running off slopes
following the first few rain storms after the fire; this has resulted
in delays to being able to effectively respond and mitigate fires.
Debris flows are common examples of ``secondary incidents'', or an
incident that is related to the initial incident. It is imperative that
restorative efforts be undertaken to minimize or prevent secondary
incidents from occurring. A good example occurred in the Forest Falls,
California community after the El Dorado Fire (2020). Our wildland
crews worked to remove over sixty tons of debris from natural flood
channels to prevent blockage; blockage often prevents the natural flow
of water causing additional damage to roads and our communities.
Despite this, debris and flooding in this community has occurred
numerous times. In September 2022, several houses were destroyed and an
elderly resident perished as debris overtook her home. In August 2023,
a similar incident occurred in the nearby community of Seven-Oaks
causing an elderly resident to be swept away in flood waters and die.
The County and private citizens work hard to reopen roads ways in our
communities. But this is not always the case on federal land.
It has been frustrating to watch fires get larger as we often
worked for days to open federal roads to allow firefighters and
firefighting equipment access to the perimeter of fire. These roads are
often left unrepaired or abandoned for many years resulting in massive
amount of heavy equipment work to make them usable. Campgrounds are
important too as they are often used as incident bases and areas of
refuge. Without campgrounds, crews are forced to drive further to areas
that can be used for sleeping, feeding, and other logistical needs.
Likewise, existing trail networks are used for crews to make access to
and from remote areas. Without these trails, crews must take time to
scout and create new trails. Fires often leave behind hazardous trees.
Hazardous trees are those trees that are dead or dying and can fall at
any moment to block roads, trails, strike humans, vehicles, and other
objects. They must be removed to allow public and infrastructure
safety.
Failure to maintain, reopen, and restore these areas affects our
local communities. Your local fire departments are often the first
arriving firefighters on federal incidents. This has always occurred
``after hours'' when federal forestry technicians are not in their fire
stations or during the ``off season'' when many of these employees have
been laid-off for the season. In today's federal forestry worker
shortage, this is occurring more and more often. When our local
firefighters are delayed due to poor road conditions, fires grow
larger, causing large threats to our communities. Even after the fire,
unmaintained roadways can cause difficulties. During a large February
2023 snowstorm, several cell phone towers used by the public to access
services including 911 services lost electrical power. San Bernardino
County Sheriff and County Fire District crews had to use helicopters to
fly fuel into these critical cell phone sites due to federal roads that
were impassable due to lack of regular maintenance and repair. We could
not even use tracked snow vehicles (snow cats) to maneuver the roads.
In closing, San Bernardino County Fire protects sixty-six
communities often threatened by emergency incidents occurred on federal
lands. These communities, and many others across the United States,
face threats originating on federal land, including fires and flooding.
Our firefighters respond through mutual and automatic aid to suppress
wildfires and respond to other emergencies on federal land, but we must
be able to access the areas where these emergencies are located. It is
important to ensure that secondary emergencies are a minimized or
prevented, this includes removing hazardous trees and taking other
mitigation efforts to prevent or minimize additional disasters such as
flooding. This Act is important to allow that our public lands are
restored and reopened which is critical to the safety of our
communities.
I encourage the Committee to act favorably on H.R. 6994. Thank you
for your time and consideration.
I am available to answer any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Munsey.
Next, I would now like to introduce Ms. Sandy Adomatis.
Did I say that correctly, Sandy?
Ms. Adomatis. You did.
Mr. Tiffany. President of the Appraisal Institute.
Ms. Adomatis, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SANDY ADOMATIS, PRESIDENT, THE
APPRAISAL INSTITUTE, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS

Ms. Adomatis. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany,
Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you for inviting me to testify on H.R. 5443, the Accelerating
Appraisals and Conservation Efforts, or the AACE Act. My name
is Sandra Adomatis. I am the 2024 President of the Appraisal
Institute, the largest professional association of real estate
appraisers.
The Appraisal Institute thanks Representatives Lee and
Joyce for their leadership in introducing the AACE Act,
legislation that aims to increase the pool of available
appraisers to the U.S. Department of the Interior.
This legislation will allow appraisers who carry a
certified general credential in one state to perform appraisals
in other states for the Department of the Interior. Similar
allowances are enjoyed by Federal staff appraisers, and an
extension of this benefit to the private sector will help
expand the pool of appraisal service providers to the Interior.
Access to appraisers has been a point of emphasis for
Interior for several years. Since 2021, the Department has seen
a 16 percent increase in the number of contract appraisers, and
a 38 percent decrease in the number of appraiser position
vacancies.
Congressionally-approved pay raises has been a big
contributor to the turnaround. The flexibility provided by the
AACE Act should also assist in increasing the number of
appraisers available to the Department.
But there is still work to be done. We are pleased the AACE
Act calls for the Department to look within the state where the
appraisals or evaluation are to be performed first before they
go outside the state. Having local appraisal expertise is of
utmost importance, protecting taxpayer interests. This ensures
that very best and most competent appraisers would be preparing
appraisals in land exchanges, conservation easements, and other
Federal acquisitions.
Many designated appraisers of the Appraisal Institute
perform appraisals for the Department. Maintaining state
credentials can be an onerous, time consuming, and expensive
task, especially for those who offer services in more than one
state like many DOI contract appraisers. Streamlining or
removing the regulatory hurdles helps to increase efficiencies
and reduces the cost.
Real estate appraisers face a complex regulatory structure
that involves a patchwork of state licensing laws. In addition
to the AACE Act, we have supported bipartisan legislation in
Congress, the Portal for Appraisal Licensing Act, that would
establish a nationwide system for appraiser licensing.
Specifically, under the proposed PAL Act, appraisers would have
one-stop shopping when applying for state licenses. The PAL Act
would help users and stakeholders engage a broader pool of
qualified appraisers throughout the country, including for
Federal lands programs.
We are engaged in several initiatives aimed at attracting
the next generation of appraisers. Since 2019, the Appraisal
Institute has helped lead the Appraiser Diversity Initiative,
ADI, the industry collaboration with Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
and the National Urban League that promotes appraisal
profession to diverse communities. ADI hosts workshops to
educate participants about professional opportunities in the
real estate appraisal, inviting interested participants to
apply for education scholarships. As of today, over 600
scholarships have been awarded.
We were also the first to bring to market an innovative
program that enables aspiring appraisers to complete their
requisite field experience in a virtual environment. The
Practical Application of Real Estate Appraisal, PAREA, provides
an alternative to the traditional supervisor training model for
gaining real estate appraisal experience. PAREA uses a
simulated environment leveraging technology and the vast body
of knowledge of the Appraisal Institute to present valuation
scenarios to aspiring appraisers. A team of experienced
appraiser mentors monitors these scenarios. It is akin to the
pilots who gather experience in flight simulators or surgeons
that expand their skills virtually. Launched last year, the AI
PAREA program currently has 125 appraisers, including veterans,
minorities, women, and those in underserved rural areas.
These initiatives and other efforts, such as the AACE Act
and PAL Act, will help reduce regulatory burdens on appraisers
and expand the pool of appraiser service providers. We urge
their favorable consideration by Congress, and look forward to
working with you on this enactment.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I look
forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Adomatis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sandra Adomatis, SRA 2024 President of the
Appraisal Institute
on H.R. 5433

Good morning, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse and Members
of the Subcommittee: thank you for inviting me to testify on H.R. 5433,
the Accelerating Appraisals and Conservation Efforts or ACE Act. My
name is Sandra Adomatis, and I am the 2024 President of the Appraisal
Institute, the largest professional association of real estate
appraisers.

The Appraisal Institute thanks Representatives Lee and Joyce for
their leadership in introducing the ACE Act, legislation that aims to
increase the pool of available appraisers to the U.S. Department of
Interior. Specifically, this legislation will allow appraisers who
carry a certified general credential in one state to perform appraisals
or other valuation services in any other State if the services fall
under the authority of the Department of Interior. Similar allowances
are enjoyed by federal staff appraisers, and we believe extension of
this benefit will help expand the pool of appraisal service providers
to Interior.

Access to appraisers and appraisals services by the Appraisal and
Valuation Services Office (AVSO) of the Department of Interior has been
a point of emphasis for several years. Since 2021, AVSO has seen a 16%
increase in the number of contract appraisers and a 38% decrease in the
number of appraiser position vacancies. Congressionally approved pay
raise for AVSO appraisers has been a big contributor to the turnaround.
The flexibility provided here by the ACE Act should also assist in
increasing the number of appraisers available to the AVSO, but there is
still work to be done.

We are pleased the ACE Act calls for the Department to look within
the state where the appraisals or valuation are to be performed first
before they look at appraisers from other States. Having local
appraisal expertise is of utmost importance to protecting taxpayer
interests. This ensures the very best and most competent appraisers
would be preparing appraisals in land exchanges, conservation
easements, and other federal acquisitions. Many Designated members of
the Appraisal Institute regularly perform appraisals for the Department
of Interior. Maintaining state credentials can be an onerous, time-
consuming, and expensive task. Helping streamline or remove these
regulatory hurdles helps to increase efficiency and reduces costs.

Professional real estate appraisers face a complex regulatory
structure that involves a patchwork of state licensing laws. It is an
expensive and cumbersome process for all appraisers, but particularly
those who offer services in more than one state, like many DOI contract
appraisers. The Appraisal Institute has supported legislation in
Congress--the Portal for Appraisal Licensing Act (H.R. 2771, S. 2692)--
that would establish a nationwide system for appraiser licensing.
Specifically, under the proposed PAL Act, appraisers would have the
ability to undertake ``one stop shopping'' when applying for state
licenses. We believe the PAL Act would help users and stakeholders
engage a broader pool of qualified appraisers throughout the country.
Passage of the PAL Act would be another important tool to improve
appraiser accessibility throughout federal lands programs and in the
entire real estate sector.

The availability of appraisers cannot just be about keeping
appraisers in the business. Many practicing appraisers are nearing
retirement, so we are engaged in several initiatives aimed at
attracting the next generation of appraisers. Since 2019, the Appraisal
Institute has helped lead the Appraiser Diversity Initiative (ADI), an
industry collaboration with Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the National
Urban League that promotes the appraisal profession to diverse
communities. ADI helps raise awareness by hosting workshops, both in
person and virtual, throughout the United States. These workshops
educate participants about professional opportunities in real estate
appraisal, inviting interested participants to apply for education
scholarships.

Beyond the ADI, providing alternate pathways into the profession
has been a major area of focus for our organization in recent years. We
are the first to bring to market an innovative program that enables
aspiring appraisers to complete their requisite field experience in a
virtual environment. The Practical Applications of Real Estate
Appraisals or ``PAREA'' program provides an alternative to the
traditional supervisory appraiser-trainee model for gaining experience
in real estate appraisal. Through PAREA, experience is cultivated in a
simulated environment leveraging technology and the vast body of
knowledge of the AI to present valuation scenarios to aspiring
appraisers. A team of experienced real estate appraiser mentors
monitors these scenarios. It is akin to pilots who gather experience in
flight simulators or surgeons that expand their skills virtually.
Launched last year, the Appraisal Institute's PAREA program is being
utilized by 125 aspiring appraisers, including veterans, minorities,
women, and those in underserved and rural areas.

These initiatives and other efforts such as the ACE Act and PAL Act
will help reduce regulatory burdens on appraisers and expand the pool
of appraiser service providers. We urge their favorable consideration
by this committee and look forward to working with you on their
enactment.

Thank you again for the opportunity to be before you today, and I
look forward to answering any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for your testimony, Ms. Adomatis.
Next, I would like to recognize Ms. Siri Roman. She is the
General Manager of the Eagle River Water and Sanitation
District.
Ms. Roman, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SIRI ROMAN, GENERAL MANAGER, EAGLE
RIVER WATER AND SANITATION DISTRICT, VAIL, COLORADO

Ms. Roman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Siri Roman,
and I am here to testify in support of H.R. 4297 in my role as
General Manager of the Eagle River Water and Sanitation
District and the Upper Eagle Regional Water Authority.
Together, we are the second largest water provider in western
Colorado.
The district and authority are municipal water and
wastewater providers that serve more than 50,000 people in the
Colorado Mountain resort communities of Vail, Beaver Creek, and
the surrounding areas.
This legislation is needed because a minor mapping error
occurred in 1980, when the Holy Cross Wilderness was originally
designated. The Bolts Ditch, which was used to fill a water
storage reservoir that was originally constructed in the early
1900s, was mistakenly included in the wilderness boundary.
While the Bolts Ditch diversion structure is only 450 feet
within the Holy Cross boundary, the wilderness designation
prevents its continued use, maintenance, and repair.
In 2019, the Town of Minturn sought a narrow wilderness
exemption in order to rehabilitate Bolts Ditch as part of its
municipal water system. The John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation,
Management, and Recreation Act directed the Secretary of
Agriculture to permit non-motorized access exclusively to the
Town of Minturn to use, maintain, and repair Bolts Ditch and
its diversion structure.
The Bolts Ditch Act is simple. It is a simple amendment to
the Dingell Act, granting the district and authority the same
access as the Town of Minturn. For the betterment of our
watershed and community, the district authority and the Town of
Minturn are working together to rehabilitate the Bolts Lake
diversion structure and ditch.
The Town of Minturn supports this legislation, and with me
in the room today is Michelle Mietteer, their town manager.
The district and authority's service area is located in the
headwaters of the Colorado River Basin in Eagle County. Like
many areas of the mountain west, approximately 80 percent of
our region's precipitation falls in the form of snow in our
high mountain peaks. The vast majority of the annual water
supply reaches our local stream systems within a very short
period of time during spring snowmelt. A reservoir to capture
the spring runoff is essential to provide water on a year-round
basis for our residents and our visitors.
In 2021, the district and authority acquired ownership of
Bolts Ditch and the Bolts Lake property to construct a new,
1,200-acre-foot reservoir at the previous Bolts Lake site. It
will be an off-channel reservoir, meaning it will not dam any
free-flowing streams.
Bolts Ditch is an essential filling source for the new
Bolts Lake Reservoir, and will help to provide sufficient
municipal water supplies for our region, including the Town of
Minturn. Bolts Lake will boost environmental flows during times
of low flow, and will provide additional recreational
opportunities to support Western Colorado's recreation-based
economy.
The purpose of this legislation is to grant the district
and authority access to maintain Bolts Ditch and make the
redevelopment of Bolts Lake possible.
Thank you for your time today, and we would be grateful for
your support of this legislation. I would be happy to respond
to any questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Roman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Siri Roman, General Manager, Eagle River Water &
Sanitation District and Upper Eagle Regional Water Authority
on H.R. 4297

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

My name is Siri Roman, and I am testifying in support of H.R. 4297
in my role as General Manager of the Eagle River Water & Sanitation
District and the Upper Eagle Regional Water Authority. The District and
Authority are municipal water and wastewater providers that serve more
than 50,000 people in the Colorado mountain resort communities of Vail,
Beaver Creek, and the surrounding areas. Together, we are the second
largest water provider in Western Colorado.
This legislation is needed because a minor mapping error occurred
in 1980 when the Holy Cross Wilderness was originally designated. The
Bolts Ditch, which was used to fill a water storage reservoir that was
originally constructed in the early 1900s, was mistakenly included in
the wilderness boundary. While the Bolts Ditch diversion structure is
only 450 feet within the Holy Cross boundary, the wilderness
designation prevented the continued use, maintenance, and repair of
Bolts Ditch and its diversion structure.
In 2019, the Town of Minturn sought a narrow wilderness exemption
in order to rehabilitate Bolts Ditch as part of its municipal water
system. The John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and
Recreation Act directed the Secretary of Agriculture to permit non-
motorized access exclusively to the town of Minturn to use, maintain,
and repair the Bolts Ditch diversion structure and 450 lineal feet of
Bolts Ditch.
The Bolts Ditch Act is a simple amendment to the Dingell Act,
explicitly granting the District and Authority the same access as the
Town of Minturn.
For the betterment of our watershed and community, the District,
Authority, and the Town of Minturn, are working together to
rehabilitate the Bolts Lake diversion structure and ditch. The Town of
Minturn supports this legislation, and their Town Manager, Michelle
Metteer, is joining me at this hearing.
The District and Authority's service area is located in the
headwaters of the Colorado River basin in Eagle County. Like many areas
of the mountain west, approximately 80% of our region's precipitation
falls in the form of snow in our high mountain peaks. The vast majority
of the annual water supply reaches our local stream systems within a
very short period of time during spring snowmelt. A reservoir to
capture the spring runoff is essential to provide water on a year-round
basis for our residents and visitors.
In 2021, the District and Authority acquired ownership of Bolts
Ditch and the Bolts Lake property to construct a new 1,200 acre foot
reservoir at the previous Bolts Lake site. It will be an off-channel
reservoir, meaning it will not dam any free-flowing streams.
Bolts Ditch is an essential filling source for the new Bolts Lake
Reservoir and will help to provide sufficient municipal water supplies
for our region, including the Town of Minturn. Bolts Lake will boost
environmental flows during times of low flow and will provide
additional recreation opportunities to support Western Colorado's
recreation-based economy.
The purpose of this legislation is to grant the District and
Authority explicit access to use, maintain, and repair the Bolts Ditch
diversion, and it will make the redevelopment of Bolts Lake, and all
its benefits, possible.
We would be grateful for your support of this legislation.

*****

Attachment A: Overview of Bolts Ditch and Bolts Lake Reservoir

Eagle River Water & Sanitation District (ERWSD) and Upper Eagle
Regional Water Authority (UERWA) are planning to redevelop Bolts Lake
in Minturn with a 1,200 acre-foot reservoir. The reservoir was
originally developed as a recreational reservoir by Ben Bolt in 1890,
when he diverted water from Cross Creek into a natural basin. The
reservoir has been inactive since 1996, when the dam was breached by
order of Colorado's State Engineer. ERWSD and UERWA serve 50,000
customers and are collectively the second largest municipal water
supplier in Western Colorado. This reservoir will provide necessary
additional in-basin storage supplies to service their customers while
maintaining healthy river flows. Bolts Ditch is an essential filling
source for the new Bolts Lake Reservoir and will help to provide
sufficient municipal water supplies for our region, including the town
of Minturn.

Attachment B: Map of Bolts Ditch area, south of Minturn, CO

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Attachment C: Photograph of Bolts Ditch intake and diversion
structure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Attachment D: Photograph of Bolts Ditch diversion structure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you for the testimony, Ms. Roman. I
appreciate it.
I will now recognize Ms. Hannah Downey with the Property
and Environment Research Center, where she serves as Policy
Director.
Ms. Downey, good to have you here.

STATEMENT OF HANNAH DOWNEY, POLICY DIRECTOR, PROPERTY AND
ENVIRONMENT RESEARCH CENTER, BOZEMAN, MONTANA

Ms. Downey. Thank you. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to participate in today's hearing on forest
conservation and how H.R. 674, the Root and Stem Project
Authorization Act, can bring additional resources to improve
the pace and scale of forest restoration work. My name is
Hannah Downey, and I am the Policy Director at the Property and
Environment Research Center.
PERC is the national leader in market solutions for
conservation, with over 40 years of research and a network of
respected scholars and practitioners. Enhancing forest health
is a primary focus of our work, especially the obstacles to
collaborative forest restoration and the expanded use of
prescribed burns. We are non-profit, non-partisan, and proudly
based in Bozeman, Montana.
But my connection to today's topic is also deeply personal.
I will never forget the fear of seeing flames racing up a
canyon towards my family while we were on a backpacking trip in
the Absaroka-Beartooth Wilderness when I was just 14. I know
what it feels like to desperately pray for my husband and his
wildland fire crew as they battle blazes around the United
States. I have had this sobering realization that our water
supply in Bozeman will be gone in just 3 days if a fire rips
through our watershed. The Root and Stem Project Authorization
Act is a tool to help tackle this huge wildfire problem.
The reality is that large and destructive wildfires are
becoming more common. Although several factors contribute to
this trend, the declining health of our nation's forest is a
primary cause. Our national forests face an 80 million-acre
backlog in needed restoration, a backlog that leaves our
forests more vulnerable to wildfire, less resistant to climate
change and drought, and more vulnerable to insects and disease.
The good news, though, is that we know that fuels reduction
treatments, including mechanical thinning and prescribed burns,
are effective at restoring forest health and reducing fire
risk. During Oregon's Bootleg Fire, for example, firefighters
reported that in areas where both treatments had been applied,
the fire intensity was reduced, the crowns of trees were left
intact, and the blaze became a more manageable ground fire.
To tackle this wildfire crisis, PERC supports the Biden
administration's ambitious strategy to significantly increase
the forest restoration work over the next decade, including the
goal of treating an additional 20 million acres. Yet, the
Forest Service has struggled to treat more than just a few
million of those acres each year.
If the good news is that we know what we need to do to fix
our forests, the bad news is that actually doing that
restoration work is a long, complex process. Before any
chainsaws or drip torches can touch our Federal forests, a
restoration project must navigate significant bureaucratic
obstacles, including the NEPA review. Though well-intentioned,
it takes years for a project to get off the ground. According
to PERC researchers, once the Forest Service initiates this
environmental review process, it takes over 5 years to actually
begin a mechanical treatment on the ground, and over 7 years to
begin a prescribed burn if an Environmental Impact Statement is
required.
The Forest Service has also historically required these
administrative process barriers as a factor holding up their
goals. As a 2002 Forest Service report described it, even non-
controversial projects often proceed at a snail's pace. Twenty
years later, the agency reached the same conclusion, that the
environmental review processes must be streamlined to expand
the use of prescribed fire to protect forests and wildlife
habitat.
We need to get more beneficial projects through the
pipeline before it is too late. The Root and Stem Project
Authorization Act builds on a successful pilot project, and is
a common-sense, bipartisan proposal that does three key things
to help achieve this goal.
First, it increases the capacity for forest restoration by
bringing in private resources. With this authority, a project
supporter can provide the upfront funding for a contractor to
do the NEPA analysis for that project. That upfront investment
is later repaid through receipts generated by the project,
which makes it possible for more forest collaboratives,
conservation groups, and even private companies to provide that
initial funding.
Second, it frees up Federal resources to do more
restoration work. Dollars and staff time that agencies would
have spent conducting that environmental review can now be
spent on additional projects and on-the-ground efforts.
Finally, it ensures accountability by requiring Federal
oversight and approval of the contractors and the NEPA
analysis. We desperately need to get more forest work done.
The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act is a popular
proposal that will help us fix America's forests. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify, and I welcome any questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Downey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hannah Downey, Policy Director, Property and
Environment Research Center (PERC)
on H.R. 674

Main Points:

Conserving forest ecosystems and solving the wildfire
crisis requires tackling the Forest Service's 80-million-
acre forest restoration backlog.

The environmental review process is a major obstacle to
increasing the pace and scale of forest restoration work.

The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act (H.R. 674)
would enhance forest restoration by allowing third parties
to fund environmental reviews for restoration projects
while still maintaining federal oversight and authority.

Introduction

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to participate in this
important discussion on forest conservation and how the Root and Stem
Project Authorization Act (H.R. 674) can bring in additional resources
to improve the pace and scale of forest restoration work.
My name is Hannah Downey, and I am the policy director at the
Property and Environment Research Center. PERC is the national leader
in market solutions for conservation, with over 40 years of research
and a network of respected scholars and practitioners. Through
research, law and policy, and innovative applied conservation projects,
PERC explores how aligning incentives for environmental stewardship
produces sustainable outcomes for land, water, and wildlife. Enhancing
forest health has been a primary focus of PERC's research and policy
efforts, with recent major reports on obstacles to collaborative forest
restoration and expanded use of prescribed fire.\1\ Founded in 1980,
PERC is nonprofit, nonpartisan, and proudly based in Bozeman, Montana.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Holly Fretwell & Jonathan Wood, Fix America's Forests:
Reforms to Restore National Forests and Tackle the Wildfire Crisis,
PERC Public Lands Report (2021); Jonathan Wood & Morgan Varner, Burn
Back Better: How Western States Can Encourage Prescribed Fire on
Private Lands, PERC Policy Report (2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beyond my professional work, my connection to today's topic is
deeply personal. As a young girl, I'll never forget the fear of being
forced to evacuate a family backpacking trip in Montana's Absaroka-
Beartooth Wilderness as an out-of-control wildfire raced toward us.
Since then, I married a wildland firefighter and have prayed for my
husband and his fire crew as they battled blazes around the United
States. I have seen members of my community lose their homes to a
devastating wildfire several years ago. And as a resident of Bozeman,
Montana--which, like many western cities, draws its water from national
forest lands with high risk of catastrophic fire--I live with the
sobering realization each summer that our community's water supply
would likely be cut off in the event of a fire in the nearby watershed.
The reality is that large and destructive wildfires are becoming
more common across the West. Although several factors contribute to
this trend, the declining health of our nation's forests is a primary
cause.\2\ Our national forests face an 80-million-acre backlog in
needed restoration--a backlog that leaves our forests with excess
fuels, more vulnerable to insects and disease outbreaks, and less
resilient to climate change and drought.\3\ Yet the Forest Service has
struggled to treat more than a few million of those acres per year.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Among the four factors driving fire severity in the western
United States, live fuel accounted for an estimated 53.1 percent of
average relative influence, fire weather accounted for 22.9 percent,
climate accounted for 13.7 percent, and topography accounted for 10.3
percent. See Sean A. Parks et al., High-Severity Fire: Evaluating Its
Key Drivers and Mapping Its Probability Across Western US Forests,
Environmental Research Letters (2018).
\3\ See Forest Service, Forest Products Modernization (last visited
Mar. 17, 2023). See also Fix America's Forests, supra n. 1 at 4-16.
\4\ See Forest Service, USDA Forest Service Celebrates Historic
Investments in 2022 (Feb. 6, 2023) (reporting that the Service treated
3.2 million acres in 2022); Fix America's Forests, supra n. 1 at 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PERC supports the Biden administration's ambitious strategy to
significantly increase its forest restoration work over the next
decade, including the goal of treating an additional 20 million acres
of national forest above the business-as-usual rate.\5\ Meeting that
critical target will require greater efficiency in the years-long
process of developing, approving, and implementing forest restoration
projects.\6\ The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act (H.R. 674)
from Representative Dan Newhouse is a common-sense, bipartisan proposal
that would help to get more collaborative forest restoration projects
through the environmental review process by allowing third parties to
contribute resources to complete environmental reviews while still
maintaining federal oversight and authority. The Senate passed
companion language from Senator Steve Daines and the late Senator Diane
Feinstein in the 117th Congress and advanced the proposal again out of
the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee in the 118th Congress
without opposition. With such broad support, and at a time of great
need, the Root and Stem Project Authorization Act will bring additional
private resources to help fix America's forests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Forest Service, Confronting the Wildfire Crisis: A Strategy
for Protecting Communities and Improving Resilience in America's
Forests (2022).
\6\ See Eric Edwards & Sara Sutherland, Does Environmental Review
Worsen the Wildfire Crisis?, PERC Policy Brief (2022). See also
Confronting the Wildfire Crisis, supra n. 5 at 30 (predicting that
existing ``shovel ready'' projects could be completed in years 1 and 2
of the plan); Forest Service, National Prescribed Fire Program Review
App. A 21 (2022) (identifying the need to ``streamline required
environmental analysis and consultations'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Getting to the Root of the Wildfire Crisis

According to the Forest Service, about 40 percent of the acres in
the national forest system are in need of restoration.\7\ When the
Department of the Interior's 54-million-acre restoration backlog is
added in,\8\ the total area of federal land that needs urgent help is
larger than the state of California. The wildfire crisis is the most
visible symptom of this problem, but it is not the only one. Due to the
backlog, many western forests are stocked full of overly dense,
unhealthy, and dying stands that provide lower-quality habitat, are
more vulnerable to insects and disease, and are less resilient to
climate change and drought (See appendix figure 1).\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Fix America's Forests, supra n. 1 at 4. The Forest Service
manages 193 million acres of land, 80 million of which are in need of
restoration, according to the agency.
\8\ GAO, Wildland Fire: Federal Agencies' Efforts to Reduce
Wildland Fuels and Lower Risk to Communities and Ecosystems (2019).
\9\ See Fix America's Forests, supra n. 1 at 8-13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As with any complex phenomenon, no single factor fully explains
declining forest health or the wildfire crisis. A changing climate has
increased the risk of drought and extended the West's ``wildfire
season.'' \10\ A massive jump in the number of people living near or
recreating in forests has increased opportunities for human-caused
ignitions.\11\ But the largest factor, according to a study by Forest
Service scientists, is excessive forest density and the buildup of
fuels due to a lack of forest management and decades of fire
suppression.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See Burn Back Better, supra n. 1 at 4.
\11\ See id.
\12\ See High-Severity Fire: Evaluating Its Key Drivers and Mapping
Its Probability Across Western US Forests, supra n. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fire is nothing new to western forests, which were traditionally
adapted to flames due to climate, terrain, and Indigenous tribes' use
of controlled fire for millenia.\13\ However, recent catastrophic
wildfires are far more destructive than historical fire regimes. They
are more likely to threaten old-growth trees, wipe out habitat for
wildlife, and cause erosion that degrades watersheds and fish
habitat.\14\ Even mighty giant sequoias, one of the most fire-adapted
tree species, are at risk. The National Park Service estimates that 10-
20 percent of the world's remaining members of this species have been
killed by wildfires since 2020.\15\ Wildfire emissions are also a major
climate concern. California's record wildfire year in 2020, for
example, released twice the amount of carbon emissions than the state
had cut between 2003 and 2019.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Burn Back Better, supra n. 1 at 4.
\14\ See Fix America's Forests, supra n. 1 at 8-10.
\15\ See Dr. Kristen Shive, et al., 2021 Fire Season Impacts to
Giant Sequoias (last visited Mar. 19, 2023).
\16\ Michael Jerrett, Amir S. Jina, Miriam E. Marlier, Up in smoke:
California's greenhouse gas reductions could be wiped out by 2020
wildfires, 300 Env'tl Pollution 119888 (2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2015, for the first time, the United States eclipsed 10 million
acres burned by wildfires in a year--an unfathomable total just a few
decades ago--with the vast majority of that acreage concentrated in the
West. Since then, we have passed that milestone twice more.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ National Interagency Fire Center, ``Total Wildland Fires and
Acres (1983-2022).''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And due to growing populations near forests, modern fires threaten
communities and property in ways not seen before.\18\ Nearly 100,000
structures have burned in wildfires since 2005, with two-thirds of that
destruction occurring since 2017.\19\ California's Camp Fire in 2018,
for example, was the deadliest and most destructive in that state's
history, killing 85 people and destroying most of the town of Paradise
in less than 24 hours.\20\ In my home of Bozeman, our whole city's
water source would be depleted in just three days if our neighboring
forests went up in flames. Yet, despite this risk, the collaboratively
designed Bozeman Municipal Watershed Project was tangled in red tape
and litigation for 15 years before restoration activities could begin.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See Burn Back Better, supra n. 1 at 4.
\19\ Headwaters Economics, Wildfires Destroy Thousands of
Structures Each Year (2022).
\20\ National Institute of Standards & Technology, New Timeline of
Deadliest California Wildfire Could Guide Lifesaving Research and
Action (Feb. 8, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Forest restoration efforts, including mechanical thinning and
prescribed fire, are urgently needed to reduce wildfire damage and
promote forest resilience. The effectiveness of these tools was
demonstrated in 2021 during Oregon's Bootleg Fire, which ultimately
burned more than 400,000 acres (see appendix figure 2).\21\
Firefighters reported that where both treatments had been applied, fire
intensity was reduced, the crowns of trees were left intact, and the
blaze became a more manageable ground fire. Reports also indicated that
an area where scheduled prescribed burns had been delayed suffered more
damage than areas where treatments had been completed.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See Burn Back Better, supra n. 1 at 5.
\22\ See Sara Sutherland & Eric Edwards, How Environmental Red Tape
Inflames Wildfire Risk, PERC Reports (2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Forest Service has simply not been able to keep up with forest
restoration needs. In 2023, the agency completed more hazardous fuels
work than any prior year in its history, treating more than 4.3 million
acres.\23\ The Forest Service is doing the right thing in working to
increase treatments, but with tens of millions of additional acres of
forests in need of restoration, we need to dramatically increase the
pace and scale of this work. The Forest Service's method of tracking
and reporting these acres has historically overstated the agency's
progress at addressing the restoration backlog, which makes it even
more challenging to evaluate how to allocate resources and the
effectiveness of treatments.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ U.S. Forest Service, USDA Forest Service celebrates historic
investments in 2023, (January 23, 2024).
\24\ See Accurately Counting Risk Elimination Solutions (ACRES)
Act, H.R. 1567. See also Adiel Kaplan & Monica Hersher, ``The Forest
Service is Overstating its Wildfire Prevention Progress to Congress
Despite Decades of Warnings Not To,'' NBC News (August 9, 2022); GAO,
Wildland Fire Management: Additional Actions Required to Better
Identify and Prioritize Lands Needing Fuels Reduction (2003).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Overcoming Red Tape

While the good news is we know how to reduce wildfire risk through
forest restoration activities, the bad news is it is exceptionally
difficult to get that work done on the ground and at the scale needed.
Before any chainsaws or drip torches can touch a federal forest, a
restoration project must navigate complex bureaucratic procedures,
including review under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
Depending on the extent of anticipated impacts, NEPA may require the
Forest Service to analyze a project through, in order of increasing
complexity and expense, a categorical exclusion, environmental
assessment, or environmental impact statement. The agency may also need
to develop a range of alternatives to the project and analyze their
impacts as well.
While well-intentioned, extensive NEPA reviews can significantly
increase project costs and inject substantial delays. In PERC's recent
policy report Does Environmental Review Worsen the Wildfire Crisis?,
researchers compiled and analyzed a novel NEPA dataset and found that
the average time to conduct an environmental impact statement is over
2.5 years.\25\ Even a categorical exclusion, which is designed to
exempt a project from stringent environmental review, takes an average
of nine months to complete.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Eric Edwards and Sara Sutherland, Does Environmental Review
Worsen the Wildfire Crisis? How Environmental Analysis Delays Fuel
Treatment Projects, PERC Policy Brief (June 2022).
\26\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NEPA delays contribute substantially to an overall approval and
implementation process that holds up projects for many years. According
to PERC researchers, once the Forest Service initiates the
environmental review process, it takes an average of 3.6 years to
actually begin a mechanical treatment on the ground and 4.7 years to
begin a prescribed burn--and those numbers increase to 5.3 years and
7.2 years, respectively, if an environmental impact statement is
required (see appendix figure 3).\27\ Given the time it takes to
conduct environmental reviews and implement fuel treatments, it is
unlikely that the Forest Service will be able to achieve its goal of
treating an additional 20 million acres over the next 10 years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Evaluating the costs associated with NEPA compliance is challenging
largely because, similar to many other federal agencies, the Forest
Service does not routinely track or report the associated costs and
personnel time.\28\ The Forest Service has, however, historically
identified administrative process barriers as a major factor holding up
forest restoration goals. As a 2002 Forest Service report on The
Process Predicament described it, ``Even noncontroversial projects
often proceed at a snail's pace.'' \29\ In 2022, the Forest Service
likewise concluded that environmental review processes must be
streamlined to give the agency more tools to use prescribed fire to
protect forests and wildlife habitat.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Katie Hoover & Anne Riddle, National Forest System Management:
Overview and Issues for Congress, Congressional Research Service (May
18, 2023).
\29\ U.S. Forest Service, The Process Predicament: How Statutory,
Regulatory, and Administrative Factors Affect National Forest
Management (2002).
\30\ U.S. Forest Service, Nat'l Prescribed Fire Program Review
(2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act

The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act (H.R. 674) is a
bipartisan proposal to add more resources to advance forest restoration
projects through the often-cumbersome environmental review process. For
projects on Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management land that have
been collaboratively developed and meet local and rural community
needs, a sponsor can front the funding for an approved outside
contractor to complete the NEPA analysis for the project and be repaid
through any receipts generated by the project that would otherwise go
to the federal treasury.
The ``A to Z'' Project

The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act builds on the ``A to
Z'' pilot project in the Colville National Forest in Washington.\31\
This innovative project was highlighted in PERC's 2021 Fix America's
Forests report as a way to leverage the value of timber to reduce
bureaucratic burdens.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ See Fix America's Forests, supra n. 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several years ago, the Northeast Washington Forest Coalition, a
collaborative group of public and private partners, was looking to
advance a forest project, but the Colville National Forest did not have
the financial or staff resources to complete environmental reviews for
the project. The coalition proposed allowing timber contractors who
would perform the harvesting and restoration work to also bear the
costs of doing the NEPA analysis. This ``A to Z'' project--so named
because the winning bidder would be responsible for the entire process
from initiating the project, to environmental review, to
implementation--presented the opportunity to use the commercial value
of harvested timber to advance the project and fund forest restoration.
A local sawmill, Vaagen Brothers Lumber, won the 10-year Forest
Service stewardship contract in 2013 to test the privately funded,
publicly managed NEPA process. It subcontracted with a third party to
plan and perform the environmental analysis. To avoid any conflict of
interest, the subcontractor's performance was overseen by agency
personnel rather than Vaagen Brothers. The NEPA analysis was completed
in 2016, and the Vaagen Brothers began commercial thinning operations
on more than 4,500 acres of national forest lands that contain excess
wildfire fuels.
With a mill that can process small-diameter trees and nearby
processing facilities that can turn that timber into laminated building
products, the contract provides Vaagen Brothers with a supply of
merchantable wood products. In exchange, the terms of the stewardship
contract also require that the private company rehabilitate streams,
replace culverts, restore roads, and control noxious weeds, leaving the
forest ecosystem more resilient to insects and disease, enhanced
wildlife habitat, and a substantially reduced risk for severe wildfire.
How It Works

The Root and Stem Project Authorization Act establishes a formal
process for a project sponsor to provide the Forest Service and Bureau
of Land Management upfront funding to hire an approved contractor to
conduct the NEPA analysis for a collaboratively designed restoration
project. It also adds the requirement that receipts generated by the
project can be used to repay the sponsor instead of being deposited
into the general fund of the treasury. Building on the success of the
``A to Z'' project, this approach could substantially speed up needed
activities while freeing up agency resources and personnel for other
projects.
The Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management can currently
contract with non-federal parties for environmental analysis and accept
outside funds to pay for that review, as demonstrated by the ``A to Z''
project.\32\ The significant reform that the Root and Stem Project
Authorization Act would make is to allow a project's timber revenues to
reimburse the party who funds the environmental review. This
improvement would create more opportunity and motivation for forest
collaboratives, conservation organizations, timber companies, and other
entities who would benefit from the restoration project to provide the
initial funding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ 40 CFR Sec. 1507.2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under this proposal, the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land
Management would maintain an approved list of non-federal, third-party
contractors in each state that the agency can hire to complete NEPA
analyses and any consultations required under the Endangered Species
Act. For forest restoration projects that have been collaboratively
developed on federal lands, a project sponsor could propose a
stewardship contract and provide the federal land management agency
with the funding to hire one of the approved contractors to conduct the
necessary project analysis. Once the project was approved, the federal
land manager would have to solicit bids to carry out the project and
use any available receipts generated by the project to repay the
sponsor.
Though outside parties would be providing upfront funding and
completing the environmental review documents, the federal land
management agency would still retain authority over the environmental
review and the project. Additionally, the relevant secretary would
still be required to determine the sufficiency of any documents and
authorize the project to proceed.
Improving Forest Restoration

At a time of great need for more forest restoration activities, the
Root and Stem Project Authorization Act would bring more resources to
the table to get important work done. Bringing in outside funding will
not only benefit the collaborative projects reviewed under the Root and
Stem authority but will also allow limited Forest Service and Bureau of
Land Management resources to be spent on other priorities. Ultimately,
more needed forest restoration projects--both ones that do and do not
generate revenues--will make it through the environmental review
process so that work can begin on the ground to reduce fuel-loading and
protect our forest ecosystems from catastrophic wildfires.
This tool is a voluntary approach that can certainly help advance
collaborative projects in areas of need. Beyond adding additional
financial and human capacity to the environmental review process, this
opportunity also recognizes and rewards collaboration on forest
projects and maintains federal oversight. Congress should explicitly
grant the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management the ability
to have outside parties pay for contractors to conduct the
environmental review analysis and documentation for forest projects so
more restoration work can begin in the forests.
Conclusion

Solving the wildfire crisis requires more forest restoration work.
Environmental reviews are a major hindrance to achieving that goal. The
Root and Stem Project Authorization Act is a bipartisan and bicameral
proposal that would help bring in additional funding and capacity to
the environmental review process, freeing up other federal resources to
conduct even more needed projects. Congress should act now to authorize
this tool to help fix America's forests.

Appendix

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Federal Emergency Management Agency wildfire risk index
rates a community's relative risk for wildfire. The map above displays
FEMA wildfire risk by census tract for the 11 western states.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As the Bootleg Fire ripped through the Fremont-Winema National
Forest in southern Oregon in 2021, firefighters reported that in places
where prescribed fires and forest thinning had been carried out, flames
returned to the ground, where they moved slower, did less damage, and
were easier to fight.  S. Rondeau/Klamath Tribes' Natural Resource
Department

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The timeline for a U.S. Forest Service fuel treatment project
includes the following steps: Initiation of the NEPA environmental
review process, NEPA decision, first on-the-ground activity (often an
inventory of fuels or similar preparation step) begins and, finally,
treatment begins. Once the Forest Service initiates the environmental
review process, it takes an average of 3.6 years (1,325 days) to begin
a mechanical treatment. Prescribed burns average 4.7 years (1,711 days)
from initiation to beginning of treatment. For both types of treatment,
projects that require rigorous review in the form of an environmental
impact statement take significantly longer to begin on average: 5.3
years (1,924 days) in the case of mechanical treatments and 7.2 years
(2,643 days) in the case of prescribed burns.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Ms. Downey, thank you very much for your
testimony. Now, I turn to Mr. Bentz for questioning for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I wish I had more
time, because I have questions for all of you, but I don't have
enough time for that.
Mr. Munsey, the roads you are speaking about, the bridges,
all of that, you must be incredibly challenged to try to keep
up with the sheer demand for what needs to be done. I am just
curious what it would really take to get back to a point of
actually being able to protect people by having the roads, the
bridges, all those systems actually in place.
Mr. Munsey. Yes, sir. First I want to thank our San
Bernardino National Forest, the road that I discussed, while
they don't have funds to repair it, we have been able to work
with them. And actually, I don't think it is the fund, I think
it is the people that they need. But they have been able to get
us supplies, the culvert, the metal that we need to repair
those roads.
These roads are on Federal jurisdiction. So, the question
is probably better to Mr. Smith of what it would take. Again, I
think that he is right, that 2 years is very ambitious.
However, I think I am right, too. Some of these roads that I
have experienced as a firefighter have been closed for 5 years,
10 years, 15 years, 20 years. These aren't roads that are
closed due to lack of will to do maintenance; these roads are
closed because they are being abandoned for one reason or
another, and they are hampering our firefighting efforts.
Mr. Bentz. Right. And there is a suggestion in the county I
live in. The county itself is 9 million acres in size, and
there is a suggestion that a couple of million of it be made
into a wilderness area, or a monument with no access. It
happens that most of that area is rangeland, not trees, but the
issue is the same: you can't get there from here unless you
have appropriate roads that have been appropriately maintained.
Otherwise, you are kind of out of luck. So, that issue is huge.
I am going to shift to Ms. Downey, and you heard me asking
questions of the Forest Service. And I am just curious if, same
question, if you had your way, how would you fix the forest
tomorrow?
Ms. Downey. There is definitely a lot of work to be done,
Congressman.
As I stated, we have an 80 million-acre backlog of needed
forest restoration work that is contributing to this wildfire
crisis. There are a lot of factors that go into it.
One, which the Root and Stem Project Authorization Act does
help to address, is the capacity. We need more resources going
to this problem, and external partners are going to be
essential to getting that done.
The second is also what we have alluded to on the NEPA
problem, and getting more projects approved. It is a huge lift
to get these projects through the approval process. And then
add on litigation, and we are looking at about an additional 2
years of delay. When all of those pieces combine, it is taking
up an excessive amount of time that we simply don't have when
we need to tackle this wildfire crisis.
Mr. Bentz. Speaker Gingrich, who I met with a number of
times now, suggests that the only way to get anything done is
to change public opinion. So, in your opinion, how would you go
about sharing with the nation the challenge that we are all
dealing with?
And to that end, I will just say in the largest part of my
district, which is the Medford area in southern Oregon, there
are about 300,000 people. And I guarantee you right now those
folks, all of them, know they have a problem because they can't
breathe during August and September. It is bad. And for a
while, we had smoke from Oregon going over this building right
here 3 years ago, and that gave us an opportunity to say, hey,
this is a wreck.
What is your organization doing to try to bring this
incredible challenge to the attention of the nation?
Ms. Downey. Congressman, you are absolutely correct that
public opinion is essential on this problem.
One of the things that we are working really actively to do
is to try to help educate and inform the public on what
actually is a healthy forest. For so long, we have gotten to
this place where all fires have been suppressed, we haven't
been conducting the mechanical thinning and prescribed burn
work that is needed to restore the health of these forests. So,
people go into the forest and they see them chock full of trees
and dead fall and overgrowth, and we just kind of think that is
what it is, when in reality we need to be actively clearing out
some of those fuels.
So, part of our mission at PERC is to try to better shape
that narrative of what actually is a healthy forest. It is good
for people to be in there and engaging and doing some of this
needed work.
And then, to your exact point, that is what then helps
prevent those negative impacts around the country. When our
forests burn in Montana, it is not just Montana that suffers,
it is the smoke that travels across the country and harms all
of us.
Mr. Bentz. It certainly does. Let me, with the few seconds
I have left, we have been trying to coordinate a messaging
system. My personal goal is 10 million people. So, if you have
interest, or any of you have interest, in joining us in that
effort so we can get these kind of messages out, please let us
know.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would turn to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. I thank the Chairman. Again, thank you to all
the witnesses for being here today and for your written
testimony and your oral testimony.
Ms. Roman, thank you so much for making the journey and
joining us here today. As I mentioned in my opening statement,
we granted the Town of Minturn--we, the United States
Congress--granted non-motorized access for the Bolts Ditch in
2019 through the Dingell Act. You touched on this during your
testimony, but I am wondering if you can just expound a bit on
why this particular legislation is necessary to expand access
to the Eagle River Water and Sanitation District.
And I guess more broadly, what benefits do you think would
flow from this particular change to Eagle County writ large?
Ms. Roman. I think that is a good choice of word, the word
``flow.''
What we are requesting is just very simple, that Minturn
already has the access to do the maintenance needed on this
historic Bolts Ditch and the diversion structure. And since we
recently bought the property and the rights to redevelop Bolts
Lake, all it is is adding our name onto that. So, it is very
simple.
But the benefits at large of this project are very far
reaching. As we know, the water picture is very variable in the
West. It ties to the forest fires. And what this will do is
help us store that snowmelt so that we can release it because
it is drier, warmer. We are having longer summers. And then we
can release those flows and augment our rivers in the fall. And
really, the whole Colorado system will benefit from this
project.
Mr. Neguse. Well, I couldn't agree more. And given my
statements that this is a simple bill, I will hesitate to ask
any further questions on this subject and complicate it, and
will simply say that I think the bill makes a lot of sense, and
I am hoping that we can get it done in short order.
And I thank you for being here. And, of course, to all the
witnesses, again, for their respective testimonies.
And I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. The Chairman is going to
use his prerogative. Mr. Bentz said he had more than 5 minutes
for questioning.
And we will give you another few minutes.
Mr. Bentz. You are very kind, Mr. Chair. Thank you so much.
Mr. Tallier, on the issue of gravel, I had in my law
practice back in Oregon lots of occasion to try to help people
expand their gravel pit operations. And in Oregon it is
extraordinarily difficult. Their neighbors don't like those
kinds of activities and, for whatever reason, people have
forgotten the absolute necessity of aggregate. I don't know
what they think roads are made out of, but the gravel is a
pretty essential element.
I am just curious. In this 10 acres that you are asking
for, as I understand it, you are asking for 10 acres or 14,
whatever the number is. That is adjacent to an existing gravel
pit, is that correct?
Mr. Tallier. Correct. It is really right next to it. It is
14 acres and it is right there, so it is just amazing how close
it would be, and we could keep on working, you know what I am
saying?
And when I look at the 340,000 other acres that the Forest
Service has, and we have to look at that big picture. And 14
acres, I just think that we could just do it and get it over
with.
Mr. Bentz. Right. And I am with you completely on that,
because if you can keep that activity in one place, you don't
have to go through the disruption that happens to a community
when you move to some other place to continue the effort to
find gravel. I am very happy to support the bill.
I want to shift to appraisers for a moment. Again, I have
dealt with appraisers a lot. There has been a dramatic change
after the debacle back in 2008. And I am just curious. When you
are talking about a shortage of appraisers, but now that seems
to be overcome, was that just as to a government agency or was
that nationwide? I am just curious.
Ms. Adomatis. Well, the shortage of appraisers is
nationwide. We have an aging group of appraisers currently that
are certified to appraise. And that is why the Appraisal
Institute has taken a proactive approach to bring the next
generation of appraisers forward.
Mr. Bentz. Yes, an absolutely essential function. And I am
happy you are here to share with us your thinking on the bill.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Stauber, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank you for
convening this hearing, and I want to thank the bills' sponsors
for introducing these pieces of common-sense legislation that
will enable communities across the nation to better manage our
public lands.
The district that I represent in northern Minnesota is home
to great timberland, including on Federal lands like the
Chippewa and Superior National Forests. Like many rural
districts across the country, we face serious risks from
wildfires if our forests are not properly managed.
The Chippewa and Superior National Forests are not
currently meeting their timber harvesting goals. While there
are several reasons why this is the case, it is abundantly
clear we need to be working more collaboratively together,
involving Federal, state, local, tribal, and private entities.
That is why I am a large proponent of expanding tools like Good
Neighbor Authority or promoting root and stem projects, which
Representative Newhouse's legislation would authorize.
Our broken and lengthy NEPA permitting regime should not be
an excuse as to why we are not taking part in proper forest
management. It is clear our Federal land managers, just like so
many in private industries across this nation, are being
overburdened by the NEPA process. Representative Newhouse's
legislation would take a small step to help alleviate that
burden on our land managers by enabling qualified private
contractors to lead the NEPA process while still ensuring we
are achieving the highest possible environmental standards.
Ms. Downey, in your written testimony you share the
successes of the A to Z pilot project on the Colville National
Forest in Washington State, which was led by a local sawmill.
Can you expand upon this, specifically how having a private
entity like the local sawmill was able to increase
collaboration and result in a more fit-for-purpose project that
reduced wildfire risk while serving the needs of the local
communities?
Ms. Downey. Congressman Stauber, you are absolutely correct
that, in the A to Z Project, the pilot project that spawned
this Root and Stem Project Authorization Act, the private
company there was absolutely essential in getting that project
off the ground. They were able to provide the initial funding,
help get that third-party contractor to get the NEPA analysis
done, and then go in and actually do a lot of the work on the
ground.
So much of this comes back to the point you were making
that we have this massive restoration backlog on our Federal
lands, and we are going to need external resources and partners
to be able to get that done. With the Root and Stem Project
Authorization Act, it reinforces that mechanism through which
those private companies can help provide the resources to get
that done, and then also be a true partner in actually going on
to the landscape and getting that mechanical treatment done to
reduce that excessive fuels load.
Mr. Stauber. Do you think this project would have been
completed if it were not for the private company coming in and
leading the project, or would the work have ended up on the
Forest Service's project backlog?
Ms. Downey. Congressman, in the A to Z situation, the
Vaagen Brothers Timber Company, their involvement in this
really came about because the Colville National Forest did not
have the resources to get this project done quickly. It was a
collaboratively-designed project. The timber company was a part
of it, the Forest Service and other local groups identifying
this as a huge priority need for their community. So, the
timber company stepping up and saying, ``We would like to help
provide the resources and get the work done,'' that was
essential in getting that across the finish line.
Mr. Stauber. Once again, the private sector doing well.
Thank you.
Timber harvesting is one of the largest and most important
industries in northern Minnesota. I think that the communities
I represent would be greatly serviced by having root and stem
projects. It would be another opportunity for the timber stock
to drive a vitally important part of our local economy, while
advancing forest health and conducting important forest
management. This bill is a great tool for our communities and
national forests, and I am proud to support it.
Mr. Chair, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields, and I am going to take a
few minutes to ask questions here. First, I want to start with
Mr. Tallier, the Supervisor from Forest County.
You are a former U.S. Forest Service employee, is that
correct?
Mr. Tallier. Yes it is. I put in 20-plus years, plus my
wife put in 25. So, yes, we have been involved with the Forest
Service a long time.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you see this project, this 14 acres that
is contiguous with the existing aggregate pit that is there,
you see it within the context of Forest County, being a County
Supervisor as well as being a former Forest Service employee,
you see it through all of those perspectives. Is that accurate?
Mr. Tallier. Accurate, and I thank you for that because
this whole thing is really common sense. It is a hill, it is
right there by the existing pit. And 14 acres--and I am not
sure what the Forest Service plan would be for it, I mean to do
with just that 14 acres.
So, it just seems to me that it is common sense to get rid
of it and let economic development continue in Forest County.
Mr. Tiffany. So, having this 14 acres go to be able to
produce aggregate, it doesn't jeopardize any of the operations
or any of the goals that the Forest Service has with their
hundreds of thousands of acres, is that accurate?
Mr. Tallier. To me, nothing.
Mr. Tiffany. And if this goes away, let say this ready mix
operation went away. What would be the impact to the local
community, including for public projects?
So, you have the U.S. Forest Service. They conduct projects
occasionally, right?
Mr. Tallier. Right.
Mr. Tiffany. You have the Forest County Potawatomi that are
right there with operations right in that immediate area in
Wabeno. What happens to the cost of construction if this is not
approved?
Mr. Tallier. Well, the thing is, about this ready mix
plant, if this closes down, then the next one is probably 50
miles to the south, 40 miles to the southwest, and then there
is another one 25 miles north. So, I mean, you are talking a
major impact.
Mr. Tiffany. If I recall accurately, they would be getting
their aggregate or their concrete at that point from either
Eagle River, Rhinelander, Antigo, places that are a long ways
away.
Mr. Tallier. A long ways. Yes, exactly. So, it is really
important that we keep this company going where it is at,
everything is in place.
And I don't know these exact numbers, but when you deal
with this many employees and this many trucks coming in and
out, different small businesses, it could be over $1 million a
year as far as the investment, everybody around the area, you
know what I am saying? So, it is really important that we keep
this business going.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, I would emphasize--I mean, we certainly
have the private sector. I just think of these public-sector
projects that they want to complete. It will cost more to
complete them if we do not have a source of concrete, a source
of aggregate like that.
Ms. Downey, I want to ask a very specific question, and I
know you guys work with sportsmen's organizations, and that is
really a big part of America, is the opportunity for sportsmen.
And when it comes to corner crossings, it is my
understanding that you guys have done a lot of work where you
have this checkerboard of public and private lands. Could you
please explain this issue with corner crossings, and how
legislation that streamlines parts of the land conveyance
process, such as Representative Lee's bill, could assist in
opening up access?
Ms. Downey. Chairman Tiffany, in the West we have a unique
situation, as you have described, called the checkerboarded
land situation, wherein, similar to a checkerboard, you have
public parcels of land, largely Federal land, where they touch
at a corner but not along the edge. So, imagine a checkerboard.
Part of it is public, part of it is private.
The question begins as sportsmen, recreationists,
conservationists want to be able to expand their access to
those public lands, how do you get from one piece of public
across the corner to another piece of public?
One side of the argument sees it as public access, the
other side sees it as crossing that line, trespassing on
private property. So, it is a really complicated land
jurisdictional issue. So, pieces like improving the appraisal
process so that we can try to negotiate exchanges or to
facilitate access agreements so that we are respecting property
rights while still promoting access are going to be really
important and help solve a big Western access issue.
Mr. Tiffany. I appreciate that.
Ms. Adomatis, do you have anything you would like to add to
that?
Ms. Adomatis. No, but I will say that this AACE Act will
help speed up the ability for them to get appraisals in these
instances where they need appraisals on access.
Mr. Tiffany. It goes back to the fundamental issue of the
bill that is before us. Is that right?
Ms. Adomatis. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, for sure.
Ms. Roman, in the district that you chair, what is your
official title again, once again?
Ms. Roman. General Manager.
Mr. Tiffany. General Manager--that you operate, is there
water used in that area for the ski resorts and things?
What is the water all used that you manage, what is it used
for?
Ms. Roman. The water that we manage is mostly used for
domestic and outdoor irrigation, but of course you can imagine
the Town of Vail, when it was developed, it was largely
developed by the ski resorts. It was all around the same time.
But our water is largely used for outdoor irrigation and for
drinking.
And then we also treat the water and return clean water
back to the streams.
Mr. Tiffany. OK. And it does help you provide to your
constituents to have more water storage. Is that accurate?
Ms. Roman. Yes.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, because it sounds like it is a somewhat
complex issue that is before us in regards to the Bolts Ditch.
Ms. Roman. I think what is before you is probably very
simple, but water in the West is very complex.
Mr. Tiffany. Always. Us Midwesterners, when we come to
Congress and we deal with natural resources, we find that out
real fast.
Finally, Mr. Munsey, based on your testimony, it sounds
like these issues before us that we are talking about today,
they are life and death issues. Is that right?
Mr. Munsey. Yes, sir. I also want to point out again that
not only life and death with wildfire or secondary emergencies,
but as your all-hazard fire department responding to Federal
land, these are often things like all-terrain vehicles, people
riding horses, lost hikers, people going into mine shafts. And
being able to access these individuals quickly can very likely
lead to life or death.
Mr. Tiffany. Do you folks try to prevent fires or try to
stop fires before they spread?
Mr. Munsey. Yes, sir. As I mentioned, we responded to
196,000 calls for service last year. Again, those are
considered failures. While we are really good at responding,
our primary job is to prevent.
In our local jurisdiction, I have my Division Chief of
Wildland behind me. His wildland crews spend hours in and
around our communities with community chipper days, cutting
fire breaks, doing inspections on private homes. But there is a
great deal of effort that is expended on the local government
to keep our communities safe.
Mr. Tiffany. So, per what we are talking about here today,
what is stopping you from preventing some of those fires?
Mr. Munsey. Well, as we mentioned, it is not just fires. It
is the all-hazard nature that is going to occur on Federal
land. But I would say here is where we have improved in the
last couple of years. CAL FIRE, the U.S. Forest Service, the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, BLM have all been working a lot
closer with County Fire to ensure that the efforts that we are
putting in are congruent.
A few years ago, we would see a patchwork quilt, where
maybe the Forest Service would take a project that was in the
middle of the forest, and then our county fire would take a
project that is in the county areas. We weren't working
together, and I think that has continued to move that forward.
The second is to continue to fund these projects.
The third, and I want to emphasize this, and I know it is
not in this Committee's purview, you need to pay your Federal
firefighters. There has been a massive loss of experience from
individuals that are going to work anywhere but the U.S. Forest
Service. CAL FIRE is hiring many of them. In Congresswoman
Kim's area in the Cleveland National Forest, 25 percent of the
stations 25 percent of the time are staffed. If you don't have
that workforce in place, then it is really hard for the Federal
Government to do its part in maintaining these fuel breaks and
working with local agencies to prevent these fires.
Mr. Tiffany. So, the burden ends up falling on you and
departments like yours. Is that accurate?
Mr. Munsey. Yes, sir. As I mentioned, about $13 million is
spent from local taxpayers to respond. There is much more money
that is spent from us to protect our communities, which is our
responsibility.
We also use our hand crews to augment the Federal hand
crews on their projects for free, because we know that if we
can minimize the impact of fire in the natural resources, that
we can keep that from going into our communities.
Mr. Tiffany. We have had organizations in this country,
well known organizations, that have fought tooth and nail to
prevent access. And as a result, maybe they didn't do it
intentionally, but the ultimate result was that we have had
these massive fires as a result of not taking the proper
approach to it. Is that turning in the West?
Mr. Munsey. Not from my perspective, sir. I think
everybody's intentions are correct, and they want to be
environmentally friendly and they want to protect our natural
resources, and I can certainly align with those viewpoints.
However, we need to make sure that we are doing our half to
make sure that our first responders can access these
emergencies quickly.
I would also take note that these individuals that complain
about maintaining room through the forest, the moment their
cell phone is not working they are going to be calling your
office and every elected official's office complaining about
it. Literally, as I recounted a story in our snowstorm where we
could not access the repeaters, the utilities went out and
40,000 people were without utilities. We had to fuel those
generators, but we couldn't make access on the road.
So, those things need to stop in order to protect the
public and make sure that they are able to access needed
service.
Mr. Tiffany. I am taking you back one more time. What
prevented access to that road in the situation that you just
highlighted?
Mr. Munsey. Maintenance. That road had not been maintained
for years.
Again, the U.S. Forest Service is now working with San
Bernardino County Fire. We are putting our heavy equipment and
our crews working with our department that maintains a repeater
on top of one of the mountains in order to be able to repair
that road. The U.S. Forest Service has been great at getting us
the supplies we need to maintain it, and getting the CEs to do
it. But for years leading up to that, that road had not been
maintained. We could not even drive it in a tracked vehicle, a
snowcat, to get up there because of the maintenance and the
slide, the rockslides that occurred on that particular roadway.
Mr. Tiffany. Well, I would like to thank all the witnesses
for your testimony today. It is greatly appreciated.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you, and we will ask that you respond to those in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Subcommittee
must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Monday, February 5, 2024. Somebody has 2023 here yet. I will
have to tease him.
The hearing record will be held open for 10 business days
for those responses.
I made that same mistake writing checks. Of course, these
young people don't write checks anymore, do they?
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
