- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EMPOWERING LOCAL VOICES AND STOPPING FEDERAL. OVERREACH TO IMPROVE THE MANAGEMENT OF UTAH'S PUBLIC LANDS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EMPOWERING LOCAL VOICES AND
TOPPING FEDERAL OVERREACH
TO IMPROVE THE MANAGEMENT OF
UTAH'S PUBLIC LANDS

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Monday, April 22, 2024, in Hurricane, Utah

__________

Serial No. 118-113

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-494 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Monday, April 22, 2024...........................     1

Statement of Members:

Curtis, Hon. John R., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Utah..............................................     3
Maloy, Hon. Celeste, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Utah..............................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:

Snow, Honorable Adam, Commissioner, Washington County, St.
George, Utah...............................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Clarke, Honorable Eric, County Attorney, Washington County,
St. George, Utah...........................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Braceras, Carlos, Executive Director, Utah Department of
Transportation, Taylorsville, Utah.........................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Renstrom, Zachary, General Manager, Washington County Water
Conservancy District, St. George, Utah.....................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Stewart, Darcy, President and CEO, Sunriver St. George
Development, LLC, St. George, Utah.........................    27
Prepared statement of....................................    28

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Maloy

Utah Department of Wildlife Resources, Statement for the
Record.................................................    41

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EMPOWERING LOCAL VOICES AND STOPPING FEDERAL.
OVERREACH TO IMPROVE THE MANAGEMENT OF UTAH'S PUBLIC LANDS

----------

Monday, April 22, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Hurricane, Utah

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 12:03 p.m., at
The Rock Bowl, 5665 West Clubhouse Drive, Hurricane, Utah, Hon.
John R. Curtis [Vice Chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.

Present: Representative Curtis.
Also present: Representatives Maloy and Moore of Utah.

Mr. Curtis. Good afternoon.
I would like to welcome everybody to an official
Subcommittee on Federal Lands oversight hearing entitled,
``Empowering Local Voices and Stopping Federal Overreach to
Improve Management of Utah's Public Lands.''
My name is John Curtis, and I represent Utah's 3rd
Congressional District. I also serve as the Vice Chairman of
the Federal Lands Subcommittee in Washington.
I would like to thank the newest member of Utah's
Congressional Delegation, Congresswoman Maloy, for inviting the
Natural Resources Committee to hold this important hearing in
her district.
By the way, I am told that this is the largest crowd that
we have enjoyed in one of these field hearings before. So,
thank you to all of you for showing up.
[Applause.]
Mr. Curtis. I would also like to thank The Rock Bowl for
hosting us today and providing the perfect backdrop for our
hearing. Can you imagine anywhere better in the United States?
We are so fortunate to live here. Thank you.
It is not in my script because they wrote it, but I also
need to give a shout-out to the staff of the Natural Resources
Committee who have put a lot of work in today's hearing, flown
from Washington to be here. So, big shout-out to them and
thanks for their help.
[Applause.]
Mr. Curtis. The Subcommittee is gathered here today to hold
an official hearing examining Federal overreach that is
limiting access to Utah's public lands and to discuss solutions
that would give Utah a greater say in how these lands are
managed.
Now, I think it is important, I have said the word
``official'' a couple of times, because this is an official
proceeding under the Rules of the House. That doesn't give us
very much flexibility in how we do things.
I would also like to note, you will notice that there are
three Members that I will introduce here in a minute from the
House of Representatives.
All of the members of the Natural Resources Committee, both
Republicans and Democrats, were invited to today's hearing. The
Committee generously offered to pay for transportation here.
So, the fact that they are not here does not mean they weren't
invited. It just simply means a choice.
They also have the ability to submit their testimonies for
the record. So, even though they may not be here today, they
can do that as well.
Before we begin, I would like to remind everybody about the
rules of decorum for official congressional proceedings.
I ask that there not be any kind of disruption regarding
the testimony given here today. It is important that we respect
the Rules of the Committee and of the House and allow all the
Members and the public to hear our proceedings.
If you missed it, there are ways for you to comment. There
were comment cards as you walked in, if you didn't get one,
those will also become part of the official record, and we
encourage everybody to do that.
We would now like to be led in the Pledge of Allegiance by
County Commissioner Bruce Adams.
Mr. Adams. Please join me in the pledge.
[Group recitation of Pledge of Allegiance.]
Mr. Curtis. Thank you.
I would now like to invite Mr. Jimi Kestin, a member of the
Interfaith Council and a pastor here in Washington, to lead us
in prayer.
Mr. Kestin. Let us pray.
My gracious and merciful Heavenly Father, we are so
grateful to be in this amazing place that you have given us to
live in southern Utah, and we welcome our Representatives from
other parts of the state and our Congressperson here for this
hearing.
We lift up all those in elected office at the Federal,
state, and local level regardless of party, that you would put
a hand of protection upon them, keep their families safe.
We lift up all those who have put their names in during
this election season for elected office at every level of
government, Lord, that we would have an election season that
uplifts the values that represent this nation and then we would
have peace and prosperity.
We pray this in the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.
Mr. Curtis. Amen. Thank you so much.
The official proceedings do not allow for much of an
introduction, but we do have a number of elected officials that
are here today, and I would like to just ask them to stand for
a minute to be recognized.
Our county and our city and any state elected officials, if
you would just stand and let us recognize you.
[Applause.]
Mr. Curtis. Thank you for being here.
Now a few housekeeping items.
One of the very first things I intend to do is take off my
jacket and I welcome our witnesses to also, you notice they are
all in navy blue. So, please feel comfortable.
For those of you who are not in this gracious shade that we
have, please, there is water over there. Let's make sure nobody
gets too warm or too hot today in today's hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Committee at any time. I ask unanimous consent
that the following Members be allowed to participate in today's
hearing from the dais: the gentleman and gentlewoman from Utah,
Mr. Moore and Ms. Maloy.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statement at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for the opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOHN R. CURTIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Curtis. Before I do, the format of this is one that we
follow in Washington, DC, and doesn't really allow for public
comment. I understand that might be frustrating to some of you,
so I can tell you that personally, I will be able to stay after
and would love to talk to any of you and hear any feedback that
you have.
To the extent that their time allows, I offer that same
opportunity for my two colleagues to the right. And please know
that we do want to hear everybody's comments, but the format
today does not allow for public comment.
I want to begin by thanking the people of Washington County
for hosting us here today in what is truly a remarkable venue.
I would also like to thank my colleague, Representative
Maloy, for inviting the Natural Resources Committee to hold
this.
As I am sure everyone is aware, today is Earth Day. It is
entirely fitting that we are gathered outside for this hearing.
Earth Day reminds us of how fortunate we are as Utahns to live
amongst such astounding natural beauty and of the unparalleled
opportunities that exist in this state for enjoying the great
outdoors.
Yet, these opportunities face significant threats. There
are many outside our state pushing policies that prevent people
from fully enjoying access to their public lands.
Roughly two-thirds of Utah is federally owned. Stop and
think about that just for a moment. We have counties with over
90 percent Federal ownership. Imagine trying to run a county
when 90 percent of your property doesn't pay property tax and
you can't control what happens.
So, any burdensome restriction or red tape limiting access
has a disproportionate impact on our state's residents and can
substantially reduce their quality of life. In the most rural
part of my district, over 90 percent of certain counties are
public lands.
Across our state, Federal mismanagement and overreach has
raised housing costs, starved local governments of needed tax
revenues, limited economic opportunities, and deprived
residents of the ability to engage in multiple uses of nearby
public lands.
Utahns know best how to manage these lands, and I will
continue to fight to increase their stewardship of them in
their own backyard.
Take the housing issue, for instance. Utah currently
suffers from the seventh-highest housing prices in the nation.
Between 2017 and 2022, only a 5-year period, the average price
of a home in Utah nearly doubled.
Our state leaders have taken big strides to counteract this
crisis, but there is only so much that can be done when the
Federal Government owns so much land.
In fact, a recent study showed that if the Federal
Government were to free up a mere 0.1 percent of all its land
holdings, less than one-tenth of 1 percent, for residential
development, housing would become newly affordable for 4.7
million Americans. That would address 35 percent of Utah's
housing shortages.
This is why I introduced the HOUSES Act, with Senator Lee,
to allow local governments to nominate certain parcels to build
affordable housing. These are areas ripe for development,
lacking any conservation value, and going completely unutilized
due to Federal law.
My bill is just one piece of the puzzle but a critical one
to support local governments who are completely surrounded by
Federal land with economic development.
Washington County has done an incredible job accommodating
the people moving into this area at a historic rate. They need
all the tools available with no Federal red tape as they work
to lower water consumption to accommodate this growing
population, a truly incredible feat by one of the fastest-
growing counties in the country.
The Federal Government has also disregarded collaboration,
to instead use the deeply divisive Antiquities Act. These
actions happen at the whim of the sitting President with barely
any consultation or regard for Utahns who live closest to the
boundaries of these monuments.
Despite having the most to lose from these preservationist
policies, the voices have routinely fallen on deaf ears of the
fairway in DC. This Federal intrusion jeopardizes the very
freedoms of outdoor lifestyles that attracted so many to Utah
in the first place.
Not long ago, the Federal Government proudly advanced
policies that encouraged state and local interests out West.
Our farmers, ranchers, energy production, and cities flourished
as a direct result. That is what we mean when we talk about
conservation, empowering local communities who live closest to
these lands, to steward them in an environmentally and
economically responsible way, and those ideas don't have to be
mutually exclusive.
If we are to restore any semblance of that arrangement, we
will have to begin by empowering local communities like
Hurricane and St. George.
To that end, I am proud to have led the various initiatives
that would stop Federal overreach and put Utah back in the
driver's seat on conservation.
This includes legislation that I introduced last year
called the Western Economic Security Today Act, or WEST Act,
which passed out of the Natural Resources Committee and will
soon head to the House Floor.
My bill would permanently withdraw the BLM's so-called
Public Lands Rule. This rule, which the BLM finalized just 4
days ago, undermines the agency's statutory multiple-use
mandate and limits access to Utah's public lands for energy and
mineral development, grazing, forest management, and
recreation.
The rule favors wealthy individuals and environmental
groups by creating a new, convoluted leasing system that will
allow them to lock up lands that belong to all Utahns.
I sent a letter nearly 1 year ago to 13 of my Natural
Resources colleagues asking the agency to hold more public
listening sessions on this rule, including holding a session
for Utahns. The agency ignored this request and finalized this
rule without hearing from you.
The combination of these two rules would fundamentally
upend multiple uses of our lands and the Western way of life.
Any new use of Federal lands should be initiated by Congress,
not the will of one person.
By advancing this legislation, we are promoting true
conservation rooted in local input, rather than preservationist
policies handed down by the Biden administration.
I also never hesitate to brag that Utah has robust energy
and mineral production on public lands, some of the cleanest in
the world. This production on public lands is critical to
everything from funds for Utah schools and ensuring the
domestic supply.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today, and
I look forward to the insights that each of you will bring to
this important discussion.
With that, I will now recognize Representative Maloy for
her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CELESTE MALOY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF UTAH

Ms. Maloy. I am really excited to be here today. I feel
like lightning has struck me twice. This is the second time
that I have participated in a congressional field hearing in
Washington County on these same issues.
Our bureaucracy is broken, and I am really grateful that
you are all here to be part of this because it matters.
Participation matters. How many people show up and pay
attention to what is happening to our lands and in Washington,
DC, really matters.
In the early 2000s, Washington County stepped up to be the
poster child for cooperation when it comes to public lands
management and access. Washington County went to the bargaining
table with environmental groups, with the Federal Government,
with state agencies, with all of the stakeholders, and worked
out a compromise bill.
It was called the Washington County Lands Bill, and it
became part of OPLMA, the 2009 Omnibus Lands Bill, signed by
President Obama. This is not a right-wing attempt at limiting
any environmental protections on land.
In that bill, the Red Cliffs NCA, National Conservation
Area, was created. In the same bill, the Secretary of the
Interior was ordered to work with Washington County and St.
George City to find a route for a Northern Corridor, a route
from east to west in Washington County that has been part of
the county's transportation plan for decades.
That was one of the things they bargained for in this bill,
signed into law, passed by Congress. That was in 2009. It is
2024, and we are still sitting here talking about this bill.
In early 2016, we had a congressional field hearing at the
Dixie Center and asked BLM why their new resource management
plan didn't have any good alternatives for a Northern Corridor
route, and we were told that they were told to consider it, and
they had considered it, and decided that they didn't want to do
it.
That isn't what agencies are supposed to do in response to
laws passed by Congress. So, here we are again, talking about
the same thing.
We got a record of decision at the end of the last
Administration allowing for that route, and as soon as we got a
new Administration, they immediately repealed the record of
decision, and now we are in a lawsuit, all so that people in
this county can have a route that has been part of their
transportation plan for decades, for which they bargained, they
came to the table in good faith and bargained for this route.
Additionally, there is a lot of information out there about
what a road through an NCA would do, how it should be illegal,
how it would be harmful to tortoises.
Even though Congress, who has the authority over public
land, decided in the same piece of legislation that a
conservation area and a route were compatible, we are still
having this argument with bureaucrats, unelected bureaucrats,
who don't come hold these hearings, who aren't hearing from
you, who aren't accountable, who you can't vote out of office.
To make this work, the county worked with the State
Institutional Trust Lands and with local governments, with the
state, and offered up what we call Zone 6, a 3,000-acre piece
of land here in Washington County that has as dense of tortoise
habitat as any tortoise habitat that has been preserved since
the 1990s, in exchange for a road that would impact about 150
acres. So, 3,000 acres to mitigate for 150 acres.
And that 150 acres that would be part of the right-of-way
would have culverts, would be porous, would allow tortoises
through. And we have good science on Red Hills Parkway that
shows that tortoises will use culverts. They will move back and
forth underneath a road. It will not destroy their habitat.
The county has been more than generous in offering up
mitigation for this. And now what people who came to that
bargaining table and pretended to bargain in good faith are
asking for is they want the 3,000 acres and they also don't
want to get a route.
I mean, this is what is broken about our bureaucracy. That
is the definition of insanity. They want us to pay for the road
and not get the road and still have the congestion on our
surface streets in St. George City.
That is why we are here having a field hearing today
because we have to be able to hold bureaucracies accountable
when they are not doing the will of the people.
Congress is elected by the people and is accountable to the
people. Agencies are not. And when Congress tells an agency
what to do, their job is to act, not to drag their feet, not to
play politics, not to use rules and obfuscation to keep from
doing the things that Congress has asked them to do.
I thank you all for being here today. I look forward to
hearing from the witnesses. We will ask more questions to get
more of the details about this out. But thank you for
participating in this process because this is representative
government in its purest form.
Mr. Curtis. We will now move to our panel of witnesses.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone. We will use timing lights, which none of us can
see because of the sun. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will now recognize our first witness, the Honorable Adam
Snow, Commissioner for Washington County.
Commissioner Snow, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ADAM SNOW, COMMISSIONER, WASHINGTON
COUNTY, ST. GEORGE, UTAH

Mr. Snow. Good afternoon, distinguished members of the
Committee and staff. On behalf of my colleagues at the
Washington County Commission, Victor Iverson and Gil Almquist,
we welcome you to Washington County, otherwise known as
paradise.
I am a seventh-generation son of Washington County. My
third great grandfather, Erastus Snow, led the company of
families called to settle the Dixie Cotton Mission.
It was a harsh and unforgiving land, but thanks to their
endurance and perseverance, forward thinking and cooperation,
what we call the Dixie spirit, they overcame the challenges and
developed this incredible place we now call home.
We are the poster child, as Congresswoman Maloy just said,
of cooperative efforts between diverse stakeholders. We work
constantly to balance responsible growth, smart planning, long-
term strategy, and resource conservation, while honoring our
heritage.
This unique partnership strategy has allowed us to be the
fastest-growing community in the nation most of the last 20
years.
Unfortunately, our cooperative efforts are directly
threatened by the recent actions of the Biden administration
through backroom deals struck with fringe environmental groups
for political gain in an election year.
Now, some ask us why this is such an important issue for
us. The County is fairly condensed into a ``U'' shape with over
a quarter of a million daily visitors and residents traveling
east-west, creating a pinch point in the middle, where we are
rapidly approaching traffic failure and collapse.
The cooperative agreement reached in the 2020 EIS, as you
alluded to, to address this issue was a good deal. It was a win
for conservation. It was a win for transportation. It was a win
for the residents and visitors. It was a win for the various
threatened and endangered species. And it followed Federal law
in the mandate of OPLMA in 2009.
It was a process that allowed every stakeholder to claim
victory, which is exceptional in modern times.
Pathetically, some fringe environmental groups weren't
happy with that cooperation, and unfortunately it appears the
Deep State of unelected bureaucrats in DC will roll this back
to score political points in an election year.
Throughout this SEIS process, the Department of the
Interior has made constant, significant errors in the face of
NEPA. The traffic modeling is outdated given our explosive
population growth.
BLM does not even have an engineer on this project or
updated data. Our local traffic planners offered to provide it
to them, but BLM will not wait a few weeks until it is
complete.
Instead, they plan to release the draft SEIS before it has
even received, let alone analyzed, that traffic data. BLM says
it will include it as an appendix in the final SEIS, which
means the public will have no opportunity to see the analysis
or comment on it before the decision is made.
This is only one of many examples of the Department of the
Interior omitting regular analysis to adhere to their political
timeline.
As for the SEIS schedule, we are in almost a decade of
working on Federal land issues around the Western United
States. This is the first time I have ever seen the BLM stick
to a timeline.
Fifteen years after OPLMA mandated a transportation
management plan through the NCA, they gave them 3 years to do
it, 15 years later, they don't even have a plan to start
working on it.
But a backroom sue-and-settle deal with fringe
environmental groups dictates a divinely decreed deadline for
them.
Perhaps the most discouraging outcome of this entire thing
is the permanent relationship damage.
We will be loud in declaring to counties and states across
the nation that they should not partner with the Department of
the Interior because the Federal Government will turn its back
on decades of cooperation to gain short-term political points.
Local governments will waste millions of dollars and years
of effort working for mutual benefit that the Department of the
Interior will arbitrarily rescind. Better to just start suing
for what you need and let the courts decide.
This is truly government at its worst.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, there has been a lot of
misinformation on this issue, and I call upon the media
reporting this hearing to thoroughly read the expert
testimonies of the witnesses today.
Responsible journalism demands that they do their homework
and recognize that the decision being repealed for political
capital with fringe environmentalists comes at the price of
real conservation, real benefit to the various endangered
species, and does nothing other than delay much-needed
transportation while costing the taxpayers millions of dollars
in unnecessary delays and legal fees, which seems to be their
point.
I express my appreciation to the Utah Congressional
Delegation for your continued support on this issue and for
convening this hearing today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Snow follows:]
Prepared Statement of Adam Snow, Washington County Commissioner

Good afternoon, Chairman Curtis, Rep. Maloy, Rep. Moore, and
members of the subcommittee. On behalf of my colleagues at the
Washington County Commission, Victor Iverson and Gil Almquist, we
welcome you to our county. Let me tell you how Southern Utah came to be
called Dixie. Quoting from the Washington County Historical Society,
``By the mid-1850s, the reality of civil war hung over the United
States. Brigham Young asked the Indian Missionaries in southern Utah to
see if cotton could be grown there. When they reported in the
affirmative, President Young immediately made plans to colonize the
Virgin River Basin.'' My 3rd great grandfather, Erastus Snow, led the
company of families called to the Dixie Cotton Mission, and the region
was dubbed ``Dixie'' because of the cotton raised here and the location
in the southern end of the state. It was a harsh and unforgiving land,
but thanks to their endurance and perseverance, forward thinking, and
hard work, they overcame the challenges and developed this incredible
place we now call home.
Thank you for inviting me to testify on important ways that
decisions made by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and Bureau
of Land Management (BLM) directly impact our community. My family has
lived in Washington County for seven generations, and I have spent much
of my professional and free time serving this community. As former
staff to Congressman Stewart and now as a county commissioner, I know
how vital three things are: (1) smart planning and growth, (2)
protecting our community, including its environment, and (3) that
backroom deals and outcome-driven decisions have no place in federal
land management decisions.
Unfortunately, our smart growth and conservation actions are
directly threatened by the recent actions of the Biden Administration.
Smart Growth and Cooperation

We are the poster child of responsible growth. We greatly
appreciate that you are holding this field hearing. I invite you to get
out and notice our growth first-hand. Drive through the new homes in
Green Springs and notice the excellent desert landscaping. Visit Sun
River and see how, for decades, we have been building large communities
with small houses and yards where people thrive because of the
community resources. Visit Desert Color--the largest planned community
west of the Mississippi River--and witness how we blend high, medium,
and low-density housing into a single subdivision, which ensures socio-
economic diversity and helps reduce crime. Lastly, I hope each of you
travels along Tabernacle Street in St. George and notice new projects
that have commercial businesses on the ground floor and several stories
of residential housing above.
We are flourishing as a community and are following innovative
growth principles. This is largely due to our responsible development
community, our great city councils, and our city plans. Over a decade
ago, our cities and the county got together to develop comprehensive
planning principles that allow our continued population growth while
recognizing that we live in a desert and water is scarce. We are now
enjoying the benefits of that planning, and we are also building on it
with a massive water reuse program you will hear about later. That
strategic and responsible planning has allowed this community to be one
of the fastest growing in the nation for most of the last 20 years. Our
rapid growth comes internally from children and grandchildren and, more
recently, from those who choose to move from out of state to St. George
for all this community offers. We have welcomed everyone and are
working hard to provide the needed infrastructure to accommodate this
challenge. Some who have moved here, especially during and since the
pandemic, are political refugees from California and other blue states
where liberal policies produced unlivable communities with high taxes,
rampant crime, poor air quality, and gridlocked highways.
Unfortunately, through the actions of the BLM and FWS, the Biden
Administration seems to want to bring some of these same conditions to
Washington County.
BLM's Likely Harm

Unfortunately, the likely action by BLM to rescind the Northern
Corridor right-of-way right before the presidential election will harm
our community by increasing traffic congestion, lowering air quality,
and imposing congestion impacts on underserved neighborhoods. After
marching forward with their Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement
(SEIS) last year, BLM only recently requested updated information on
these topics.
The traffic modeling for the 2020 EIS was based on 2017 data. The
BLM does not even have a traffic or any other type of engineer on staff
working on this project. That may be normal for BLM, but it is
inexcusable that their SEIS contractor also does not have a single
engineer on the team! They did not have data on our COVID population
boom from people fleeing locked-down states. Luckily, our local traffic
planners asked the BLM if they were gathering this information and
offered to provide it. So, new traffic modeling is being completed and
should be done in June.
However, taking the time to actually gather traffic data for a
decision about the best location of a roadway does not fit with the
Biden Administration's election-year timeframe. So, the BLM plans to
release its draft SEIS for public review and comment before it has even
received, let alone analyzed, that data. This is just wrong! BLM should
be transparent with the public by providing a full analysis of each
alternative using up-to-date information. Instead, what BLM intends to
do by not having the up-to-date information in the draft SEIS is reveal
it later only by including it as an appendix in the final SEIS, which
means the public will have no opportunity to see the analysis in the
actual document or comment on it during a public comment period.
BLM's statutory mandate in the 2009 Omnibus Public Lands Management
Act was to develop a transportation management plan through the Red
Cliffs National Conservation Area in no more than 3 years. They have
ignored this congressionally mandated deadline for more than 10 years
with no plans in sight to even work on the transportation plan.
Instead, they are prioritizing a newer politically driven deadline to
eliminate the one route that provides the best solution that addresses
our transportation challenges. Additionally, they do not intend to
include any analysis of the harm to our air quality or impacted
neighborhoods that will happen by eliminating the right-of-way. Vehicle
engines perform best when running at 40-60 miles per hour and emissions
are the worst with stop-and-go traffic. Having to wait two or three
lights to get through an intersection wastes fuel because the trip is
taking longer, and the idling vehicles are polluting more than if they
were moving efficiently. We do not yet have the current modeling, but
without a Northern Corridor, the old modeling--which has slower
population projections than the reality reflected in the new data--
showed that if the right-of-way is rescinded, travel time to get from
Sunset Boulevard to Exit 13 on Interstate 15 will increase from 14
minutes of travel time (in 2019) using one of three different routes to
anywhere from 24 to 40 minutes of travel time. (See 2020 FEIS Appendix
I, Air Quality Report on page 22)
Additionally, BLM does not intend to do an updated air quality
report before deciding whether to rescind the right-of-way. Given the
``high priority'' the Biden Administration has placed on studying air
quality in every EIS, it is strange that they will likely decide to
harm our air quality, and perhaps, just maybe, that is why they are not
gathering additional information on this impact. This is merely one
more violation of processes mandated by NEPA to achieve a political
outcome.
The Biden Administration talks a lot about environmental justice to
reverse federal impacts on specific underserved neighborhoods that have
historically been located next to freeways and train tracks. These
neighborhoods have higher concentrations of carbon dioxide and become
concentrated heat domes. The BLM's SEIS process will result in an
environmental injustice because it will force more and more traffic
into the increasingly congested urban core of St. George, where the
lower income and workforce housing is located, causing more air quality
impacts and transportation backups.
This is Federal Decision-Making at its Worst

Given my extensive professional experience with land management in
the West over the past decade, I can expertly declare that this is the
most predetermined, outcome-driven environmental review I have ever
seen! With the prior administration, we went through a years-long
public process, did all of the proper analysis, and achieved the best
result for our community. In stark contrast, this Administration cut a
sue-and-settle, back-room deal with fringe environmental groups that
included a cash payoff and a commitment to get this done by election
time regardless of how many corners would have to be cut. Now, they are
going through a predetermined ``sham'' process that ignores their own
policies of stakeholder participation, climate impact analysis, and
environmental justice impacts. The political appointees in Washington,
D.C., know precisely their end outcome. Regardless of the environmental
consequences, they are going to do what they need to secure the
political support of fringe environmental groups who do not represent
or speak for the values of this community. These fringe groups think
that if they can stop this roadway, they can help prevent growth here
in Washington County. Ironically, most of them also just moved here
themselves.
When BLM rescinds the Northern Corridor right-of-way, not only will
it become harder and harder to travel east to west and vice versa
across our county, it will be a massive loss for our recreation
community because then the Fish and Wildlife Service is obligated to
authorize the take of desert tortoises on the non-federal lands in Zone
6--which means that eventually, those popular trails and climbing areas
will in all likelihood be turned into housing. It will be a loss for
350-500 Mohave desert tortoises and all of the potential progeny that
could have lived long lives in Zone 6 as their habitat is permanently
lost to development. It will be a loss for our partnerships with
federal agencies. We have worked openly and in good faith for decades
with BLM and the Fish and Wildlife Service. This has produced
remarkable outcomes for the community and the species. We cannot,
however, continue to do that if they are going to extract millions of
dollars from us to recover the tortoise and then rescind the permit
that we were paying for. This is government at its worst. The original
permit was a good faith compromise that allowed all stakeholders to
join in a mutually beneficial partnership between federal, state,
local, and private entities. All stakeholders could proudly declare a
victory on conservation, environment, recreation, development, and
transportation. In this back-room, closed-door, exclusive deal, the
federal government is violating federal law not for the benefit of the
tortoise, the environment, recreation, transportation, or federal
partnerships. It is only for the benefit of political points to their
fringe supporters.
I wish to express my appreciation to the Utah Congressional
delegation for their continued support on these issues. Thank you for
convening this hearing today.

______

Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Commissioner Snow.
I now recognize the Honorable Eric Clarke, attorney for
Washington County, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ERIC CLARKE, COUNTY ATTORNEY,
WASHINGTON COUNTY, ST. GEORGE, UTAH

Mr. Clarke. Distinguished members of the Committee, thank
you for this opportunity.
I have spent much of the last 10 years working on the
issues before the Committee today.
In our county, we strive to preserve our amazing land,
protect at-risk plants and animal species, manage our rapid
population growth, and welcome 8 to 10 million annual visitors.
Unfortunately, the impending cancellation of the Northern
Corridor Right-of-Way will increase traffic congestion, harm
our area's desert tortoise population, open a popular
recreation area to development, and worsen our air quality.
Twenty years ago, as the Congresswoman mentioned, our local
leaders began working with Congress, conservation groups, and
others to protect open space without hindering water
development, utility access, or approval of the Northern
Corridor.
Those efforts resulted in the Washington County Growth and
Conservation Act passed as part of an omnibus bill in 2009.
On the conservation side, the Act designated over 250,000
acres of wilderness, classified the Virgin River as wild and
scenic, and established two national conservation areas, or
NCAs, protecting an additional 100,000 acres.
On the growth side, the Act affirmatively allowed
maintenance and development of utility and water systems in the
Red Cliffs NCA.
Additionally, BLM was required to adopt the travel
management plan, containing one or more Northern Corridor
options by 2012.
BLM has fully implemented all of the conservation measures
of the Act while largely ignoring the growth measures.
On utility and water access in the Red Cliffs NCA, in 2016,
the efforts of this Committee, and then Deputy County Attorney
Celeste Maloy, played a major role in ensuring BLM's initial
and restrictive proposals were not implemented.
However, BLM has still not adopted a travel management
plan. Even worse, prior to 2017, it openly opposed the Northern
Corridor.
So, our county joins state, local, and Federal partners to
tackle the issue.
While the county had no biological mitigation obligations,
our team of partners built a conservation package that
obviously offsets the negative impacts from constructing the
road. This included adding a new zone to the Red Cliffs Desert
Reserve and additional mitigation in the area around the
Northern Corridor.
The new zone, Zone 6, contains nearly 7,000 acres. Roughly
half is BLM-managed land, and most of the rest is Utah school
trust land.
Zone 6 has a large and healthy desert tortoise population
and is used heavily by mountain bikers and climbers, with the
Bearclaw Poppy Trail alone having over 1 million riders
annually.
If we compare the desert tortoise habitat lost to the
Northern Corridor to what is gained by Zone 6, we added 12
acres of habitat for each acre impacted, again, 12 to 1.
If instead we compare actual tortoises, Zone 6 protects
between 500 and 1,000 tortoises, and 40 to 50 would be impacted
by the road.
We also committed to improve the habitat in the Red Cliffs
NCA by adding tortoise crossing culverts underneath the
Cottonwood Road that is currently an impassable barrier that
cuts Zone 3 of the reserve in half.
The proposed benefits to the tortoise far outweigh harms
caused by the 4\1/2\-mile-long Northern Corridor.
But in order to prevent a roadway expressly allowed by the
law, the Biden administration is moving forward to remove
protections on thousands of acres of occupied desert tortoise
habitat. It is going to open up over 3,400 acres in Zone 6 to
development.
It is mind-blowing that people are willing to sacrifice so
much habitat in order to prevent a congressionally authorized
road. That decision will not only harm conservation efforts, it
is burning bridges built by decades of working together in good
faith.
Our county has spent over $6 million to fulfill our
Northern Corridor commitment since January 2021. Federal
agencies have required us to continue with these activities for
years as they negotiated behind closed doors with environmental
groups how to keep the benefits of our actions and cancel the
Northern Corridor.
We have fulfilled our part of the bargain, but they are
walking away from theirs.
Thank you for your support and assistance. We have made
significant progress on these issues over the last 10 years. I
am confident that with the facts on our side and the broad
support we receive from our local, state, and Federal partners,
we can and will fix this issue and continue appropriately
balancing growth and conservation in our community.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Clarke follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric Clarke, Washington County Attorney

Mr. Chairman Curtis, Representatives Maloy and Moore, and other
distinguished members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity
to address you today. I have worked in the Washington County Attorney's
Office for thirteen years and served as the County Attorney since 2020.
I spent much of the last nine years working on issues regarding the
county's Incidental Take Permit and related Habitat Conservation Plan
for the federally protected Mojave desert tortoise and the planned
Northern Corridor that will cross the southern portion of the Red
Cliffs National Conservation Area. Unfortunately, in an election year
the Biden Administration is moving at a reckless pace to undo our work.
Their actions will increase traffic congestion, significantly harm our
area's Mojave desert tortoise population, make popular recreation areas
on public lands immediately subject to development, and worsen our air
quality. It is an example of politically-driven decisions leading to
harmful results.
Washington County Background

We are a public lands county, with the federal government managing
over 75% of our county. Of our 1.5 million acres, the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) manages 41%, the U.S. Forest Service manages 25%, and
the National Parks Service manages 9%. Our county's uniquely beautiful
landscape is due to the junction of the Colorado Plateau, Mojave
Desert, and Great Basin landforms. Our vistas, warm climate, and
friendly community make Washington County an ideal place to live, and
we continue to experience rapid population growth. In 1960 we had
10,000 residents. Today we have 200,000. To put that in perspective,
our population has at least doubled every twenty years since 1960.
Tourism is also an important part of our economy, and we estimate that
our area receives between eight and ten million visitors annually.
In addition to being an attractive place for people, our unique
landscape is also home to 15 federally protected plant and animal
species. Our community leaders work diligently to ensure our population
growth and outdoor recreation occurs in ways that preserves our local
environment. Our open space and beautiful views are extremely important
to residents and visitors.
2008 Washington County Growth and Conservation Act

We have worked diligently to preserve open space in our area.
Twenty years ago, Governor Olene Walker encouraged our local leaders to
work with Congress, conservation groups, and others to protect
significant swaths of open space in our county while ensuring those
protections would not impede water development, utility access, or our
transportation needs. Those efforts resulted in the Washington County
Growth and Conservation Act, which was passed as part of the 2009
Omnibus Public Lands Management Act (Public Law 111-11). That Act
designated 16 wilderness areas, totaling over 250,000 acres. It
designated 165 miles of the Virgin River and its tributaries in our
county as a Wild and Scenic River. Lastly, the Act established two
national conservation areas protecting, to a lesser degree than
wilderness, an additional 100,000 acres. This NCA acreage was expected
to grow significantly when BLM fulfilled its commitment to acquire the
privately held and school trust lands inside the Red Cliffs National
Conservation Area (Red Cliffs NCA) boundary. The Act even designated
that funds from BLM selling lands that had been listed for disposal
years earlier would go towards acquiring the NCA inholdings. Truly, the
``conservation'' side of the Growth and Conservation Act was
significant.
On the ``growth'' side, local and state land-use planners were
given assurance that the Red Cliffs National Conservation Area's
creation would not unduly hinder running utilities across or accessing
water that would be necessary for future population growth. This was
important because the NCA's southern and eastern boundary was adjacent
to existing or planned developments, and its western boundary abuts the
Shivwits Band of Paiutes Reservation. So to some degree, the NCA land
must be utilized for the movement of water, utilities, and traffic.
The Act also gave BLM three years to develop a comprehensive travel
management plan that would ensure appropriate access to all of the BLM
managed land in the county. The contents of the final plan for BLM
managed lands were to include one or more options for the construction
of the Northern Corridor. As you can see in the map prepared for this
testimony, the Red Cliffs NCA boundary dips south near the historic
downtown of St. George City (See Exhibit A). Traffic planners have
identified the need for a northern bypass road since the mid-1980s, and
that is why it was included in the Act.
BLM's Failure to Follow the Law

Inexplicably, the BLM has fully implemented all of the conservation
measures of the Act while largely ignoring the growth measures.

Utility and Water Access. This Committee held a field hearing in
St. George City several years ago to address utility and water access
in the Red Cliffs NCA. The draft Resource Management Plan (RMP) for the
Red Cliffs NCA inappropriately restricted utility and water access.
Pressure from the committee combined with excellent work of then Deputy
County Attorney Celeste Maloy resulted in most of these concerns being
resolved before the finalization of the RMP.

Travel Management. Around 2014, the local BLM field office began
working with the County on the required travel management plan. For six
months county and BLM planners identified dispersed campsites,
overlooks, and other destinations throughout the county. The draft plan
was well written, and the county was largely supportive of BLM's
preferred alternative. However, the plan was never released for public
comment or adopted. It has sat on a shelf in the BLM office for ten
years. We have even heard rumors that BLM plans to abandon the draft
plan that was written with the 2009 Act in mind and instead craft a
more restrictive transportation plan.
Northern Corridor. BLM's most egregious action was its open
opposition to the Northern Corridor. This was demonstrated by the
denial of an initial application for the roadway--which was overturned
by the Department of Interior Board of Land Appeals, and the refusal to
include a corridor in the Red Cliffs NCA RMP that would meet our area's
traffic needs.
Granting a Right-of-Way

In order to directly address the Northern Corridor issue, in 2017,
our county teamed up with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the State
of Utah, the state's school trust lands administrators, local
transportation planners and cities, and even the BLM. While our
position remains that no additional biological mitigation should be
necessary because the roadway was part of the bargain struck in the
2009 Act, we acknowledge there are legitimate concerns about the road's
impacts on the Red Cliff's Desert Reserve, which is the basis for the
county's Mojave desert tortoise incidental take permit. We also saw an
opportunity to protect as open space the heavily recreated area shown
as Zone 6 in the map before you (See Exhibit A). So, from 2017 to 2021,
the BLM and Fish and Wildlife Service jointly completed an
environmental impact statement that analyzed (1) an application from
Utah for the Northern Corridor Right-of-Way and (2) a twenty-five-year
renewal of the County's desert tortoise incidental take permit. The ITP
renewal process included amending the County's Habitat Conservation
Plan so that the plan addressed commitments from the County, BLM,
school trust lands administration, and others that would only be
triggered if the Northern Corridor were approved. The most important
aspect of those commitments was expanding The Red Cliffs Desert Reserve
to include Zone 6.
Zone 6 contains 6,813 acres, half of which is BLM managed land.
One-third of Zone 6 is part of the Red Bluff Area of Critical
Environmental Concern which was already managed for conservation of the
protected dwarf bear-poppy plant but not for the Mojave desert
tortoise. Nearly half of Zone 6 is owned by Utah school trust lands
administration, and the remaining acres are owned by private property
owners or local governments. The area has a large and healthy desert
tortoise population. It is also heavily recreated. Popular trails
include Bearclaw Poppy and Zen. Rock climbing areas include Green
Valley Gap and Moe's Valley. To put in perspective how popular the area
is, trail counters show that over 100,000 mountain bike rides occur
annually on Bearclaw Poppy Trail alone.
In order to ensure that all impacts to the desert tortoise from the
construction of the Northern Corridor would be fully offset, the county
and its partners proposed that all 6,813 acres in Zone 6 be managed for
the benefit of the tortoise, that the prior development authorization
of 3,341 acres of non-federally managed lands be done away, and that
tortoise culverts be strategically placed under Cottonwood Road in the
portion of the Red Cliffs NCA near the Northern Corridor. In acres this
created a 12:1 gain to loss ratio; in actual tortoises that would be
disturbed, the ratio was 8:1 (but with new information we believe it is
closer to 10:1), and in fragmentation of tortoise habitat the ratio is
also 8:1. (See appendix G, Determining Fully Offset for the Northern
Corridor of the 2020 Amended and Restated Washington County Habitat
Conservation Plan.) No one can reasonably refute that the proposed
benefits to the tortoise recovery efforts far outweigh the harms caused
by the construction and ongoing use of the four and half mile-long
Northern Corridor.
It is shocking that in order to prevent the construction of a
roadway expressly allowed by law, President Biden's Department of
Interior is going to remove protections on thousands of acres of
occupied desert tortoise habitat! At most, fifty tortoises will be
temporarily removed from the right-of-way and have their movements
impeded until the road is finished and they can cross under its bridges
or culverts. But at least 350 tortoises will be relocated out of Zone 6
and into the Red Cliffs NCA--a significant distance where they will
lose access to all of their prior burrows--when the trust lands and
private property in Zone 6 are developed.
Breaching Trust

In addition to the horrible biological path the Biden Department of
Interior is taking, they are also burning the bridges built by decades
of working together in good faith. Since the Northern Corridor Right-
of-Way was issued in January 2021, our county has been obligated to
fulfill many commitments in connection with the road's approval. We
have spent over $6 million! We have closed down areas to OHV use with
fencing, signage, and regular law enforcement presence. We purchased
enough acres of land to offset the loss of acres from the road at a 3:1
ratio. We purchased grazing permits to be retired. We built a public
outreach center and educated the public about our area's sensitive
animals and plants daily. We have implemented tortoise conscious
development restrictions for utilities crossing Zone 6. And we have
significantly cleaned up and reduced the amount of trash dumping that
had occurred in the area for decades. We fulfilled our part of the
bargain.
But neither the BLM nor the Fish and Wildlife Service ever
indicated that we should hold off on these activities or that our
obligations were being put on hold while they negotiated for years with
environmental groups. It is clear they intend to eliminate the corridor
and not compensate the county in any way for the taxpayer dollars we
spent under our Northern Corridor obligation. It is unclear how we can
work with these agencies in the future if they are going to go back on
their commitments and keep the full benefit of our work and resources.
Conclusion

We are very grateful for the constant support and assistance of the
Utah Congressional delegation and their staff. We have made significant
progress on these issues over the last ten years. While we will likely
suffer a setback this year due to President Biden's reelection-geared
decisions, I am confident that with the facts on our side and the broad
support we receive from our local, state, and federal partners, we will
get this fixed and continue to appropriately balance growth and
conservation in our community. Thank you for holding this important
hearing today.
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Clarke.
I would now like to recognize the Executive Director for
the Utah Department of Transportation.
Carlos, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARLOS BRACERAS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, UTAH
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, TAYLORSVILLE, UTAH

Mr. Braceras. Chairman Curtis, distinguished members of the
Federal Land Committee, and members of Utah's Delegation, my
name is Carlos Braceras, Executive Director of the Utah
Department of Transportation.
Thank you for coming to the great state of Utah for the
opportunity to testify regarding the urgently needed Northern
Corridor. On behalf of Utah, I want to express my gratitude to
the Members of the Utah Delegation for bringing this issue
forward.
I will share a little bit of background, some of which you
have heard, as to why we are having this conversation.
The St. George metropolitan area is one of the fastest-
growing areas in Utah and in the United States. According to
the U.S. Census Bureau, in the past 35 years, St. George area
has grown by over 400 percent. During the period from 2020 to
2023, it grew an estimated 12 percent.
In anticipation of this growth, long-term transportation
plans identified the need for a northern transportation
corridor as far back as the mid-1980s.
It is not hard to see why the Northern Corridor is
fundamental to a successful transportation system that supports
the social, physical, and economic well-being of communities in
the St. George metropolitan area.
In fact, Congress recognized how important this corridor is
when it established the Red Cliffs National Conservation Area
as part of the Omnibus Public Lands Management Act of 2009.
When establishing the conservation area, Congress also
directed the BLM to develop a comprehensive travel
transportation management plan, and in doing so, to identify
one or more alternatives for a northern transportation route in
Washington County.
This was to be done within 3 years of passage of OPLMA, and
done in consultation with state, tribal, and local governments.
Because UDOT recognized the timeliness and importance of
these decisions, we, along with the local governments, began
identifying a route that would be both compliant with OPLMA
directives and feasible from an engineering perspective.
In doing so, we solicited input from the BLM, the U.S.
Forest Service, and other Federal agencies.
Due to the input that they provided, we actually changed
the alignment that we were proposing, one that actually
performed best from an operational perspective, to one that,
according to the agencies, would be better for the desert
tortoise.
Additionally, we agreed to help expand the Habitat
Conservation Plan for the desert tortoise by putting thousands
of otherwise unprotected state lands into conservation.
Despite all these efforts, 9 years later, 6 years after the
congressional deadline, BLM had still not implemented the
required travel management plan. So, in 2018, UDOT applied for
a right-of-way within the Red Cliffs National Conservation Area
which compelled BLM to act upon the directives of Congress.
BLM was forced to initiate an EIS process to analyze the
effects of granting a right-of-way to UDOT and amend their
resource management plan. The result was a record of decision
that granted UDOT a right-of-way in early 2021.
Today, those same Federal agencies have insinuated that the
Northern Corridor was an idea hastily hatched during the Trump
administration and decided in its waning days. That could not
be further from the truth.
They also put forward the troubling narrative that it is
legitimate and normal to use a Supplemental Environmental
Impact Statement process that is geared towards a new alignment
that terminates UDOT's right-of-way, has an abbreviated
timeline determined by the terms of the settlement agreement
that UDOT was not even allowed to be party to, and ignores NEPA
principles and best practices.
In conclusion, I ask that you consider the following.
The Northern Corridor has been carefully planned for
decades, because the success of Washington County's
transportation system is dependent upon a functioning northern
county corridor.
If the UDOT right-of-way were to no longer exist, the
additional conservation areas for the desert tortoise would
also cease to exist.
And lastly, the Federal Government has a duty to comply
with OPLMA, as well as a duty to carry out NEPA according to
regulations and procedures. The Federal Government is not above
its own law.
Thank you for your time, and I am pleased to answer any
questions that the Members may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Braceras follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carlos Braceras, Executive Director, Utah
Department of Transportation

Introduction

Chairman, Ranking Member, Vice Chair, and distinguished members of
the Federal Lands Subcommittee. My name is Carlos Braceras, and I am
the Executive Director of the Utah Department of Transportation (UDOT).
Speaking on behalf of the Utah Department of Transportation, we are
very grateful to the members of the Utah Delegation for providing this
opportunity to discuss the Northern Corridor project. Thank you for
coming to the great state of Utah and for allowing me the opportunity
to testify regarding the importance of the vital and necessary Northern
Corridor transportation route in Washington County and the mandate that
Congress set forth nearly 15 years ago directing the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) to identify a northern transportation alignment on
lands managed by the BLM, which primarily consist of the Red Cliffs
National Conservation Area. As you know, Washington County is an area
within the State of Utah that is largely surrounded and landlocked by
federal public lands, so we are acutely aware of the challenge this
issue poses as we try to conduct transportation planning for our
communities.
UDOT is the designated state agency responsible for transportation
in the State of Utah. UDOT's mission is to enhance the quality of life
for Utahns through transportation. We do this by optimizing mobility,
connecting communities, promoting a strong economy, and encouraging
good health. We take these responsibilities seriously and understand
the potential that each transportation project has to benefit and
improve communities and the environment. Accordingly, UDOT expends
significant time, energy, and effort to collaboratively work with local
governments, including rural and metropolitan planning organizations,
to understand and address local and regional transportation needs,
perspectives, and concerns. As a state entity with delegated NEPA
authority from the Federal Highway Administration, UDOT is keenly aware
of the importance that the administrative and NEPA process play in the
evaluation and consideration of any proposed project and land
management decisions.
As a state governmental entity, we fastidiously abide by all laws
and regulations relevant to our work, and we see it as equally
important for the federal government to be held to the same standard.
In this case, the federal government has a duty to comply with the
Congressional directive under the Omnibus Public Lands Management Act,
Pub. L. No. 111011, 123 Stat. 991, 1081-83 (2009) (OPLMA) as well as a
duty to objectively carry out its National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) review in accordance with applicable regulation and procedure.
Northern Corridor

The long-planned ``Northern Corridor'' is a proposed transportation
corridor referred to by various names that connects the communities of
Ivins, Santa Clara, and the western urbanized area of St. George to the
west and Washington and Hurricane to the east between State Route 18
and Interstate 15. Connecting these communities requires crossing
federal public lands. Because of the importance of this corridor, the
northern transportation route connecting these endpoints has been on
state or local transportation plans for more than 30 years. Since 2017,
significant planning for development of this corridor has been
undertaken as a result of current demand and forecasted population
growth within Washington County. The Northern Corridor is a necessary
highway infrastructure project to accommodate and support the increased
growth and travel demands and reduce impacts to aging transportation
infrastructure that was not designed for the capacity we now anticipate
and the growing population now projected for Washington County.

Over the years, UDOT has prepared or funded, by itself or with
other state and local entities, at least five different studies of
alignments for the corridor, including the following:

Red Hills Parkway State Route 18 (Bluff Street) to
Industrial Road Development Assessment (2009 UDOT);

Washington Parkway Cost/Benefit Study (Horrocks Engineers,
2011);

Washington Parkway Study: Integration of East-West
Transportation Needs with Conservation Objectives for
Desert Tortoise in Washington County, Utah (Jacobs and
Logan Simpson 2012);

Washington County General Plan (amended 2012); and

Dixie Metropolitan Planning Organization (DMPO) Regional
Transportation Plan.

Notably, Washington County has grown from a community of 13,669 in
1970 to its current population of approximately 189,500 people.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in the past 35 years, the St.
George area has grown by more than 400 percent. Based on this explosive
growth, the existing transportation network between S.R. 18 and I-15 is
not adequate to meet future (2050) east-west travel demand in the
northeastern and northwestern areas of St. George. A northern
transportation route for the rapidly growing area is necessary to
reduce traffic congestion, substantial delays and idling, which is also
expected to improve air quality. In addition to improving east-west
mobility on arterial and interstate roadways, the highway is necessary
to reduce traffic volumes on key corridors such as Bluff Street, Red
Hills Parkway, and St. George Boulevard that are currently congested
and are expected to experience worse congestion in the future as the
Washington County population grows and the associated east-west travel
demand increases.
The Northern Corridor will fulfill a necessary transportation need
identified decades ago that UDOT has planned for, studied, and invested
millions of dollars to develop. It has done so working in close
cooperation with the DMPO (the agency responsible for regional
transportation planning in Washington County); Washington County; the
City of St. George; Washington City; the City of Ivins; the City of
Santa Clara; the City of Hurricane; and other communities in the St.
George and Hurricane urbanized area.
Omnibus Public Lands Management Act (OPLMA)

Nearly 15 years ago, in creating the Red Cliffs National
Conservation Area, Congress, state and local officials, and
conservation groups recognized the challenges in balancing management
and conservation values with local and regional growth of the
surrounding community in Washington County. To meet this challenge,
Congress reached a compromise in enacting OPLMA in 2009 with twin aims
focused on balancing conservation with regional transportation needs
based on growing community needs. In this legislation Congress
recognized the need for a northern corridor transportation route over
federal public lands because the only BLM-managed lands north of the
City of St. George in Washington County were in the Red Cliffs National
Conservation Area as shown on the maps in Attachment A, which were
included in the statute.

In recognition of this circumstance, in enacting OPLMA, Congress
expressly directed the Secretary of the Interior to meet the following
mandates:

1.  OPLMA Section 1974 Mandate: manage the National Conservation Area
in a manner that conserves, protects, and enhances (1) the
resources the ecological, scenic, wildlife, recreational,
cultural, historical, natural, educational, and scientific
resources of the National Conservation Area for the benefit
and enjoyment of present and future generations; and (2) to
protect each species that is located in the National
Conservation Area and listed as a threatened or endangered
species under the Endangered Species Act. OPLMA
Sec. 1974(e); and

2.  OPLMA Section 1977 Mandate: within three years of its passage
(2012), develop a comprehensive travel management plan to
provide the public a marked network of roads and trails
with signs and maps over lands managed by the BLM and lands
under management by the U.S. Forest Service in Washington
County, in consultation with appropriate Federal agencies
and State, tribal, and local governmental entities.
Congress further directed that the travel management plan
should:

promote enhanced recreation and general access
opportunities;

help reduce in the County growing conflicts
arising from interactions between motorized recreation and
important resource values on public lands;

promote citizen-based opportunities for
monitoring and stewardship of trails and trail system
management;

support law enforcement officials in promoting
compliance with off-highway vehicle laws and deterring abuses
of public land; and

identify 1 or more alternatives for a northern
transportation route in the County.

OPLMA Sec. Sec. 1977(b).

Despite the clear federal direction and Section 1977 mandate, it
has been fifteen years since OPLMA was passed. We are nearly twelve
years beyond the statutory deadline for BLM to identify a northern
transportation route in cooperation with the affected state and local
entities that require it, yet, the BLM has yet to seriously consider a
comprehensive travel management plan. BLM's actions over the last
several years continue to undermine any measurable progress in meeting
BLM's Section 1977 obligations under OPLMA at best. At worst, BLM's
actions demonstrate noncompliance and disregard of the law and BLM's
statutory requirements.
UDOT Right-of-Way

Based on a combination of the directive under OPLMA, prior local
and regional planning and needs, and current demand and forecasted
population growth within the county, which will continue to outstrip
the capacity of the transportation network, UDOT proactively submitted
an application to the BLM for a right-of-way for a four-lane highway
that includes a paved hike and bike path, and will be 4.5 miles long,
with 1.9 miles crossing federal lands in the Red Cliffs National
Conservation Area as shown in purple below:

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

After completing the NEPA process and consultation under
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act, on January 15, 2021, BLM
issued a Record of Decision approving a right-of-way subject to
specified mitigation measures. In issuing this decision, BLM determined
that granting the right-of-way was consistent with the legislative
instructions under both Sections 1974 and 1977 of OPLMA.
UDOT Mitigation Commitments and Northern Corridor ``Changed
Circumstance''

As you are aware, this area is also home to the Mojave Desert
Tortoise. Washington County currently manages conservation of Mojave
Desert Tortoise in the Upper Virgin River Recovery Unit and development
on 12,264 acres of non-Federal lands in Washington County under an
Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP). In collaboration with BLM and other
HCP partners, the HCP originally created the approximately 62,000 acres
Red Cliffs Desert Reserve (Reserve) aimed to protect a significant
block of desert tortoise habitat in Washington County. Currently, the
Reserve is segmented into five management zones separated by
topographical and human barriers. Reserve Zones 1, 2, and 3 are north
of the cities of Ivins, St. George, and Washington and west of
Interstate 15. Reserve Zones 4 and 5 are north of the city of
Hurricane, south of Leeds, and east of I-15.
In issuing the Northern Corridor right-of-way, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service determined that the project impacts would not
appreciably affect either the survival or recovery of Mojave Desert
Tortoise finding that the proposed UDOT mitigation measures would be
more protective and beneficial to desert tortoise and the environment.
As part of the proposed application and issuance of the Northern
Corridor right-of-way and Washington County's proposed application for
renewal of its incidental take permit and amendment of its HCP, UDOT in
collaboration with Washington County agreed to and coordinated
mitigation measures targeted to offset impacts to the Mojave Desert
Tortoise from the proposed highway which would be located in Reserve
Zone 3. This included nearly 14 pages of mitigation measures, including
specific Northern Corridor design features, including exclusionary
tortoise fencing, shade structures, and passageways to provide
effective mitigation against potential habitat fragmentation and
connectivity issues for Mojave Desert Tortoise, and additional
monitoring.

Additionally, Washington County's Amended HCP expressly included a
Northern Corridor ``changed circumstance'' that addresses effects of
the highway to the HCP conservation program if a right-of-way is
issued. A significant part of the Northern Corridor changed
circumstance in the Amended HCP is to establish, administer, and manage
expansion of the Reserve to include a new Reserve Zone 6 of
approximately 6,813 acres (nearly an 11 percent expansion). This new
Reserve Zone 6 would result in benefits and uplift to Mojave Desert
Tortoise, and its habitat, including additional commitments by UDOT,
BLM, and the State of Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands
Administration (SITLA), and Utah Department of Natural Resources
(UDNR), aimed at offsite habitat restoration after the 2020 wildfires,
and acquisition of state and private lands, would further protect the
subpopulation Mojave Desert Tortoise in the Upper Virgin River Recovery
Unit such as:

Reserve Administration: The County will provide additional
funding for up to three full time HCP support staff,
including an Outreach Coordinator, Field Technician, and
Administrative Assistant.

Reserve Land Acquisition: The County will fund the
acquisition of approximately 450 acres of SITLA-owned lands
within proposed Reserve Zone 6 prior to the start of
construction of the Northern Corridor.

Reserve Fencing: The County will install fencing along the
eastern parts of the Reserve Zone 6 boundary and along the
Navajo Road corridor to prevent motorized access outside
the road right-of-way; and other fencing to enhance
protections for listed plant species within Reserve Zone 6.

Law Enforcement: The County will provide additional
funding for Washington County Sheriff Deputy patrols within
the Reserve.

Community Education and Outreach: The County will provide
additional funding for education and outreach efforts that
may include videos, advertising, handouts, community
engagement, contractor training, and volunteer
coordination.

Grazing Permit Acquisition and Retirement: The County and
the HCP Partners \1\ will coordinate with the holders of
active grazing permits applicable to Reserve Zone 6 and
negotiate the acquisition of such grazing permits from
willing sellers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The ``HCP Partners'' include the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, BLM, UDNR, SITLA, Washington County, and Ivins City.

Development Protocols: The County and the HCP Partners
will subject the allowed uses of Reserve Zone 6 to the
applicable provisions of the Development Protocols. The
County will provide additional funds to support the
application of Development Protocols associated with the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
proposed Reserve Zone 6.

Recreation Management: The County, the BLM, and the other
HCP Partners agree to reduce the total mileage of
designated recreation access routes within Reserve Zone 6
to approximately 50 miles of primarily nonmotorized
trails--a two-thirds reduction in the total mileage of
existing trails. The County and the HCP Partners will amend
the Public Use Plan to create a final trail plan that
implements the targeted level of trail reduction within
Reserve Zone 6. The County will act within its discretion
to complete these Public Use Plan amendments within the
first 5 years after this Changed Circumstance is triggered.
The County also commits to funding recreation management
activities within Reserve Zone 6, such as the installation
of signs, trail maintenance or enhancement, parking
improvements, and similar actions.

Reserve Habitat and Fire Management: The County will
provide additional funds to support the management of
SITLA-owned lands in Reserve Zone 6 and financial support
for HCP Partners with long-term management responsibilities
associated with the proposed Reserve Zone 6.

Monitoring and Adaptive Management Planning: The County
and the HCP Partners will expand the biological monitoring
program to include Reserve Zone 6. To support this
expansion, the County will provide additional funding for
baseline Reserve population monitoring and special topic
monitoring for use by UDWR or another qualified contractor.

Retire Previously Authorized Reserve Zone 6 Take: Retire
the previously authorized, but unutilized, incidental take
associated with the 3,341 acres of non-federal lands within
Reserve Zone 6. The retirement of previously authorized
incidental take creates a conservation benefit separate
from the uplift from the establishment and management of
Reserve Zone 6.

Cottonwood Road Tortoise Passages: The County and the HCP
Partners will provide technical assistance and funding to
support the design, construction, maintenance, and/or
monitoring of tortoise passages in Washington County, with
an emphasis on creating connectivity across Cottonwood Road
in Reserve Zone 3.

The new Reserve Zone 6 would represent a large and contiguous block
of habitat in Washington County outside the current Reserve that would
protect the largest known sub-population of tortoises that would
otherwise be subject to take under Washington County's incidental take
permit. However, with issuance of the Northern Corridor right-of-way,
these lands would be permanently protected providing significant
benefits to Mojave Desert Tortoise and their habitat.
Federal Agency Post-Decisional Actions

After the change in presidential administrations, however, the
Project was litigated and BLM settled with the Project's opponents
(many of whom were organizations not based in Utah) rather than
standing behind the agency's decision. It has given no sign that it
intends to fulfill the transportation-related mandates under OPLMA.
[Moreover, BLM and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service have unilaterally
taken further action to undermine the issuance of the UDOT Northern
Corridor right-of-way by (1) refusing to enter into a Memorandum of
Agreement to complete Section 106 consultation under the National
Historic Preservation Act for nearly 4 years, which process BLM
proposed and then declined to defend, and (2) voluntarily withdrawing
and amending the supporting Biological Opinion issued to complete the
Section 7 consultation process under the Endangered Species Act.
Despite withdrawal of the Biological Opinion and pending
reconsideration of the original right-of-way grant, BLM has continued
to act as though the Northern Corridor ``changed circumstance'' has
been triggered, pressuring state and local agencies to expend time,
effort, and money toward implementing the mitigation required under the
changed circumstance. Because such land use management changes were
completed as part of a project level application and amendment, it is
not proper nor within the province of BLM to change aspects of a
project application for implementation; and notably, without input from
the project proponent. To the extent BLM seeks to complete broad land
use management planning for the area, federal statute and regulations
expressly set forth the procedures and requirements to complete such an
amendment, and BLM should be required to follow that process.
In our experience, the local BLM office has historically engaged in
a very positive manner with UDOT. But when it comes to this Project,
BLM has declined to engage with the project proponents and
stakeholders, including UDOT and the entities most affected by any
decisions or further review under NEPA. Instead, it appears that BLM,
at the highest levels, has selectively engaged with its preferred
constituents in meetings, discussions, and agreements behind closed
doors, then acted unilaterally to effectuate those backroom decisions.
In such meetings, BLM has intentionally not provided UDOT a seat at the
table and withheld information from UDOT. Those actions do not reflect
the behavior of a good neighbor vis-a-vis adjacent landowners, nor a
government that respects the sovereign interests of its state and
municipal counterparts. Such actions are not reflective of good
government, nor consistent with good land use management practices and
procedures.
UDOT's mission is to serve the interests of Utah residents, and as
a result, the prejudice from delaying the road is not solely to UDOT
but to those residents. To date, UDOT has expended over $8.5 million in
the Northern Corridor project, of which $7 million was paid to support
the BLM's initial NEPA process to evaluate UDOT's application for a
right-of-way grant over federal public lands, and the other over $1.5
million was committed to design and engineering work required after the
right-of-way was issued by BLM.
Conclusion

UDOT has expended considerable resources completing the
environmental impact studies and navigating the federal approval
processes, and it has committed millions of dollars to implementation
of the Northern Corridor project. The Project was approved through that
process in an effort to proactively encourage BLM to meet its OPLMA
obligations.
Our experience with the Northern Corridor demonstrates the
Administration's unfortunate tendency to act as though the federal
agencies were the only landowner; to ignore important needs related to
transportation planning; and to exclude state and local counterparts
from planning processes that will accomplish the needs of those who
actually live in the affected area. The delay and failure of the BLM to
comply with and effectuate that Congressional mandate should not be the
basis to thwart state and local efforts to meet and comply with those
requirements and expectations. Postponement or outright prevention of
the Northern Corridor project significantly increases the costs of
providing the road's intended benefits at the expense of Utah's
taxpayers. In addition to monetary costs, such delay imposes non-fiscal
costs on UDOT and the Utah residents it serves by depriving them of the
benefits of mobility and safety in their transportation system and
inhibits implementation of local and regional transportation plans.

______

Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Braceras.
I think we are getting a little feedback, so all of us,
let's make sure we turn off our mics, and if you will speak
directly into it, I think we will get better sound quality.
I would like to now recognize Mr. Zach Renstrom, General
Manager at the Washington County Water Conservation District,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Renstrom, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF ZACHARY RENSTROM, GENERAL MANAGER, WASHINGTON
COUNTY WATER CONSERVANCY DISTRICT, ST. GEORGE, UTAH

Mr. Renstrom. Mr. Chairman, Representative Maloy,
Representative Moore, we are so grateful to have you here in
our wonderful county that we love so much.
I am grateful to be here today and to share some of the
great things that we are doing with water conservation down
here and water in general, and just not share but actually brag
what we have been doing down here because we are very proud of
what we have done here.
As has been mentioned multiple times before, we are one of
the fastest growing communities in the United States, and we
don't see that slowing down at all.
And as the individual that is tasked with making sure that
our current residents have water and our future residents have
water, you can just imagine the overwhelming burden that has
been placed on the Water District going forward.
To prepare for this, we have come up with what we call the
20-year plan where we basically outline how we are going to
ensure that this community has water for the next 20 years.
Several aspects of it, and one part I would like to bring
up is water conservation. We are making sure that the new homes
and businesses that are being constructed today are the most
water-efficient homes in the state of Utah, if not most of the
western United States.
Our businesses and retail institutions, they are also
working with this. In fact, we were the first county in the
state of Utah to ban or prohibit non-functioning grass at
retail or industrial, those type of developments moving
forward, so we are very proud of that also.
We are also working with our existing residents. We are
offering a grass rebate, where we actually go out and we pay
residents to remove turf and install desert-friendly
landscaping.
The response to this was so overwhelming we actually had to
go out and quickly hire additional staff to respond to that.
And we are able to measure this water conservation that is
going on, and if you look at the water-per-capita use, our
numbers are decreasing faster than almost anywhere in the
western United States at this time.
Another aspect to that program is reuse. Currently, we have
a small reuse, but we are going to expand that greatly.
However, that comes at a huge cost, in the hundreds of
millions, if not billions of dollars costs moving forward.
The Water District also wants to be a very good partner in
all these projects moving forward.
In 2016, the BLM came to the Water District and requested
the Water District go and purchase 90 acres of inholdings with
the National Conservation Area. This is private land where an
individual could go and develop it. They could go to a city,
get a development permit, and bulldoze the area.
The Water District took an active approach in working with
the BLM. At the time, the BLM told us it would take 2 years to
get that process completed.
We are now in our 8th year and it is still not completed,
and this is a massive problem because as projects get delayed,
it costs time, both for the local and Federal Government.
However, we are still working on that project. We hope to
have that completed. And once it is completed, there will be 90
additional acres that currently could be developed that will be
placed in Federal ownership that will permanently protect that
area for the future for the desert tortoise.
We are also working with the Federal Government in the
salinity control program. Currently, the United States has a
treaty with the country of Mexico to reduce the salinity in the
Colorado River, and it has been a challenge.
Currently we have a natural hot spring that produces over a
thousand tons of salt that are placed into the Colorado River
System, and we are working with the Bureau of Reclamation to
come up with innovative ways how we could remove that salt and
reduce the salinity in the Colorado River that would benefit
both the United States and our treaty with Mexico.
We also are actively working on the Virgin River program.
This is a program where we protect all the species along the
Virgin River Corridor and the Santa Clara Corridor where we
work with our Federal, state, and local governments to ensure
that those species are protected. And since developing that
program, our species are actually thriving.
Why I bring up these projects is these are excellent
examples, when you allow local control to get involved, how we
can make things happen. Here in Washington County, we have a
long history of good stewardship. We are very proud of the
stewardship. We love this county, we love living here, and we
love actually sharing it with others too.
When we are not able to control our local destiny and the
Federal Government removes that, bad things happen. And I think
you have heard several people testify on that today, about what
can happen when we lose that partnership.
We are grateful for you being here today. We are committed
to move forward and be good stewards of this area. But we
desperately need the help of Congress.
Right now with our Federal nexus, almost everything we do
here in Washington County has some type of Federal nexus that
requires us to go through the environmental review process.
It takes years and years to accomplish the most basic,
simple things. It costs millions of dollars and lots of time
lost to both government employees and to our local economy.
We are thankful for your time being here, and if you have
any questions, I will be happy to answer them after my time.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Renstrom follows:]
Prepared Statement of Zachary Renstrom, General Manager, Washington
County Water Conservancy District

Mr. Chairman Curtis, Rep. Maloy, Rep. Moore, and other
distinguished members of the Committee. I am grateful to have been
invited to appear before you today to discuss the remarkable water
management accomplishments of this desert community. As has been
mentioned, Washington County is the fastest-growing County in America.
In the last decade, our population has increased 37 percent and our per
capita water use has decreased significantly. We are creating a more
sustainable community through aggressive water conservation measures,
reuse expansion, agricultural water optimization, and intelligent
growth ordinances. Washington County is dependent on one, fully
appropriated water supply--the Virgin River watershed, a tributary of
the Colorado River that runs through Zion National Park. This water
source has been developed and used by settlers since 1854. It now
serves over 200,000 residents and an estimated 8-10 million annual
tourists.
The Virgin River watershed is prone to excessive drought conditions
and is insufficient to meet the demands of a population projected to
more than double by 2060. We must conserve AND diversify. We have
developed a 20-year plan that relies on new infrastructure, aggressive
conservation, wastewater reuse, and optimization of agricultural water.
Conservation

The district has worked with Washington County and our municipal
partners to adopt the most restrictive water use ordinances in Utah.
Washington is the first county in the state to prohibit non-functional
lawn in new commercial, industrial and institutional developments;
require weather-based smart irrigation controllers; and, mandate golf
course water budgets. Other measures include restricting lawn in new
residential development, implementing lawn replacement incentives, and
improving rate structures to penalize water waste. The community has
responded well to these programs. Washington County represents 7% of
Utah's population, but we account for 34% of the grass that was
replaced statewide in 2023. This is partly due to a clever public
awareness campaign with messages like ``Get your Saturday back'' and
``Get off your lazy grass.'' Washington County has replaced enough
grass to run a 12-inch wide strip of grass from the county
administration building to California's border. Additional conservation
will account for about 25% of the water needed to serve our community
over the next 20 years.
Regional Reuse System

Construction is underway on a new regional reuse system that
includes expanded treatment facilities, reservoirs, and pipelines to
capture, treat and deliver treated wastewater for agricultural and
irrigation purposes, freeing up potable water. Reuse will provide more
than 50% of the anticipated water demand of our community over the next
20 years.
Local Supply Optimization

In addition to developing new storage, we are expanding well
systems to maximize agricultural groundwater for future conversion to
municipal development. We support efforts to improve system
efficiencies, manage groundwater and meter water use.
20-Year Water Supply Plan Summary

The collective efforts of conservation, reuse and local supply
optimization are anticipated to provide approximately 46,600 acre feet
at a cost of well over $1 billion.
Red Cliffs National Conservation Area/Warner Valley Reservoir

The Red Cliffs National Conservation Area (NCA) is an integral part
of our watershed, with snowpack from the Pine Valley Mountain feeding
groundwater basins inside the Conservation Area. In addition to
directing BLM to identify a route for the northern corridor roadway
through the NCA, the Washington County portion of the 2009 Omnibus
Public Lands Management Act guaranteed our continued access to the
historic wells in the groundwater basin at the foot of the mountain and
within the NCA boundary. Since 2020, the Water District and the BLM
have been working to complete a land exchange to protect 90 acres of
private inholdings within the Conservation Area boundary. The exchange
will involve the District purchasing the inholding and exchanging it to
BLM for a potential reservoir site in the Warner Valley area. The land
exchange will permanently protect desert tortoise habitat and result in
more efficient management of land within the NCA boundary. It will also
protect our watershed. The BLM, Water District, and Washington County,
as administrator of the multi-species HCP that established the Reserve,
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in December 2020 for
this purpose and are working together to acquire the remaining
privately-owned acreage through exchange and possible donation. The
County is contributing funding towards the processing of the exchange,
and the District has entered into an option agreement to acquire the
non-Federal property acres needed for the exchange.
Next Steps

Longer-term planning is underway through a grant with the Bureau of
Reclamation to evaluate how we can beneficially use water from the La
Verkin Hot Springs, also known as Pah Tempe. According to the Bureau of
Reclamation, the hot springs are the Colorado River's second-highest
source of salinity. The United States has a treaty obligation to reduce
salinity in the water delivered to Mexico. As an aside, I want to thank
all of you for introducing H.R. 7872 two weeks ago to extend the
Colorado River Basin Salinity Control Act, which authorizes the funding
for the hot springs project. The hot springs are natural springs
located on the Virgin River on the boundary between Hurricane and La
Verkin that produce approximately 5,000 gallons per minute, or more
than seven million gallons daily, of 107-degree Fahrenheit water. The
springs release an astounding 109,000 tons (6,813 semi-truck loads) of
salt annually. The springs' high salinity limits use and poses unique
challenges to our regional and local water supply. The Water District
is studying treatment options to improve the water quality for future
use as a blended resource. High power costs and salt disposal pose our
most significant challenges. We are also evaluating possible ways to
harness solar power and monetize salt production through a myriad of
potential uses.
In the interim, the Water District has agreed with a national hot
springs operator to create Zion Canyon Hot Springs. The $60 million
resort will be located on elevated topography in La Verkin, offering
guests picturesque views of the Virgin River canyon.
Off Road Capital Partners and the founder of Iron Mountain Hot in
Glenwood Springs, Colorado, are developing Zion Canyon Hot Springs and
will manage the resort as a public recreational amenity. The District
has entered into a long-term lease agreement with the developers for
land and a portion of the water produced by the hot springs. The
developer broke ground in March and is scheduled to open in the fall of
2025. The 15-acre resort will feature 53 pools, including a large
freshwater pool and whirlpool. Water from the springs will be used in
the pools and returned to the Virgin River.
Conclusion

The Washington County Water Conservancy District is determined and
committed to prepare for the future in this beautiful area. We have
significant challenges with water resources, topography and endangered
species. The public land nexus requires us to obtain federal permits on
many of the District's projects. These permits are unnecessary costly
and time consuming both for the Federal Government and local
governments. permits. Washington County's history is one of coming
together to solve complicated issues. We love this community and are
honored to call it home.
Thank you for your time.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Renstrom.
Finally, I would like to recognize Mr. Darcy Stewart,
President and CEO of SunRiver St. George Development.
Mr. Stewart, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DARCY STEWART, PRESIDENT AND CEO, SUNRIVER ST.
GEORGE DEVELOPMENT, LLC, ST. GEORGE, UTAH

Mr. Stewart. Thank you very much. I appreciate being here,
appreciate the forum, appreciate what is trying to be
accomplished.
Again, my name is Darcy Stewart, and I have been a
developer and a builder here in St. George since 1990. I have
been involved with commercial projects, including hotels,
office buildings, retail, and fuel stations.
In terms of residential development, I have developed and
built a large-scale master-planned community, including 2,600
homes, numerous community amenities, and an 18-hole golf
course.
I have worked closely with Washington County and local
authorities to meet and exceed conservation standards. Long
before these conservation guidelines and restrictions existed,
we have installed desert landscaping as a standard to
homeowners and built an entire community of over 300 homes
entirely of desert landscape or artificial turf, with only a
small portion of grass on the community amenity.
The community is still aesthetically beautiful and water
wise. The Sun River community has become an example of water
conservation in Washington County.
I have also worked with the city of St. George, exchanged
water rights for reuse water on our community golf course,
again working with local authorities in a win-win effort.
These are just a few examples of the ways we and other
developers in the area are trying to work together with local
authorities to be responsible to the environment, enhance the
beauty of the area, and meet the growth demands that we have.
Congestion and traffic are escalating. The need for the Red
Hills Parkway to continue on and connect with Exit 13 on
Interstate 15 is critical and timely.
With communities already approved and not yet on-line, the
current infrastructure will not meet the demand. Denying
regional belt roads like the Northern Corridor will not keep
people from moving here but will reduce the quality of life and
economic potential of the area.
Red Hills Parkway was thoroughly planned. The existing part
of the Red Hills Parkway was thoroughly planned and executed,
preserving the surrounding beauty. The same planning and
insight can be given to the proposed Northern Corridor.
This road will not open any of our public lands to
development. The adjacent public lands will remain untouched
except for possible trailheads for public enjoyment with
restrictions managed by the Red Cliffs Desert Reserve or the
BLM.
Ample migration corridors for the reserve wildlife under
the road is another solution to an important concern. We too
have a concern for the endangered species in the area.
With the unique topography of Washington County, it is
critical to provide solutions for transportation. The natural
beauty, the strength of local communities and the state will
continue to draw people for the same reasons that many of us
live here in the area.
Responsible planning is the solution, and for this reason,
I support the proposed Northern Corridor.
Thank you very much. I appreciate being here.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stewart follows:]
Prepared Statement of Darcy Stewart, Chief Executive Officer,
Fieldhouse

My name is Darcy Stewart and I have been a developer and builder in
St. George and Washington County since 1990. I have been involved with
commercial projects, including hotels, office buildings, retail and
fuel stations. In terms of residential development, I have developed a
large-scale master planned community including 2,600 homes, numerous
community amenities, and an 18-hole golf course.
I have worked closely with Washington County and local authorities
to meet and exceed conservation standards. Long before these
conservation guidelines and restrictions existed, we have installed
desert landscaping as a standard to homeowners and built an entire
community of over 300 homes entirely in desert landscaping or
artificial turf with only a small portion of grass in a common amenity.
The community is still aesthetically beautiful and water wise. This Sun
River community has become an example of water conservation in
Washington County.
We have also worked with the City of St. George exchanging water
rights for reuse water on our community golf course. Again, working
with local authorities in a win-win effort.
These are just a few examples of the ways we and other developers
in the area are trying to work together with local authorities to be
responsible to the environment, enhance the beauty of the area and meet
the growth demands.
Congestion and traffic are escalating. The need for Red Hills
Parkway to continue on and connect with Exit 13 on Interstate 15 is
critical and timely. With communities already approved and not yet
online, the current infrastructure will not meet the demands.
Denying regional belt roads like the Northern Corridor will not
keep people from moving here, but will reduce the quality of life and
economic potential of our area.
Red Hills Parkway was thoughtfully planned and executed initially
preserving the surrounding beauty. The same planning and insight can be
given to the proposed Northern Corridor connection. This road will not
open our public lands to development--the adjacent public land will
remain untouched except for possible trailheads for public enjoyment
with use restrictions managed by the Red Cliffs Desert Reserve or BLM.
Ample migration corridors for Reserve wildlife under the road is
another solution to an important concern.
With the unique topography of Washington County, it is critical to
provide solutions for transportation. The natural beauty, the strength
of the local communities and the State, will continue to draw people
for the same reason many of us call this area home. Responsible
planning is the solution and for this reason I support the proposed
Northern Corridor now.

______

Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Stewart.
The Chair will now recognize Members of Congress for their
questions, and I would like to begin with Congresswoman Maloy.
The time is yours for questions.
Ms. Maloy. Zach, I am going to start with you.
You talked about water and long-term water planning, and
obviously that is essential. I mean, we couldn't ask for a more
beautiful setting for this hearing. We could ask for a little
bit better air conditioning. It is warm here. And that means
every drop of water we have is precious.
In 2015, when BLM released their resource management plan
for the Red Cliffs National Conservation Area, you were a
County Commissioner and covering water issues. I was a Deputy
County Attorney, and we worked together on this.
Can you talk just a little bit about what was in that plan
concerning water rights?
Mr. Renstrom. Located in NCA is an aquifer underneath that
is critical to Washington County. Several of our local cities
actually have wells up there, and they have been up there for
years, and years, and years.
In fact, we have certain infrastructure that runs through
that, the NCA, that has been there almost 100 years now. So, it
is critical that we have access to that really pristine
aquifer.
And part of the whole process, we want to make sure, is
that we continue to have access to that aquifer. When we go and
we put a pipeline in there or we put a well house, it has
essentially no effect upon the tortoises.
We know that we can actually go in and utilize that
resource and have no effect upon the tortoises or any other
habitat in the area.
And that is one of the reasons why as a county, and as the
County Commissioner, we were fighting for that, because it is
critical.
Ms. Maloy. Yes. And when the plan first came out, there was
language in there calling for BLM to claim those water rights
that lie under the NCA, which violates state law, and there is
no Federal authority to do it.
And between me, you, Eric, and Adam, we all worked hard on
this, and we got the BLM to take that language out. But it took
a huge effort by a lot of people, including a lot of lawyers,
to remind them that they don't have the authority to do this.
I started off by saying our bureaucracy is broken, and that
is a really good example of our most precious, most limiting
resource to growth here, they were trying to overreach their
authority and claim it.
And then you also talked about the land swaps that are
required for long-term water planning here. In order to build
water infrastructure projects, we have to do some land trades
that require Federal Government involvement.
And you talked about how long they take. Will you just talk
a little bit about how much they cost? How much of the cost is
not associated with a land swap but just with the bureaucracy?
Mr. Renstrom. Every time we get involved in one of these
things, we are now estimating millions and millions of dollars,
and it just keeps on escalating.
And like the land exchange I was talking to you about, when
we were first approached by the BLM, they told us 2 years, and
if we could have stuck to that timeline, it would have saved
time and money, because every time we have another meeting, we
have to pay staff and we have to go out and get the consultants
there and it just escalates astronomically, almost
exponentially.
And the other thing is that the Federal agencies will add
bureaucracy. So, even though this started 8 years ago, we will
be going through it, and then the Federal bureaucracies will
come out with a new regulation or rule, and then we have to
kind of step back several steps and start the process again.
So, part of the problem of not getting that finished is
they kind of create new rules as we are going through the
process, and that makes it very expensive because then we have
to dive into it. I have to pay attorneys to review it. I have
to pay engineers that go through it and see how we are going to
work through it.
Ms. Maloy. Yes. And in the meantime, this is something the
BLM actually wants done. It is getting more expensive, and we
are going to end up with the exact same swap at the end. We
didn't get a better swap for all that time and all that money.
Mr. Renstrom. Yes.
Ms. Maloy. I introduced the Water Rights Protection Act
with Senator Barrasso from Wyoming just to address that
original problem we talked about, to make it clear that
agencies don't have the ability to coerce water rights out of
local governments or landowners in order to be able to do
things on public lands.
Eric, I want to quickly switch to you. You talked about
school trust lands and how much of the SITLA, State
Institutional Trust Lands, are in that Zone 6.
Can you explain what the constitutional mandate for SITLA
is?
Mr. Clarke. Yes. SITLA exists to make money for
schoolchildren, period, right? Like that is what it does. So,
whenever we work with SITLA as a partner on a public lands
issue, we have to figure out how to make it pencil out so that
they can show financial benefit. They can't simply be
conservationists. They have to show that it makes money.
Ms. Maloy. I am almost out of time, so I just want to wrap
this up really quickly.
If the county were to try to offer up Zone 6 without a
Northern Corridor, in your opinion, would that violate SITLA's
state constitutional mandate?
Mr. Clarke. Yes. The Utah Education Association can and
should sue SITLA if SITLA goes around and starts locking up
land without getting money back for it.
Ms. Maloy. So, we have a Federal agency asking a state
agency to do something that would be unconstitutional?
Mr. Clarke. Right.
Ms. Maloy. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Ms. Maloy.
I would like to defer to my colleague, Mr. Moore, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Folks, thanks for being here, sincerely. I get to go on a
lot of field hearings in my other Committee, Ways and Means. We
have been to several different places across the country. And
the engagement here and the attendance is amazing. So, thanks
for sticking it out. I really appreciate it.
Almost to a person, you all have either been in my office
or we have communicated somehow, and I don't even represent
Washington County. You bring a thoughtful approach that is
comprehensive that cares about all the angles that are
involved.
And the frustrating part for me has been what I will just
briefly open with.
But first, on my script here, it says ``Chairman Curtis.''
It is going to be tough to call you that, John.
Mr. Curtis. Order. Order. The gentleman will----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. I didn't come to this role with a strong public
lands experience. Virtually nothing. I came more from a
national security perspective. And I will say that the two
folks that we have here, I have been able to defer to them. I
served on Natural Resources. I love this Committee. But I have
been able to defer to them.
John's focus on land swaps and getting as much land back
and low ownership control with a strong conservation,
environmental approach to thinking about energy is second to
none, and it has been an inspiring piece, particularly with
Celeste. I mean, there is something unique to be able to have
that much experience as not a Member of Congress, dealing with
the actual details that she has leading up to this, that she
immediately has made an impact on this world as she joined just
not long ago.
So, it has been an honor to be able to absolutely show up
here. I wish I would have known it was here, and I would have
had a tee time. But regardless.
Debt is my biggest issue. It is what I dig into entirely on
my Committees. Debt and immigration are things Congress has
just proven they are not willing to work together on.
These types of issues, we actually, as a body of Congress,
can come to some agreement on. And that is the frustrating part
because what ends up happening is you have executive ping-
ponging back and forth, executive overreach that happens.
And I don't like it when it is President Biden's policy
typically, and I may like it when it is a Republican in the
White House. But the fact remains is all of this executive
power that gets passed back and forth just creates a ping-pong
for our elected officials that are actually just trying to do
the right thing.
And the other thing is legal obstruction. Like those are
the two factors that create so much drama and turmoil that we
can't actually get something done. And that is ultimately why
we are here today and highlighting some of these issues.
I want to ask two very simple questions. Mr. Clarke and Mr.
Snow, jump in too.
How much money are we talking about? Thinking about Zone 6
in particular, you have worked on fish and wildlife issues.
Please, describe some of those efforts.
And then, I mean, what are we talking as far as what the
county has spent on just dealing with this back-and-forth?
Mr. Clarke. In Zone 6, since 2021, we are just over $6
million, and that has included a lot of different things we
have done. We went out and we purchased some land from school
trust lands, that they would like a 3-to-1 offset to the
corridor.
There was a lot of OHV use out there. That is obviously
tougher on the tortoises than mountain bikers.
So, we have pushed that off, we have fenced areas, we have
signed areas, and then we have put a regular law enforcement
presence out there. None of that is super cheap.
And we have done a lot of education outreach. We try really
hard to talk to our community, and to talk to our recreational
community in particular, about we can co-exist with our
endangered species issues that we have.
So, we drop money every single day. If you go into the new
county building, you will see a beautiful visitor center that
is there to educate people about our area and how we live here
and co-exist with what we do.
Mr. Moore. Anything to add, Mr. Snow?
Mr. Snow. Yes. Eric covered all the things, the direct
costs from the county. That is a rounding error compared to the
value of the land that SITLA has already put in, the road
improvements on the area outside the NCA that the Northern
Corridor will connect to.
Just the detrimental reliance on the good-faith agreement
that we had from the county, from the city, from the state,
from the SITLA.
To add all of those up, we are talking tens of millions of
dollars.
Mr. Moore. Thanks so much. I have another question here for
you on grazing, which is very much a northern Utah issue too,
but I will postpone it for now with my time.
Director Braceras, lastly, give me an estimate, give me a
sense for how much financial investment we could have avoided
if we would have just had a good-faith effort working together.
Which I know there are players in there, and then all of a
sudden things just kind of at the last minute, either a lawsuit
happens or an election comes up, that type of stuff.
Just give me a sense for what are we talking as far as
missed opportunities here.
Mr. Braceras. Yes. Thank you, Congressman.
Time is money. To date, we have spent $7 million just to do
the EIS for the BLM. We have paid another $1.5 million to do
some geotechnical work, working towards doing the engineering
after the issuance of the right-of-way, after the record of
decision.
To give you an idea of how time impacts us, in 2021, our
inflationary costs on our program were 16 percent a year,
construction costs. In 2022, they went to 12 percent. Last
year, they were 8 percent. This year it looks like they are
tracking.
We have a program right now of about $7 billion. So, it is
easy to do the math. Any time you delay a project by a year,
you are adding hundreds of millions of dollars to the cost to
the state to try to deliver the much-needed transportation
system. So, it is important.
The product, the Northern Corridor in this case, the
product will save lives and make people's lives better. And to
do so at a reasonable cost, we need to be able to move forward
together with all of the partners in good faith.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Moore.
I now yield to myself for questions. I would like to start
with Mr. Braceras.
Carlos, how long have you served in your current role?
Mr. Braceras. Mr. Chairman, you didn't tell me that this
was an embarrassing----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Braceras. I am currently 12 years as Executive
Director.
Mr. Curtis. And how many years with UDOT?
Mr. Braceras. With UDOT, June will be 38 years.
Mr. Curtis. OK. So, that makes you qualified to answer my
question.
How often do you build a road, particularly of this
consequence, without opposition?
Mr. Braceras. Nothing worth doing is easy, it seems like.
Mr. Curtis. So, in other words, you expect opposition on
any road that you are going to build anywhere in the state?
Mr. Braceras. The answer is yes. I wish it wasn't that
case, but when you are trying to prepare for the future you
have to have a big, bold vision, and sometimes it is hard.
Mr. Curtis. As I have driven around the state, sometimes I
have been on a road, I think of I-70 as an example, where I ask
myself: Would this ever be built today?
And I am curious, in your mind, if we use the same
standards we are using for the Northern Corridor, how would
transportation in Utah look?
Mr. Braceras. It is hard to imagine we could do the things
that we need to do to support our economy, our society. Today,
it seems like it is much harder to do things that matter. I
started my career as a designer, designing the last barrel, 16
miles of I-70, Ghost Rocks to Rattlesnake Bench, and it was a
wonderful project.
Mr. Curtis. Yes. And sometimes we talk about the economy,
but I also want to throw in healthcare, our ability to offer
services to people in need, and education, and many other
things, in addition to just being nice to drive around.
Do you think, as you look at this Northern Corridor and the
other projects you have worked on, have you or your department
tried any less hard to meet the environmental standards on this
road than any other road you have ever built?
Mr. Braceras. Absolutely not.
We hold ourselves to a high standard. We live here. This is
our home. We care about the lands, the wildlife in our homes.
So, we hold ourselves to a standard in which we want to make
sure we are going above and beyond.
We talk about meeting a transportation need, but we also,
when we do a project, we want to improve communities and we
want to improve the environment. We think there is an
opportunity to accomplish all three of those things together.
Mr. Curtis. That is great. Thank you.
Commissioner Snow, I am going to take you a little bit off
the record and off what you may have anticipated. But you and I
had a conversation a little earlier today that centered around
just how deeply people in this area do care about being
environmentalists, quite frankly, and leaving this Earth better
than we found it.
How far back do you and your family go in this area?
Mr. Snow. 1849.
Mr. Curtis. 1849. During that period of time, would you and
your ancestors feel that you have done a good job preserving
and protecting this area?
Mr. Snow. Clearly, yes.
Mr. Curtis. And I am curious, during your time,
particularly in service, how often have you been approached
from Washington, DC, from the executive branch, asking you your
opinion for how this land should be taken care of?
Mr. Snow. Zero.
Mr. Curtis. Zero times. Yet, you would bring quite a bit of
expertise from those generations and generations of good
stewardship in taking care of it.
Is it fair to say that sometimes you feel, I don't know if
the right word is that we are hypocritical, or I am not sure
how you would describe it, to be in the position where you have
guarded and protected these lands, now your opinion is not
sought, and somebody from far away wants to tell you how to
manage these lands.
Can you just give us a sense of how, not just you, but how
others in the community feel about that?
Mr. Snow. Insulted. It is absolutely insulting to think
that those of us, just this morning on our wonderful social
media, somebody said that, ``You don't care. You only care
about the money, Adam. You would pave every inch of this
county.''
My family settled this county. They led the 300 families
that were originally called here. Nobody can love this county
more than I do. Some people may be able to love it just as
much, but nobody loves it more, I guarantee you that.
And for us to be the stewards that we have and to develop
the things and the hard work that it took to make this this
incredible place now, that somebody can come in from
Connecticut or California or somewhere else and say, ``Trust
us, you have screwed it up for the last 180 years, let us tell
you now how to do it,'' is insulting.
Mr. Curtis. Yes, I think it is. During this hearing, I have
listened carefully. I have not heard any of my colleagues and I
have not heard any of the witnesses suggest that we shortcut
any environmental standards. I have not heard anybody suggest
that we don't care about doing this the right way.
But there is a great sense of frustration. And,
Commissioner Snow, you expressed it so well, I am actually just
going to stop there and let your words hang for a minute.
And I am now going to defer to my colleague, Congresswoman
Maloy, if she has a second round of questions.
Ms. Maloy. I do. I have some questions I didn't get to with
Commissioner Snow and with Mr. Braceras.
I will start with Commissioner Snow, since your mic is all
warmed up.
You talked about the 2020 SEIS. Will you just explain what
an SEIS is and why we are having one in 2020?
Mr. Snow. Yes. The National Environmental Policy Act, NEPA,
dictates that there are various levels of analysis based on
what somebody is going to do on the land, or proposing to do,
and then they analyze what that is.
And the highest level of analysis is an Environmental
Impact Statement. SEIS is a Supplemental Environment Impact
Statement. So, it is a review of the original analysis.
Ms. Maloy. And in that 2020 SEIS, one of the things that
was agreed to was a study to see the impact of wildfire on
tortoises.
I want to ask unanimous consent that we submit, for part of
the hearing record, Utah Department of Wildlife Resources study
on the impacts of wildfire on desert tortoises in this region.
Just as a spoiler alert, for those of you who are not going
to take the time to go read this entire study on the record,
the tortoises are doing fine. The impact is negligible. So,
thank you for that.
And you talked a little bit about everything we do here has
a Federal nexus. We are a public lands state. This is a public
lands county. You are a local elected official. You are a
County Commissioner.
Can you just speak to the processes you have to go through
as a local elected official to do the things that you are
required to do for your constituents?
Mr. Snow. There are many, many hoops to jump through. Name
any project, whether it is roads, water, power lines, providing
healthcare, access for people to get to grazing allotments,
anything, every single thing the first call is always to a
partner, the Federal Government. Whether it is the Forest
Service, the BLM, the National Park Service, we are always
having to go through them.
And luckily we do have good relationships with many of the
people on the ground. They are good, honest public servants.
Their bosses in DC are the ones that generally don't know what
they are doing and cause the headaches for us.
But everything we do has to go through the Federal
Government.
Ms. Maloy. And has calling one of those Federal partners
ever made something you are doing for your constituents cheaper
or easier?
Mr. Snow. Never.
Ms. Maloy. Thank you.
All right. Mr. Stewart, I have one for you.
As a developer in this area, you have never had to work
directly with the Fish and Wildlife Service even though you are
developing land in an area with listed species, the endangered
desert tortoise, because Washington County has had a habitat
conservation plan in place for almost 30 years now, and you get
to deal directly with the county when you are developing land.
Can you just talk a little bit about what the importance of
that is to you as a developer?
Mr. Stewart. Well, obviously, if we had to take on the
Federal Government just for a development, it wouldn't be
feasible or practical at all.
I think, as I have listened to the discussion here today, I
would like to have the other stakeholders, they all charge
impact fees, well, at least Zach does.
And I am wondering, every person that is sitting here, how
much money of a water impact fee is charged to take care of all
this legal and Federal work that is going on? Because impact
fees are a big part of what is causing affordable housing to
not be affordable.
Ms. Maloy. Well, I don't know if you are allowed to
question Zach, so I am just going to go ahead and let him
answer that question if he would like to.
Mr. Renstrom. That is actually a really good question. We
have not done the analysis on that specific issue, but I can
tell you it is incorporated into the impact fees, and it is in
the millions of dollars.
Ms. Maloy. Thanks.
And then, Carlos, I am just going to wrap up with you. You
have a lot of experience working in the Department of
Transportation. We have established that.
Do we know how to engineer roads that are porous and would
allow tortoises to go back and forth?
Mr. Braceras. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes, we do. As was mentioned earlier, we were planning to
build culverts that allow the tortoise to go back and forth.
Basically we want to create a road that doesn't bifurcate the
preserve so that we can really enhance this area.
So, yes, we know how to engineer it. Yes, we know how to
build it. Yes, we know how to maintain and operate facilities
that can live alongside the wildlife.
Ms. Maloy. So, the factors that are stalling this project
are not engineering or design factors?
Mr. Braceras. Absolutely, they are not things that are
stalling this project.
Unfortunately, we are not even allowed to have the
conversations about engineering and design processes, to bring
that into the conversation. We are being left out of the
conversation.
Ms. Maloy. Mr. Chairman, I am almost done. I just want to
wrap up where I started.
Our bureaucracy is broken. I mean, if you have been sitting
here listening to this, it is very clear that we have public
servants who want to do things that are in the interest of the
people who live here. We know how to do those things. We know
what the answer is.
But we are stalled in years and years of red tape and
expense to get those things done. And what we get at the end of
it is not an improved product. We just get more debt and more
costs.
And all of that is borne by the taxpayers. The taxpayers
are paying for both sides of the lawsuits. The taxpayers are
paying for the increased costs over time of the projects.
Taxpayers are paying for all of the studies, all the personnel,
all the people who are showing up and doing this kind of back-
and-forth just to try to get the basics we need for
transportation, water, a lifestyle, a life here.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Curtis. The gentlewoman yields.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Moore.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. Just a couple more things to flesh
out.
Mr. Stewart, you actually hit on a really important part. I
have spoken with UTA numerous times. I have worked with folks
from every municipality that I represent.
The congestion that potentially comes from growth with
regards to affordable housing, right? It is a supply-and-demand
issue entirely, right? It is one of the big reasons for the
driver of affordable housing.
Building transportation networks that will alleviate
congestion is a big key factor. Figuring out how to deal with
this NIMBYism that we continue to hold on to so strongly is
another major issue.
But the way that we regulate our ability to build is a huge
part of it, and it adds an enormous amount of cost. And those
costs, if you save on those costs because you find something
that is archaic or really nonsensical, which there are plenty,
those costs get passed directly to the consumer.
This is not something that developers are holding on to
because we have a competitive market in this field, and it will
get passed directly to them.
So, you hit on a very important part, and I just wanted to
reiterate how doing smart regulation in not an overburdensome
way can actually help reduce the cost to get younger folks in
houses.
I can tell you, I sit on the Social Security Subcommittee.
We are in a tough spot going into the next decade. We don't
have the financial situation that we did. And if we don't have
people getting and investing in property, in homes, even if it
is a smaller condo, they are going to have a much more
difficult time than even I did, and I am not that far of a
generation away from them.
So, hot button topic for me. And I appreciate you bringing
that up.
I would actually just like to continue to question you, Mr.
Renstrom and Mr. Stewart. How have you addressed water issues?
How have you been able to find conservation approaches? I have
had St. George City municipality leaders in my office a bunch
talking about this.
Can you highlight some of the significant wins that you
have done over the last few years?
Mr. Stewart. We have developed a 2,600-unit community. And
when we started out, water wasn't an issue. In fact, when we
started, we asked the city if we could put in purple pipe,
which is reuse. So, we put in two systems. The reuse would be
dry until the reuse water was available. And we were turned
down on that.
So, we have moved forward as best we can to conserve water.
Now, the last 300 homes that we built, having grass, like the
grass you are sitting on, was not an option. If they wanted any
kind of a grass, it had to be an artificial turf. And, yes, the
community center has some grass around it, but I think
everybody needs a little bit of grass.
So, in design of our communities, we have been very
cautious to design with water as a future issue. So, yes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Mr. Renstrom, anything to add?
Mr. Renstrom. One of the things that we have done is work
extensively with the home builders. Of course, the home
builders, like you said, are very concerned with costs. And we
basically reached an agreement with the home builders that if
they start building these highly efficient, water-efficient
homes, that we can lower our impact fees.
So, right now, compared to what we could have, our impact
fees are about $5,000 to $6,000 lower per home because they are
simply going to have a lower impact.
So, we just think of these creative solutions with that, of
how we work with the home builders, lower our impact fees, make
sure homes are more affordable, but yet still conserve water.
And it has actually been a very positive experience down
here, and it has been moving forward very quickly.
Mr. Moore. Commissioner Snow, how long have you been in
office?
Mr. Snow. Just over 2 years.
Mr. Moore. I have been just 3\1/2\. I recommend not reading
the comments on social media.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Moore. Can we talk grazing real quick?
The potential impacts of the BLM's new conservation rule
that has recently been put out, there are a lot of concerns,
obviously, goes down party lines for the most part, right.
And I challenge that. And I think if people actually really
dug into the issues, they would be able to find what I
mentioned before. This is actually an area Congress can usually
find a path forward on, unlike some of the other issues that
are, obviously, very important to our nation too, a frustration
that I have with my own employment location.
But this is something, like, grazing, just grazing. What
does this do to grazing? What does this do to the outlook of
grazing? Is this a hindrance or will this be promoting more
opportunities for grazing, this type of BLM authority that is
coming out?
Mr. Snow. Absolutely a hindrance, for sure.
And just to your point, Congressman, in this county alone
we have massive amounts of land set aside. You have the Red
Hills NCA. You have the Beaver Dam Wash NCA. You have the
national forest which has enormous amounts of wilderness area.
You have the second busiest national park, not a small one.
You have four state parks in the middle of the county as well.
We have a lot of conservation in this county. You have,
even on the less regulated, you have major areas of ACECs in
the other areas of the BLM land.
So, conservation is important, nothing to take away from
that, but it is balancing multiple use. And to elevate the
conservation rule to say that conservation is now at the same
level, that was not in FLPMA, and that only hinders grazing.
And for many of the people in this audience here who are
actively grazing to support their families, I can only imagine
the terror and the fear in their eyes looking at the future.
Mr. Moore. Yes. One thing we definitely do a very poor job
of in Congress is giving people some consistency. We don't do
it to business owners, we don't do it for tax policy, we don't
do it to landowners, to know what is going on.
I love what I am seeing in some areas in my district.
Conservation easements. They are doing it in a way that keeps
the Federal Government out of it. They are making it private
sector-related. They are engaged.
And while they are doing it, they have these opportunities
for grazing that goes on. Grazing has limited a significant
risk with regards to wildfire. Like there are so many positive
impacts from this.
This type of ruling, I anticipate, in the change of
Administration, these things will, obviously, go a different
direction. But it doesn't really solve the problem that we
don't get at the root of it and we don't let Congress actually
address this.
Because I know there are more reasonable people that could
find some type of compromise, that would say, ``All right, this
is what our 10- or 15-year outlook is going to look like and we
will reassess then.''
Because grazing is absolutely essential with respect to not
only livelihood, but to our environment and our conservation
efforts.
So, thank you very much.
And I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Curtis. The gentleman yields.
I will ask a few final questions. For those of you that are
getting warm, we are getting very close, so hang with us for
just a minute.
Congressman Moore mentioned the BLM rule, and I would like
to point out that I had sponsored a bill that has made its way
through the Natural Resources Committee, it would get to the
House Floor, to repeal that rule.
Commissioner, you and I both want to take this moment to
point out, this isn't because we don't want to preserve and
protect these lands. But an agency having unquestionable
ability to make these decisions about where we lock up grazing
and other activities on the land is not the way that our
Founders intended us to operate.
You don't need to comment on that, but the nodded head is
good enough.
I would also like to point out, to Congressman Moore's
point, I hate to give him this, that he made a good point, but
I am going to say that----
Mr. Moore. Hold on, let me record this.
Ms. Maloy. It is on the record.
Mr. Moore. It is on the record.
Mr. Curtis. This is an issue that we can beat. And what I
mean by that is, we can come together with different
viewpoints. It is not like we really disagree on what we want
to have happen. We want to preserve and protect. We want to be
able to have economic development. We want to be able to have
the essential corridors that we need.
And I am confident. And I would point to the Emery County
Public Lands Bill as a really good example where we set aside
1.3 million acres and designated where we would graze, where we
would recreate, where we would extract, and where we would
protect, and actually found consensus. It is difficult to do,
but it can be done.
And I would just like to say to this group that is here, as
we start to wind down, I am very grateful, as the Chairman,
that you have all done such a great job. Maybe it is the heat
that has kept you mellowed out. But you have done a great job
of being participants today, thank you for coming, on both
sides of this issue, and thank you for listening patiently.
I will just mention again that I am available, and to the
extent my colleagues are available, to mingle with you
afterwards. If your points weren't made, please take a minute
to come up and express the things you would like to us to do.
And finally, in conclusion, I would like to point out,
simply because we are in this county, we haven't really
emphasized a lot of the problems that we see in other parts of
the state with this overreach.
So, I do want to bring up extraction and point out that
there are parts of our state that we are being limited in
extraction as well. And this is the very extraction that will
provide the critical minerals to drive the new economy that all
of us have talked about, that we would like to do.
We hold underneath Utah's surface some of the most
important critical minerals for our future. And for those of
you who want to get cleaner and cleaner, they are under our
surface, and these BLM rules are prohibiting us from accessing
those.
We mentioned grazing. I want to re-emphasize grazing. And
recreation as well. These rules are also prohibiting
recreation. What is the point of having these lands if we can't
take our grandkids and they can't take their kids out into
these lands and enjoy the beautiful nature that we have?
So, I just want to point, as you move around the state,
there are other issues here that are important to recognize as
well.
And with that, I conclude the questioning portion of our
hearing.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. Members of the
Committee may have some additional questions for our witnesses
today, and we ask that they respond to those in writing.
By the way, Congresswoman Maloy, we will accept your
document into the record, without objection.

[The information follows:]
Statement for the Record
J. Shirley, Director
Utah Department of Wildlife Resources

Chairman Curtis, Representative Maloy, Moore, and other
distinguished members of the Federal Lands Subcommittee, thank you for
coming to the great state of Utah and allowing me to provide
information for the record regarding the status of the Mojave desert
tortoise (MDT) as part of the Northern Corridor project. Speaking on
behalf of the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR), we are very
grateful to the members of the Utah Delegation for bringing this issue
forward. My name is J. Shirley, and I am the Director of the State of
Utah's Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources.
The UDWR has been granted authority over wildlife and its management
within the state borders and, therefore, is the state's wildlife
expert.
The UDWR has 2023 MDT population estimates, updated from the 2019
MDT population estimate, within the Red Cliffs National Conservation
Area (NCA) to assess the impacts of the 2020 wildfires on the Mojave
desert tortoise. The MDT populations across the NCA have stabilized,
and there is no evidence of recent declines in tortoise densities
following the 2020 wildfires (Figure 18a). The 2023 abundance estimate
of 2,425 individuals across the NCA (Zones 2, 3, and 5) is the highest
recorded since 2005.

Summary of UDWR. 2024. MOJAVE DESERT TORTOISE POPULATION MONITORING
WITHIN THE RED CLIFFS NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA, 2023. Publication
Number 24-07.

Primary goal: Determine the current tortoise density and
long-term demographic and population trends for desert
tortoises within the Red Cliffs NCA.

-  Obtaining population estimates in the calendar year 2023,
exactly 25 years since the full-scale implementation of the
monitoring program, will allow for trend evaluation of one
tortoise generation, an important recovery criterion.

-  Population monitoring efforts were concentrated on federal
lands within Management Zones 2, 3, 4, and 5 in the Red Cliffs
NCA; additional surveys were conducted in surrounding areas on
State Trust Institutional Lands Administration (STILA) and Utah
Department of Natural Resources (UDNR) lands.

Secondary goal: to evaluate the effectiveness of the
recovery program and implement appropriate adaptive
management strategies to recover desert tortoises in the
Upper Virgin River Recovery Unit (UVRRU).

Relevant Findings:

Since 2009, tortoise populations across the NCA appear to
have stabilized, and there is no evidence of recent
declines in tortoise densities (Figure 18a)

We estimate there are 2,425 adult tortoises across
Management Zones 2, 3, and 5, and an additional 359 adult
tortoises estimated in Management Zone 4, the translocation
site for displaced tortoises. Our abundance estimate of
2,784 adult tortoises in Zones 2-5 is similar to abundance
estimates from a 2023 drone survey which estimated 2,609
animals (Bandy 2023)

Our 2023 abundance estimate of 2,425 across the NCA (Zones
2, 3, and 5) is the highest recorded since 2005. Further,
translocating displaced tortoises helped establish a robust
population within Management Zone 4 (UDWR 2019). These
estimates are also similar to the 2023 drone surveys,
although drone estimates were slightly lower (1,221 adult
tortoises; Bandy 2023).

In general, the majority of tortoises appeared healthy,
with appropriate muscle mass and weight. We observed
numerous tortoises actively foraging with green around
their mouths. In addition, we observed a high number of
recaptures relative to previous years. Interestingly, we
recaptured seven tortoises that were originally marked 26
to 51 years prior. Four of those tortoises were marked with
a distinctive permanent marking system (e.g., drill holes
in marginals) that was implemented prior to 1985 in the
Paradise Canyon and Red Cliffs Recreation Area.

Densities within the NCA are currently higher than many
other Mojave desert tortoise populations, range wide (2.2
to 7.2 tortoises per km2; USFWS 2021b).

Recovery actions implemented as part of the Washington
County Habitat Conservation Plan, including protection of
existing habitat, restoration of degraded habitat (e.g.,
disturbed, burned), tortoise fencing on the perimeter of
the NCA, community education programs, translocation of
displaced animals, addition of Management Zone 6, and law
enforcement presence, are important to maintain stable
populations. In addition, the NCA designation in 2009
offered additional regulations and oversight to protect
tortoises and their habitat (Pub.L. 111-11, H.R. 146).

Zone 6 provides additional protection for an estimated 772
tortoises. It protects an additional 6,813 acres of habitat
in the Reserve that has not been impacted by fires in the
recent past (Bandy 2022).

Zone 6 Long-term Benefits

Washington County has identified Zone 6 as mitigation for the
Northern Corridor and the loss of DNR land purchased with USFWS Section
6 funds. Zone 6 has experienced very little fire (80 acres since 1976)
and has an intact vegetation community with 50% fewer noxious weeds and
invasive species compared to the rest of the reserve. Being separated
from the other zones allows Zone 6 to serve as a refuge population.
Incorporating Zone 6 is valuable because ``desert tortoises are
long-lived; they may persist in an isolated and small area for a long
time and still maintain a resource pool for genetic diversity. However,
over several generations, a minimum abundance level is necessary to
ensure successful reproduction and to avoid inbreeding depression and
loss of fitness. Connectivity within and between areas can help
maintain demographic and genetic needs (USFWS 2011).'' Protecting the
SITLA and other non-federal lands in Zone 6 provides resilience and
redundancy.
``The protection of additional habitat within the UVRRU (e.g.,
Management Zone 6) increases the viability of desert tortoises living
within the protected habitat and provides resiliency and redundancy
against the cumulative threats they face (USFWS 2021b)''.
Conclusion

The most recent population monitoring report found MDT populations
across the NCA have stabilized, and there is no evidence of recent
declines in tortoise densities following the 2020 wildfires. The 2023
abundance estimate of 2,425 individuals across the NCA (Zones 2, 3, and
5) is the highest recorded since 2005.
The DWR's updated population monitoring validates the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service's original 2021 findings in the Final Biological
Opinion for the Northern Corridor Highway Project, in that the ROW for
the Northern Corridor ``is not likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of the desert tortoise in the UVRRU and rangewide . . . [and]
the proposed action is not likely to destroy or adversely modify
designated critical habitat for the desert tortoise.'' (USFWS 2021a).
Furthermore, the 6,813 acres of land within Zone 6 is high-quality,
year-long habitat for MDT populations and adds resiliency and
redundancy to the UVRRU.
Citations

Bandy, M. 2022. A method for Mojave Desert Tortoise Drone Surveys and a
Controlled Field Test. Report submitted to the Washington County
Habitat Conservation Plan. Resi-2022-001-02.

Bandy, M. 2023. Drone surveys for the Mojave Desert Tortoise in Zones
2-5 of the Red Cliffs Desert Reserve. Report submitted to the
Washington County Habitat Conservation Plan. Resi-2023-014-01.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2021a. Biological Opinion for
the Northern Corridor Highway Project. January 2021. Utah Ecological
Services Field Office, Salt Lake City, Utah. 100 pages
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2021b. Biological report for
the Upper Virgin River recovery unit 14 population of the Mojave desert
tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), Version 1. January 2021. Utah Ecological
Services Field Office, Salt Lake City, Utah. 119 pages plus appendices.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2011. Revised recovery plan for the
Mojave population of the desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii). U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Pacific Southwest Region, Sacramento,
California.

Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR). 2024. MOJAVE DESERT
TORTOISE POPULATION MONITORING WITHIN THE RED CLIFFS NATIONAL
CONSERVATION AREA, 2023. Publication Number 24-07.

Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR). 2019. Translocation in the
Red Cliffs Desert Reserve, Summary Report, 1999-2018. Utah Div. of
Wildl. Res., Publ. Number 98-04.

______

Mr. Curtis. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Thursday, April 25. The hearing record will be held
open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee on Natural Resources stands adjourned.
Thank you, everyone.

[Whereupon, at 1:18 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
