- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES OF LAND CONSOLIDATION IN INDIAN COUNTRY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE OPPORTUNITIES
AND CHALLENGES OF LAND
CONSOLIDATION IN
INDIAN COUNTRY

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Tuesday, January 30, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-92

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-708 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INDIAN AND INSULAR AFFAIRS

HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, WY, Chair

JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, PR, Vice Chair

TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, NM, Ranking Member

Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         CNMI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Jerry Carl, AL                       Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jim Moylan, GU                       Ed Case, HI
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio

---------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, January 30, 2024........................     1

Statement of Members:

Hageman, Hon. Harriet M., a Representative in Congress from
the State of Wyoming.......................................     1
Leger Fernandez, Hon. Teresa, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Mexico...............................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Weatherwax, Hon. Marvin, Councilman, Blackfeet Tribal
Business Council, Browning, Montana........................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Questions submitted for the record.......................     8
LeBeau, Hon. Ryman, Chairman, Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe,
Eagle Butte, South Dakota..................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Questions submitted for the record.......................    15
Kitcheyan, Hon. Victoria, Tribal Council Chairwoman,
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, Winnebago, Nebraska...........    15
Prepared statement of....................................    17
Questions submitted for the record.......................    20
Stainbrook, Cris, President, Indian Land Tenure Foundation,
Little Canada, Minnesota...................................    21
Prepared statement of....................................    23
Questions submitted for the record.......................    27

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Bureau of Indian Affairs, Mr. Darryl LaCounte, Director,
Statement for the Record...................................    35
Questions submitted for the record.......................    37

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES OF
LAND CONSOLIDATION IN INDIAN COUNTRY

----------

Tuesday, January 30, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Harriet M.
Hageman, [Chairwoman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hageman, LaMalfa; and Leger
Fernandez.
Also present: Representative Johnson.

Ms. Hageman. The Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Examining the Opportunities and Challenges of Land
Consolidation in Indian Country.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I, therefore, ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. HARRIET M. HAGEMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WYOMING

Ms. Hageman. The purpose of today's hearing is to hear from
tribal leaders, and originally from the Bureau of Indian
Affairs, about land fractionation, land consolidation, and the
challenges that Indian tribes and individual Indian landowners
face as a result.
Land fractionation is the result of the policies
implemented by the Federal Government for American Indians
during what we refer to as the Allotment Period. Beginning with
the General Allotment Act of 1887, the Federal Government
divided tribal lands into 80- or 160-acre sections to be
allotted to individual tribal members. Any land not allotted
was sold off, which resulted in approximately 90 million acres
of Indian land being removed from Indian ownership and control.
Congress formally ended and repudiated the failed policy of
allotment with the Indian Reorganization Act in 1934, but the
impacts are still felt today.
Because individual Indian allotments initially followed
state laws for inheritance, property interest in individually
allotted lands were inherited by multiple heirs. When the
original tribal owners died in testate, that is, without a
will, the ownership of the land was divided equally amongst
their heirs. But the physical land itself was not divided,
resulting in co-ownership of the land between those heirs.
As time passes and more generations die without writing
wills, the number of co-owners with a fractionated interest
increases exponentially. Many of the fractionated interest
owners only have a small fraction of a claim to the land that
they own. To put this into perspective, if a parcel of land
earns $100 for grazing purposes, and an individual interest
owner has a 2 percent claim for that land, they would only
receive $2.
In 2018, after implementation of the Land Buy-Back Program,
the Department of the Interior estimated that there were
243,000 landowners who owned nearly 2.5 million interests in
100,000 fractionated parcels.
As this Subcommittee has explored in previous hearings,
barriers to land use and the development of land in Indian
Country frequently discourage economic development and
investment. Fractionated lands are another barrier to
development because generally a majority interest is needed to
make land use decisions.
If an allotment has 50 or 100 co-owners, it can be
unaffordable and logistically prohibitive to gain a majority
interest agreement for land use. As a result, adjacent
tribally-controlled land can remain undeveloped, and individual
Indian landowners do not receive the benefits.
Congress has attempted to address Indian land fractionation
in multiple ways, through providing pathways for tribes to
consolidate lands, creating and reforming the probate process
for Native Americans, and also creating land buy-back programs
to purchase fractionated interests from willing sellers, the
largest of which was the Land Buy-Back Program that was part of
the Cobell v. Salazar Settlement.
The Cobell Settlement was negotiated by the Obama
administration and funded through congressional legislation.
$1.9 billion was set aside from the $3.4 billion settlement to
make a concerted effort to resolve fractionization through a
10-year voluntary Land Buy-Back Program. It has not been as
successful as we had hoped.
The Buy-Back Program conducted consolidation actions from
2012 to 2022 and sent offers to 63,763 individual Indian
landowners in 53 different locations. Ultimately, $1.69 billion
was paid out to Indian landowners, increasing or creating
tribal ownership in over 51,000 tracts of land, with 1,916
tracts reaching 100 percent tribal trust ownership.
While this program made some progress in reducing land
fractionation, the Department of the Interior's own final
report included two statistics that I would like to highlight
today. The program identified more than 2.9 million purchasable
fractional interests, and after the program now there are still
2.4 million purchasable fractionable interests remaining. And
even with the concerted 10-year efforts of the Buy-Back
Program, without further action the rate of fractionization
will bypass pre-Buy-Back Program levels in just 14 years.
It is obvious that funding massive buy-back programs is not
the be all and end all in ending land fractionization. We have
to do better for Indian Country.
There are further policy-focused opportunities to reduce
land fractionation and purchase consolidation within Indian
reservations. This hearing today will have our witnesses talk
about their experiences with the Land Buy-Back Program and what
other efforts tribes, organizations, and individual Indian
landowners are taking to prevent further fractionization of
land interests.
We can all work towards cohesive, interrelated solutions to
prevent further fractionization and advocate for informed land
management. This hearing continues this conversation that has
been happening now for decades. I want to thank the witnesses
for being with us today. I look forward to your testimony.

The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member for
her statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TERESA LEGER FERNANDEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW MEXICO

Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, and good morning, everyone.
And thank you to our witnesses for joining us today.
I want to begin today perhaps slightly different.
Yesterday, we lost N. Scott Momaday. He died in his home is
Santa Fe, New Mexico. As you all know, his novel ``House of
Dawn'' won the Pulitzer Prize in 1969 and is largely credited
with igniting a wave of modern Native American literature.
Mr. Momaday once said, ``Our very existence consists in our
imagination of ourselves.'' He showed us the power of
storytelling and oral tradition, bringing imagination to life.
He also spoke of the importance of the land and the importance
of his peoples and his imagination entwined within the land.
He reminded us that we must have a deep ethical regard for
the land. We had better learn from it. Surely, that ethic is
merely latent in ourselves. It must now be activated, I
believe. We Americans must come again to a moral comprehension
of earth and air. We must live according to the principle of a
land ethic. The alternative is that we shall not live at all.
I think that this poet's words ring true today as we think
about how do we best allow and help Native Americans regain the
land and regain full interest in the land that is theirs,
because today we are discussing the critical importance of the
United States' trust responsibility to tribes when it comes to
managing lands and the issues facing land fractionation.
We know that land fractionation is a direct result of the
devastated and misguided allotment in the assimilation period
of the late 19th and early 20th century. The General Allotment
Act of 1887 was a keystone of those failed policies. I remember
clearly the maps that we have all seen as the land that was
once tribal and just shrinks, and shrinks, and shrinks over
time.
It dictated that law, the forced conversion of communally-
held tribal lands into separate 80- and 160-acre parcels.
Fractionation happens when someone passes away, and little by
little that land is so deeply fractionated. It is difficult to
manage and difficult to own.
The Cobell Settlement agreement in 2010 was one of the most
significant results of the Department of the Interior land
acquisition programs. The purpose of the settlement was to
resolve a class action lawsuit regarding the Federal
Government's accounting and management of over 300 individual
Indian trust accounts.
Part of that was the creation of the $1.9 billion Trust
Land Consolidation Fund to permit DOI to purchase at fair
market value lands of fractionated ownership from willing
individual Indian trust beneficiaries.
The Land Buy-Back Program ran from 2012 to 2022. In these
10 years, tribal ownership increased by 2.97 million acres
across 53 locations. While we must recognize that this wasn't
enough, it was something. With increased land consolidation,
tribes can exercise tribal sovereignty and self-determination
over their lands that better suit their community's leads. They
can actually carry out that land ethic that Momaday calls us
to.
The Land Buy-Back Program took significant steps to correct
misguided policies, and tribes have seen the benefits. However,
land fractionation continues to be a significant issue. After
the program expired in 2022, approximately 2.4 million
fractionated areas remained at 150 locations. That is 5.6
million acres with an estimated value of several billion
dollars. The BIA estimates that as of Fiscal Year 2023 it had a
backlog of more than 32,000 inheritance cases for these lands.
BIA's 2024 budget requested $30.5 million to hire 22 staff
to continue the land consolidation efforts and purchase
fractional interests at an additional five locations. In Fiscal
Year 2023, they only received $8 million--$8 million--when the
request was $30.5 million, and we know we needed so much more.
Giving tribes more control and sovereignty over the lands
will continue to be a priority of mine on this Committee, and
it needs to be for the entire Congress. I know the tribes here
today are going to go into more detail about their experiences
with the Land Buy-Back Program, and I look forward to hearing
from you on this issue and on ways in which we can make it
better and continue our progress to a land ethic.
Thank you.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
I will now introduce our witnesses for our panel. We had
anticipated that Director LaCounte would be testifying this
morning on behalf of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. However, we
were informed this morning that he is ill and unable to attend.
And while I definitely hope that he gets better soon, I will
state that I am disappointed in BIA's absence, as their
involvement in these discussions is critical to finding
workable solutions. So, hopefully we will have the opportunity
to engage them before much more time passes.
First, the Honorable Marvin Weatherwax, Councilman,
Blackfeet Tribal Business Council, Browning, Montana; the
Honorable Ryman LeBeau, Chairman, Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe,
Eagle Butte, South Dakota, thank you for coming back; the
Honorable Victoria Kitcheyan, Chairwoman, Winnebago Tribe of
Nebraska, Winnebago, Nebraska, again, thank you for being in
front of our Committee again today; and Mr. Cris Stainbrook,
President, Indian Land Tenure Foundation, Little Canada,
Minnesota. Thank you all for joining us.
I would like to remind the witnesses that under Committee
Rules, they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but
their entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone. We use timing lights. When you begin, the
light will turn green. When you have 1 minute left, the light
will turn yellow. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement. I
will also allow all witnesses on the panel to testify before we
begin with our Member questioning.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Marvin Weatherwax
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARVIN WEATHERWAX, COUNCILMAN,
BLACKFEET TRIBAL BUSINESS COUNCIL, BROWNING, MONTANA

Mr. Weatherwax. Good morning, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member
Leger Fernandez, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Marvin Weatherwax, Jr. I am a member of the Blackfeet Tribal
Business Council and serve as the Chairman of the Coalition of
Large Tribes.
Our original reservation spanned from the eastern front of
the Rocky Mountains to the eastern borders of Montana, from the
Yellowstone River on the south to the northern border with
Alberta, Canada. But our land losses were staggering for more
than a century.
The failed Federal assimilationist allotment policy
resulted in the loss of many millions of acres of land across
Indian Country and hundreds of acres across our reservation
alone. During the starvation winter of 1883, our chiefs were
forced to cede 130,000 acres to receive rations. In 1911, we
were subjected to the Blackfeet allotment where another 156,000
acres were sold as surplus to non-Indians.
By 2012, when the Land Buy-Back Program was established, we
had lost 90 percent of our original reservation and had the
third highest amount of fractionated land in the United States,
making use and management of these lands difficult, and in many
cases impossible, because of the large number of landowners,
often hundreds of owners per parcel, and the resultant
difficulty in conducting and securing the consent of those
landowners for particular use.
To prevent further loss of lands, we enacted a right of
first refusal ordinance for on-reservation land sales, which
has allowed us to receive notice of opportunities for land
reacquisition so we can move quickly to engage with landowners.
We have mapped our reservation, so we have data that helps
us make informed decisions. We devoted extensive efforts to
community engagement and earned the confidence of reservation
landowners. Both from our own efforts and with the resources of
the Land Buy-Back Program, the Blackfeet Tribe has consolidated
more than 190,000 fractional interests and more than 490,000
equivalent acres in more than 14,000 transactions.
Based on the Blackfeet Tribe's experience, I have four
recommendations. First, we would like to see more flexibility
in use for the program monies. Second, we would like to see
more and better BIA investment in technology. Third, the Land
Buy-Back Program should be expanded to other categories of
land.
In sum, we need maximum flexibility in the Land Buy-Back
Program, namely distribution of monies directly to the tribes
to use as we see fit each year in one block grant with a single
audit.
And, lastly, Congress should direct enforcement of Federal
land reacquisition statutes that are already on the books.
Without dramatic funding, we will soon be worse off than we
were pre-Cobell, of the incessant proliferation of land
fractionation. In Fiscal Year 2023, DOI requested $80 million
for land buy-back and got $8 million. In Fiscal Year 2024, OMB
limited DOI's ask to $8 million. These dribs and drabs are
insufficient to meet the need. Funding of land buy-back
programs should be tailored to what is needed to actually
achieve the objective, not keep us on the hamster wheel of the
same number as last year.
I thank you very much.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Weatherwax follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Marvin Weatherwax, Jr., Member of the
Blackfeet Tribal Business Council

Good morning, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Marvin Weatherwax Jr. and I am
a member of the Blackfeet Tribal Business Council. I also serve as
Chairman of the Coalition of Large Tribes (COLT), and as a
Representative of District 15 in the Montana Legislature.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on the
implementation of the Land Buy-Back Program. My Blackfeet Tribe views
the Program as an important tool to restore Blackfeet ownership of
Reservation lands. Our Tribe has enacted laws to maximize the utility
of monies available under the program and devoted our own resources
separately to land reacquisition as part of our broader efforts to
restore as much land as possible from our 1855 Treaty to Tribal
ownership and control. We believe removal of current bureaucratic
impediments is central to achieving the goals of the Land Buy Back
Program.
Our story mirrors that of other large land base tribes. The
original Treaty Reservation spanned from the eastern front of the Rocky
Mountains to the eastern border of Montana and from the Yellowstone
River on the South all the way to Northern border with Alberta, Canada.
But our land losses were staggering for more than a century. The failed
federal assimilationist allotment policy resulted in the loss of many
millions of acres of lands across Indian Country, and hundreds of
thousands of acres across the Blackfeet Reservation alone. During the
starvation winter of 1883, our Chiefs were forced to sign another
treaty to receive rations in exchange for 130,000 acres of land that
was to be given to the U.S. Forest Service. In 1911, the Blackfeet were
subjected to the ``Blackfeet Allotment'' where another 156,000 acres
were sold as ``surplus'' to non-Indians.
By 2012, when the Land Buy-Back Program was established, the
Blackfeet Tribe had lost 90% of our original Reservation and had the
third highest amount of fractionated land in the United States, making
use and management of these lands difficult, and in many cases
impossible, because of the large number of landowners--often hundreds
of owners per parcel--and the resultant difficulty in contacting and
securing the consent of those landowners for a particular use. A large
percentage of the fractionated interest owners are Indians that are not
enrolled in our Tribe, but instead are members of other tribes, which
makes land use and management decisions even more complex.
For the past three decades, well before the birth of the Land Buy-
Back Program, the Blackfeet Tribe has dedicated considerable resources
to the restoration of our Reservation land base. We have enacted laws,
dedicated Tribal revenues and developed Tribal programs to reacquire
Reservation lands within our Treaty Reservation boundaries. To prevent
further loss of lands, we enacted a ``right of first of refusal''
ordinance for on-Reservation land sales which has allowed us to receive
notice of opportunities for land reacquisition so we can move quickly
to engage with landowners.
Our Tribal GIS staff have extensively mapped our Reservation,
including allotments so we have data that helps us make informed
decisions. Most importantly, our Tribal staff devoted extensive efforts
to community engagement to earn the confidence of Reservation
landowners.
Both from our own efforts and with the resources of the Land Buy-
Back Program, over the last decade, the Blackfeet Tribe has been
successful in the consolidation of more than 196,000 fractional
interests and more than 490,00 equivalent acres in more than 14,000
land transactions.

Based on the Blackfeet Tribe's experience, I have four concrete
recommendations that would make the Program more successful without
additional funding, although I note that additional funding is needed
and warmly welcomed:

1.  First, we would like to see more flexibility in uses for Program
monies. The Land Buy-Back Program is a narrow but effective
tool that provides a means to restore Tribal ownership of
fractionated interests in Trust allotments. The Blackfeet
Tribe, like other large land base tribes, has developed a
Land Department and has charged it with the management of
land and resources. The Blackfeet Tribe would like to be
able to utilize Program funding to support the Land
Department as it continues to grow in ways to support the
agri-businesses of the Tribe and Tribal members; to
implement the HEARTH Act for expansion of on-Reservation
housing stock; and to track and process data relating to
fractionated interest holders, GPS, land use, water rights,
precipitation, sunlight, leases, and rights-of-ways
management. The flexibility would not create additional
costs.

2.  Second, we would like to see more and better BIA investments in
technology. The Bureau utilizes an antiquated and
ineffective system to manage land. Our Tribe and others are
utilizing and creating innovative and cutting-edge
technology to better manage the tribal land and resources.
Our landowner engagement has been effective because we have
``reinvented the wheel,'' by recreating federal data to
which we are denied access (TAAMS). But our Land Department
needs training, hardware, software and planning to achieve
both short-term and long-term goals, and we need ready
access to federal land management systems' data. This
flexibility would not create additional costs.

3.  Third, Land Buy-Back Program expanded to other categories of
land, such as in the Blackfeet Tribe's case, lands
alienated in the Blackfeet Allotment Act of 1911. By
allowing Land Buy-Back funds to be used to acquire lands
beyond ``fractionated interests,'' the true meaning ``Land
Buy Back'' can be fulfilled. Our land losses took many
forms and the Land Buy-Back monies should have maximum
flexibility to allow for reacquisition of any lands
alienated from original Treaty boundaries. Again, this
flexibility would not create additional costs.

4.  Lastly, Congress should direct the Department of the Interior to
enforce other federal land reacquisition statutes that are
already on the books. For example, the Indian appropriation
act of September 21, 1922,\1\ provides:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 42 Stat., 994, 995 (``1922 Act'').

SEC. 3. That the Secretary of the Interior is hereby
authorized and directed to issue a patent to the duly
authorized missionary board, or other proper authority, of any
religious organization engaged in mission or school work on any
Indian reservation for such lands thereon as have been
heretofore set apart to and are now being actually and
beneficially used and occupied by such organization solely for
mission or school purposes, the area so patented to not exceed
one hundred and sixty acres to any one organization at any
station: Provided, that such patent shall provide that when no
longer used for mission or school purposes said lands shall
revert to the Indian owners.  (Emphasis supplied). The 1922 Act
placed restrictions of fee patents associated with Indian
Boarding Schools in direct response to abuses by churches
whereby they were acquiring fee patents to many thousands of
acres of reservation lands far in excess of any education needs
and they were likewise using the Indian Boarding Schools as
otherwise illegal child/slave labor under abhorrent conditions.
The 1922 Act requires the return of thousands of acres of land
to tribes right now. Statutes like the 1922 Act are a ready
supplement to the Land Buy-Back Program and their enforcement
would bolster reservation economies and likely provide other
important health and education benefits--all without any
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
additional funding.

On behalf of the Blackfeet Tribe, I appreciate the opportunity to
provide our perspectives on the Land Buy-Back Program. We look forward
to working with the Subcommittee and any Administration to ensure its
continued and greater success on our Reservation and for other large
land base tribes.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Marvin Weatherwax,
Councilman, Blackfeet Tribal Business Council

The Honorable Marvin Weatherwax did not submit responses to the
Committee by the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed
record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your testimony, it was mentioned that the Blackfeet
Nation has utilized innovative technology when it comes to land
management including mapping alternatives.

1a) Would it be useful to have regional organizations collaborate
on land management?

1b) How can Congress help to support tribal land offices to have
access to data and maps from the Department of the Interior?

Question 2. Could you expand on how denied access to TAAMS has
hindered land management practices for the Blackfeet Nation?

Question 3. In your opinion, how good of a job did the Land Buy-
Back Program do in targeting lands that had a high economic value to
consolidate?

Question 4. How has your tribe approached long-term land use
planning?

4a) How has fractionation and land consolidation impacted the
effectiveness of long-term use planning?

Question 5. The Department created GIS maps and a database for use
in the Land Buy-Back Program and has stated that tribes have access to
that data to see the lands and help make land planning decisions.

5a) Does the Blackfeet Nation use this data specifically. And if
yes, how accessible is this data? And If no, please explain why not.

Question 6. The Land Buy Back Report acknowledges that land
fractionation will exceed pre-program levels in 14 years without
further action.

6a) Can you further expand from your testimony on any legislative
or policy solutions that Congress should consider to help further
consolidate fractional interests?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Ryman LeBeau for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RYMAN LeBEAU, CHAIRMAN, CHEYENNE
RIVER SIOUX TRIBE, EAGLE BUTTE, SOUTH DAKOTA

Mr. LeBeau. [Speaking Native language.] I said I shake your
hand with a good heart, and we thank you for allowing us this
time.
Chair Hageman, and members of the Committee, I am Ryman
LeBeau, the Chairman of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe. I am
here for my Lakota people.
The Cheyenne River Reservation is 2.8 million acres in
north-central South Dakota along the Cheyenne, Moreau, and
Missouri Rivers. We are the fourth largest reservation in
Indian Country. The Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe is four bands of
the Lakota, and these four bands are the Miniconjou, the
Itazipcho, Sihasapa, Oohenunpa. We are one of the great Sioux
Nation Tribes, or as we say the [Speaking Native language], the
seven council fires.
In general, we allocate grazing units and farms to our
tribal members for agriculture development. Grazing units are
typically 1,000 to 2,000 acres because our animal units require
28 acres for a cow-calf pair. We have 85 percent unemployment
in the winter and 75 percent unemployment in the summer. We
need value-added agriculture to provide employment for our
people and generate economic activity. We must find a brighter
future for our young people.
We have a tribal buffalo herd with 2,000 head. And we would
like to grow our herd, so we bought a small processing plant in
Mobridge, South Dakota, just across the Missouri River from our
reservation. And the business is doing great. They are
currently trying to get those products, buffalo and beef, back
into our local grocery stores, which the Tribe owns.
The 1868 Great Sioux Nation Treaty reserved all western
South Dakota from the low water mark on the east bank of the
Missouri River to Wyoming as our permanent home. That is about
27 million acres. And we also reserved 44 million acres of
unceded Indian territory and hunting lands in North Dakota,
Montana, Wyoming, Nebraska, Kansas, and Colorado.
America pledged its honor to keep the peace. But when
Custer discovered gold in the Black Hills in 1874, President
Grant decided he could no longer defend our Great Sioux Nation.
In 1876, Custer attacked us at the Battle of Little Big Horn,
and we defended our women and children. Congress passed the
1877 Taking Act to seize our Indian territory, hunting lands,
and the Black Hills.
In 1889, just before North and South Dakota reached
statehood, Congress took another 9.5 million acres of land in
central and western South Dakota from us and divided the Great
Sioux Reservation into six smaller reservations including
Cheyenne River Reservation. In 1890, the BIA police killed
Sitting Bull and the cavalry massacred our people at Wounded
Knee.
Right now, we are seeking to recover our sacred site at
Wounded Knee under our own Nation title, together with the
Oglala Sioux Tribe in restricted fee status. The House recently
passed H.R. 3371, The Wounded Knee Memorial and Sacred Site
Act, and we appreciate the Committee's support.
The 1868 Treaty and the 1889 so-called Sioux Agreement
provided for allotment of tribal lands to individuals. In 1908,
Congress opened the Cheyenne River Reservation for non-Indian
homesteading. In 1950, Congress took our best 104,000 acres of
Missouri River bottom land for the Flood Control Act.
As a result of this history, we do not have enough
agricultural land for our Lakota people. We have roughly
900,000 acres of tribal trust lands and 600,000 acres of
allotted Indian trust lands and 1.3 million acres of non-Indian
fee land on the reservation.
Many of non-Indian neighbors are elderly, and they would
like to sell their land to us. Article III of our 1868 Treaty
provides for the United States of America to set aside further
lands for agriculture for our Lakota people, and we call upon
Congress to assist us and continue to buy back fractionated
lands and to recover fee lands to provide the basis for jobs
and value-added agriculture.
First, with respect, we ask Congress to support the $30
million BIA request for Fiscal Year 2024 buy-back programs.
Second, with respect, we ask Congress to allocate $400 million
for the reservation fee land purchases.
In 1934, Congress authorized $20 million annually for such
purchases, but these were never funded and the work needs to be
done now because our Lakota people population has rebounded
since the wars of 1800s. We need a solid base for jobs to make
our permanent home on our reservations a livable home.

[The prepared statement of Mr. LeBeau follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ryman LeBeau, Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe
of the Cheyenne River Reservation
Anpetu waste, Hau Kola. Good Morning Friends. Chair Hageman, and
Members of the Committee, Greetings from the Cheyenne River Sioux
Tribe. My name is Ryman LeBeau and I serve as Chairman of the Cheyenne
River Sioux Tribe.
The Cheyenne River Reservation is composed of 2.8 Million acres of
high prairie grassland, interspersed with a few ridges of farmland
along the Cheyenne, Moreau and Missouri Rivers. We are the Lakota
People of the Three Rivers. Our land is Buffalo Country, and we also
raise horses and cattle. Because an animal unit for grazing is 28
acres, we allocated our Range Units in 1,000 or 2,000 acre lease units,
with our tribal members receiving allocations for grazing. That
provides a living for approximately 600 to 700 families. At Cheyenne
River, we also have tribal government and retail jobs, but we have
26,400 people, so our unemployment ranges up to 85% in the winter.
At Cheyenne River, under the Buy Back Program, the BIA spent $90
Million for almost 35,000 fractionated interests and the equivalent of
300,000 acres. Our Tribal Members received a large part of the payment
for the land. So, the program was a strong effort, yet there is much
left to be done.
Lakota Belief

In our belief, Tunkasila, Wakan Tanka, Grandfather, the Creator
gave the first woman and first man the breath of life at Wind Cave in
the Black Hills. Together with life, Tunkasila blessed us with liberty
and a sacred duty to care for Unci Maka, Grandmother Earth. Our is the
original land of our Lakota Oyate, prior to America.
1868 Great Sioux Nation Treaty

Our 1868 Great Sioux Nation Treaty recognizes 44 million acres of
unceded Great Sioux Nation Indian territory and hunting lands in North
Dakota, Montana, Wyoming, Nebraska, Kansas and Colorado, and over 27
million acres of Great Sioux Reservation--our ``permanent home''--in
North Dakota, Nebraska, and South Dakota, with our boundary at the low
water mark on the east bank of the Missouri River and including our
existing reservations east of the Missouri.
1877 Taking Act: Black Hills

In 1876, President Grant decided to stop defending the Great Sioux
Reservation and to force the Great Sioux Nation to cede the Black
Hills, our unceded Indian territory and hunting lands. After our
defense of our 1876 Lakota-Nakota-Dakota People at the Battle of the
Little Big Horn, Congress enacted the 1877 Act taking the Black Hills
and our unceded and hunting lands. In 1980, the Supreme Court held that
the Act taking the Black Hills and our other lands was unconstitutional
because the Act violated the 5th Amendment and violated the 1868
Treaty. United States v. Sioux Nation, 448 U.S. 371 (1980).
Act of March 2, 1889: Division of the Great Sioux Reservation

In advance of North Dakota and South Dakota statehood in 1889,
Congress divided the Great Sioux Reservation into six separate
reservations, including the Cheyenne River Reservation, and further
declaring 9.5 million acres of land in central and western South Dakota
in between the new reduced reservations.
The 1868 Great Sioux Nation Treaty and the 1889 so-called Sioux
Agreement

Our 1868 Great Sioux Nation Treaty and the 1889 Agreement
authorized allotment of reservation lands to Lakota tribal members on
the Cheyenne River Reservation and the BIA started to allot lands on
the reservation.
1908 Surplus Land Act

In Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463 (1983), the Supreme Court
explained America's Allotment Process:

On May 29, 1908, Congress authorized the Secretary of the
Interior to open 1.6 million acres of the Cheyenne River Sioux
Reservation for homesteading. Act of May 29, 1908, ch. 218, 35
Stat. 460 et seq. (Act or Cheyenne River Act) . . . In the
latter half of the 19th century, large sections of the Western
States and Territories were set aside for Indian reservations.
Towards the end of the century, however, Congress increasingly
adhered to the view that the Indian tribes should abandon their
nomadic lives on the communal reservations and settle into an
agrarian economy on privately owned parcels of land. This shift
was fueled in part by the belief that individualized farming
would speed the Indians' assimilation into American society and
in part by the continuing demand for new lands for the waves of
homesteaders moving west. As a result of these combined
pressures, Congress passed a series of surplus land Acts at the
turn of the century to force Indians onto individual allotments
carved out of reservations and to open up unallotted lands for
non-Indian settlement. Initially, Congress legislated its
Indian allotment program on a national scale, but by the time
of the Act of May 29, 1908, Congress was dealing with the
surplus land question on a reservation-by-reservation basis,
with each surplus land Act employing its own statutory
language, the product of a unique set of tribal negotiation and
legislative compromise . . .

[T]he Act strongly suggest that the unallotted opened lands
would, for the immediate future, remain an integral part of the
Cheyenne River Reservation. In Sec. 1 of the Act, the Secretary
was authorized to set aside portions of the opened lands ``for
agency, school, and religious purposes, to remain reserved as
long as needed, and as long as agency, school, or religious
institutions are maintained thereon for the benefit of said
Indians.'' . . . Most of the members of the Tribe obtained
individual allotments on the lands opened by the Act.

As a result of the Allotment Policy and the Cheyenne River Act, the
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe retains approximately 900,000 acres of
Tribal Trust Lands and roughly 600,000 acres of Allotted Indian Trust
Lands.
Fractionated Lands and the Land Buy Back Program

The Indian Land Tenure Foundation explains the problem of
fractionated lands as follows:

For over a century, Indian families have seen valuable land
resources diminish as fractionated ownership increases with
each passing generation. As a result of the General Allotment
Act of 1887 (also called the Dawes Act), reservation land was
divided up and allotted to individual tribal members. When an
allottee died, title ownership was divided up among all of the
heirs, but the land itself was not physically divided. As such,
each Indian heir received an undivided interest in the land.
Now, as each generation passes on, the number of owners grows
exponentially, which has resulted in the highly fractionated
ownership of much Indian land today.

Parcels with fractionated ownership can have hundreds or even
thousands of owners. With so many owners, individual income
from the land is minimal--sometimes less than what it costs the
federal government to process the payment. In addition, land
use is compromised because an undivided interest owner must
gain consent from a majority of the parcel's owners to do
anything with the land. This makes it nearly impossible for any
one of the owners to use the land for agriculture, business
development or a home site, all uses that would improve quality
of life for Indian people.

On its website, the BIA explains the Land Buy Back Program as
follows:

The Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations (Buy-Back Program
or the Program) implemented the land consolidation component of
the Cobell v Salazar Settlement Agreement which provided a $1.9
billion Trust Land Consolidation Fund (Fund) to purchase
fractional interests in trust or restricted land from willing
sellers at fair market value. Consolidated interests were
immediately restored to Tribal trust ownership for uses
benefiting the reservation community and Tribal members.

The Program was established in December 2012 and the 10-year
period for its implementation of land consolidation efforts
came to an end November 24, 2022.

In 2015, at the outset of the program, Mike Connor, the Deputy
Secretary of Interior described the Buy Back Program and our initial
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe Buy Back agreement:

The agreements with the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of the
Cheyenne River Reservation in South Dakota and the Prairie Band
Potawatomi Nation in Kansas detail what each tribal government
will do to help implement the Buy-Back Program and provide
resources to facilitate outreach and education. The Department
has thus far entered into cooperative or other agreements with
nearly 20 sovereign tribal nations.

``We continue to be encouraged by the growing momentum and
excitement about the Buy-Back Program across Indian Country,''
said Deputy Secretary Connor. ``As we have made clear, a
significant factor in the Program's success is the ability to
work effectively with tribal leadership to best tailor outreach
and information to their community. Working closely with the
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe and the Prairie Band Potawatomi
Nation, we can maximize our ability to provide landowners with
the information they need to make informed decisions about
their land through this voluntary program.''

Land fractionation is a serious problem across Indian Country.
As lands are passed down through generations, they gain more
owners. Many tracts now have hundreds and even thousands of
individual owners. Because it is difficult to gain landowner
consensus, the lands often lie idle and cannot be used for any
beneficial purpose. There are more than 245,000 owners of three
million fractionated interests, spanning approximately 150
Indian reservations, who are eligible to participate in the
Buy-Back Program.

The Buy-Back Program was created to implement the land
consolidation component of the Cobell Settlement, which
provided $1.9 billion to consolidate fractional land interests
across Indian Country. It allows interested individual owners
to receive payments for voluntarily selling their land.
Consolidated interests are immediately transferred to tribal
governments and stay in trust for uses benefiting the tribes
and their members.
Administration Proposal--AS-IA Bryan Newland May 2023 Appropriation
Testimony:

The Biden Administration proposes continuity for the Indian Land
Consolidation Program in AS-IA Bryan Newland's FY 2024 BIA Request:

BIA requests $30.5 million, a $22.5 million increase above 2023
enacted, for the Indian Land Consolidation Program (ILCP),
which purchases fractional interests from willing individual
Indian landowners and conveys those interests to the Tribe with
jurisdiction. ILCP funding recognizes the ongoing need to
continue to address fractionation on Indian lands while also
focusing support on Tribes' plans for and adaptation to climate
change. This program is especially important since the Land
Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations (LBBP), established as part
of the Cobell Settlement, ended in November 2022. The ICLP has
incorporated lessons learned from the LBBP and the previous
ILCP in BIA to ensure effective program implementation.
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe Proposed Solutions

The Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe supports the Administration's
Request for FY 2024 Funding for $30.5 million for the Indian Land
Consolidation Program (ILCP).

Additional Funding: $400 Million for Reservation Fee Land

In the early 1900s, Congress believed that Indian Reservation lands
were in excess of the needs of Indian nations. That was not true for
the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe and the Cheyenne River Reservation.
Indeed, in the 1950s, America called upon the Cheyenne River Sioux
Tribe to once again sacrifice, this time 104,000 acres of our best
Missouri River bottom land taken for Flood Control downstream on the
Missouri River. In building the dam that created Lake Oahe, significant
lands were flooded that stripped the Reservation of our great oak
trees, corn production, the best flood plain farming lands and
residential lands on the Reservation.

Economic development is a serious challenge for the Cheyenne River
Sioux Tribe. Unemployment is 85% in the winter months, with winter
temperatures reaching below ^20 degrees Fahrenheit, and with wind
chill, temperatures feel as low as ^50 degrees Fahrenheit. In the
summer, unemployment exceeds 75%. The extreme unemployment on the
Cheyenne River Reservation leads to a myriad of social economic
problems including low educational attainment, drug and alcohol abuse,
violent crime, family dislocation and high teenage pregnancy,
depression and suicide, among other things.

Ziebach County was the very poorest county in America in the 2010
Census, based on per capita income. Ziebach County is the fourth
poorest county in America in the 2020 Census: 47.91% poverty rate,
1,100 people in poverty, and 2,296 population, according to the World
Population Review, visited on January 1, 2024. Dewey County is the 18th
poorest county in America: 35.59% poverty rate, 1,858 people living in
poverty, and 5,221 population. Our tribal records, with 26,400 tribal
members, indicate that the Census represents a severe undercount of our
tribal population with thousands more of our Lakota People living in
poverty.

We need additional lands in order to produce more value added
Agriculture. Recently, the Cheyenne River Buffalo Corporation applied
for funding for a USDA Grant for Buffalo Processing and Senator Thune
wrote a letter to support value added Agriculture:

As a long-time proponent for agriculture as a means to
strengthen rural economies, I write . . . As you know,
producers have faced significant market disruptions for several
years. The largest meatpackers in the country have seen record
margins, while local ranchers and farmers have struggled just
to make ends meet. While I will continue to pursue legislative
and regulatory policies to address issues impacting the
livestock industry, I am wholly pleased to advocate on behalf
of entities seeking to expand small meat processing capacity.

The CRST Buffalo Authority Corporation is an independent,
tribally-owned and chartered organization, whose primary
mission is to promote and develop a sustainable buffalo herd
for the benefit of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, our state,
and the American public. With the largest tribally-owned herd
in the nation and through a value-added approach to managing
their nearly 2000 head of buffalo, the corporation currently
utilizes a small meat processing facility located in Mobridge,
South Dakota. Should they receive funding, the CRST Buffalo
Authority Corporation plans to construct a new, state-of-the-
art buffalo processing facility . . . South Dakota's producers
work hard to raise high-quality livestock, and we need to
invest in expanded processing capacity to help create more
market opportunities and meet consumer demand for their
products.

The Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe needs the value added agriculture
that Buffalo production and other livestock production represents
because we need jobs for our Lakota people to make our Cheyenne River
Reservation a livable home.

Through land consolidation purchases, the Cheyenne River Sioux
Tribe must recover reservation fee lands for value added agriculture to
feed and employ our Lakota people and Congress should help us. In
Article III, the 1868 Treaty provides that the Great Sioux Reservation
should have additional lands for tribal members:

If it should appear from actual survey or other satisfactory
examination of said tract of land that it contains less than
160 acres of tillable land for each person who, at the time,
may be authorized to reside on it under the provisions of this
treaty, and a very considerable number of such persons shall be
disposed to commence cultivating the soil as farmers, the
United States agrees to set apart, for the use of said Indians,
as herein provided, such additional quantity of arable land,
adjoining to said reservation, or as near to the same as it can
be obtained, as may be required to provide the necessary
amount.

As anticipated by Article III of our 1868 Treaty, Indian Land
Consolidation requires re-acquisition of large areas of fee land,
especially in light of our Native American population growth. In 1980,
the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe's population was 12,500 and today our
population is 26,400. Indian Land Consolidation should include $400
Million for the purchase of Indian Lands on reservations, with large
areas of fee lands, including the Cheyenne River Reservation with our
1.3 Million acres of fee lands.

Partition Fractionated Indian Trust Lands Upon Request

Fractionation of Indian lands is especially a problem for economic
development. Individual Indians may own a 5% undivided interest in a
160 acre parcel, which would be equivalent to 8 acres were the
fractional interest. BIA typically requires all landowners to agree to
partition (divide) Indian allotted lands, so the native landowner
cannot partition his undivided land interests to use their 8 acres for
a home-site without a huge transactional effort. BIA should amend its
rules to allow an Indian trust landowner to partition his undivided
interest in allotted Indian trust lands without that transactional
effort.

Native Nation Title: Restricted Fee Lands

America recognized that our Native Sovereign Nations owned our
Native lands, and sought title from us for American lands, as we
reserved our permanent homelands by treaty, and settlers were forbidden
from occupying Native lands while the United States protected our
Native lands with Indian ``trust title.'' While Indian trust title,
that is the United States of America holding land in trust for Indian
tribes, is a useful means to protect Indian lands from alienation, yet
without more flexibility, Indian trust title can stifle economic
development. The Secretary of the Interior recently re-issued updated
Federal Indian trust regulations, 25 CFR Part 151, which provide for
the recovery of Native lands in the name of the United States of
America for the benefit of Native Sovereign Nations, yet do not allow
for the recovery of Native home lands in restricted fee status in the
name of our Native Nations.

We are asking Congress to enact legislation to further our nation-
to-nation treaties and protect our Native Sovereign Nation homelands
through provisions for:

Issuance of Native Nation Restricted Fee Title to Protect
Nation homelands with the status of Indian Country, subject
to the restriction that the land may not be alienated
without consent of both the Native Nation title holder and
the U.S. Congress;

Affirmation that our Native Nation fee lands are under
Native Nation self-government, including civil and criminal
jurisdiction, with annexation to Native Nation reservations
as the permanent home of our native peoples, and protection
by Federal laws and treaties safeguarding Indian lands,
including any and all protection for Indian trust lands and
at the election of the Native Nation title holder,
treatment as a Federal enclave;

Pre-emption of state and local taxation, and pre-emption
of state law or regulations that may interfere with Native
Nation self-determination and self-government; and

Provision for Tribal Government authority concerning value
added agriculture, economic development, and governmental
services, including housing, health care, education, and
other tribal government activities, without secretarial
sign-off.

In this way, Native Nation Title and restricted fee land can
forward America's long-standing Indian Self-Determination Policy.
Conclusion

Fractionated interests are the result of America's colonial
treatment of Indian lands. A more modern approach will move us past the
fractionation problem by eliminating BIA's excessive red tape in the
management of Indian allotted trust lands.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Ryman LeBeau, Chairman,
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe

The Honorable Ryman LeBeau did not submit responses to the Committee by
the appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Please expand on your testimony regarding using
restricted fee status to encourage land consolidation and reduce
fractionation.

1a) What specific legislation should be pursued to make that
possible?

Question 2. In your opinion, how can Congress best pursue the idea
of allowing and/or encouraging land partition of fractionated parcels?
What process will be best for the tribe and the affected landowners?

Question 3. In your opinion, how good of a job did the Land Buy-
Back Program do in targeting lands that had a high economic value to
consolidate?

Question 4. How has your tribe approached long-term land use
planning?

4a) How has fractionation and land consolidation impacted the
effectiveness of long-term use planning?

Question 5. The Department created GIS maps and a database for use
in the Land Buy-Back Program and has stated that tribes have access to
that data to see the lands and help make land planning decisions.

5a) Does the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe use this data specifically.
And if yes, how accessible is this data? And If no, please explain why
not.

Question 6. The Land Buy Back Report acknowledges that land
fractionation will exceed pre-program levels in 14 years without
further action.

6a) Can you further expand from your testimony on any legislative
or policy solutions that Congress should consider to help further
consolidate fractional interests?

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you for your testimony, and I am proud
of the fact that the Wounded Knee Memorial bill came out of
this Committee, has gone to the House, and I am hoping that we
can get that through. And I am excited to come and celebrate
with you when we are able to move forward with that project.
The Chair now recognizes the Honorable Victoria Kitcheyan
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE VICTORIA KITCHEYAN, TRIBAL COUNCIL
CHAIRWOMAN, WINNEBAGO TRIBE OF NEBRASKA, WINNEBAGO, NEBRASKA

Ms. Kitcheyan. Good morning, Chair Hageman and Ranking
Member Leger Fernandez, and members of the Committee. My name
is Victoria Kitcheyan, and I am the Chairwoman of the Winnebago
Tribe of Nebraska. Thank you for the opportunity to provide
this testimony.
The Winnebago people make our home along the hills and the
banks of the Missouri River in northeastern Nebraska and
northwestern Iowa. However, the path that led my people to call
this home and our reservation was long and traumatic.
The Winnebago people are originally from Wisconsin. In the
1800s, we were forcibly removed by the United States from
Wisconsin to Minnesota, Iowa, South Dakota, and finally, in
1865, to the Winnebago Indian Reservation in Nebraska and Iowa.
Our 1865 Treaty promised that this would be a home for the
Winnebago forever. Our ancestors suffered through immeasurable
pains to secure a forever home. Through these removals, our
culture and way of life was disrupted. Many Winnebago died
along the way, and we were separated from the lands to which
our culture was closely tied.
Thank you for mentioning Scott Momaday and the work that he
did, and he also talked about tribes and Indians being
intrinsically tied to the land. And when we are removed from
the land, it impacts us throughout everything. Knowing this
harsh history strengthens our fight to protect and restore
homelands.
By the time the General Allotment Act became law, the
Federal Government had been imposing allotment policies on the
Winnebago for over 20 years. For example, the Winnebago Removal
Act of 1863 allotted Winnebago head of families 80 acres for
cultivation and improvement. As a result of those policies, the
Tribe just owned one-third of the reservation by 1913.
The Tribe is still feeling the impact of those detrimental
allotment policies. Our remaining land was placed in trust to
stop the rapid loss of land. Trust land, however, has had
terrible long-term consequences for the Tribe. Over the last
seven generations, much of our land has become highly
fractionated, weakening our ability to exercise our
sovereignty, self-determination, and limiting our ability to
develop housing, agriculture, and overall economic gain.
The Tribe is very appreciative of the efforts of Elouise
Cobell, along with Winnebago tribal leader Louis LaRose and
many others that resulted in the Cobell Settlement. A component
of the settlement was the trust land consolidation, which was
implemented with the Land Buy-Back Program.
In May 2016, the Tribe signed an agreement with the
Department of the Interior to implement the program. We
participated in two rounds. Through those rounds, approximately
$17 million in offers were accepted for 5,700 equivalent acres.
The Tribe as well as individual tribal members benefited
significantly from the program. They used proceeds to pay off
debt, create savings and investments for long-term use, helped
purchase vehicles, homes, and other necessities for the family.
And for the Tribe, the increased control of the land has helped
boost the Tribe's economic growth and community development
efforts.
In particular, the program has been critical to tribal
farming efforts because we have more usable agriculture land.
Just this year, Ho-Chunk Farms, a wholly-owned farming company
of the Tribe, will farm 7,000 tribal acres while providing
jobs, training, and income for the Tribe.
While funding authority for the program has ended, the
Tribe is committed to building on successes of the program. We
want to work with Congress and the Administration to overcome
challenges and create opportunities. Our recommendations are:
(1) take down bureaucratic hurdles that often so exist when the
Tribe is trying to do something; (2) interpret existing
regulations in favor of the Tribe rather than using them as
reasons to do nothing; (3) provide oversight to ensure local
agencies are carrying out the intent of Congress; (4) continue
to implement laws that allow tribes to make local decisions and
set tribal policies that fit the unique need of the Tribe.
For example, under existing agriculture leasing
regulations, the Tribe has implemented a lease policy where
tribal entities match the highest bidder. This has resulted in
higher bidding of this land. It has been very successful for
the Tribe and our wholly-owned company.
And (5) additional Federal funding would help sustain the
gains that have been made in addressing the fractionation
problem.
In conclusion, the Tribe has the capability to use its
existing systems of creating tribal entities to achieve certain
goals, one of which is land acquisition and consolidation.
Using lessons learned and drawing on past successes can help
the Tribe be successful in its efforts.
The Tribe looks forward to continuing to work with the
Subcommittee and the Department of the Interior in an effort to
solve Indian Country's fractionation problem.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to
answer questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Kitcheyan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Victoria Kitcheyan, Chairwoman,
Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska

Good morning, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
Members of the Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs. My name is
Victoria Kitcheyan, and I have the honor of serving as the Chairwoman
of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska (``Tribe'' or ``Winnebago''). Thank
you for the opportunity to provide testimony at today's hearing on
``Examining the Opportunities and Challenges of Land Consolidation in
Indian Country.''
I. WINNEBAGO HOMELANDS

Today, the Winnebago people make our home on a reservation along
the hills and banks of the Missouri River in Northeastern Nebraska and
Northwestern Iowa. However, the path that led my people to ultimately
call this reservation home was a long and traumatic one. My ancestors
were pressured to cede their lands and leave what is now the State of
Wisconsin. This led to treaties in 1829, 1832, and 1837. Our 1837
treaty resulted in the Winnebago people being removed from Wisconsin to
a reservation in Iowa.
The Winnebago people were removed once again in 1846 to two
separate locations in Minnesota. Then, after the Dakota War of 1862,
the Winnebago, who were not involved in the conflict, were forced to
leave our lands in Minnesota and relocate to ``an undesirable parcel of
land'' on the Crow Creek Reservation in South Dakota. The conditions
there were so horrendous that many of our people died from ``starvation
and exposure.'' Fighting for survival, many Winnebago people fled from
South Dakota and sought refuge among the Omaha Tribe in what is now the
State of Nebraska.
In 1864, ``twelve hundred starving Winnebago'' relocated themselves
to the bottomland where Blackbird Creek flows into the Missouri River.
Subsequently, a Winnebago delegation went to Washington, DC to
negotiate the sale of part of the Omaha reservation to the Winnebago
Tribe. In 1865, the Winnebago purchased on hundred thousand acres of
the north end of the Omaha Tribe's reservation. A treaty was signed in
1865 that exchanged the Winnebago Tribe's land on the Crow Creek
Reservation in South Dakota for our new reservation in Nebraska.
The Winnebago Tribe's Treaty of 1865 promised that land would be
``set apart for the occupation and future home of the Winnebago
Indians, forever . . ..'' Our ancestors suffered through immeasurable
pains to secure a ``forever'' home for the Winnebago people. Through
these removals, our culture and way of life was disrupted, many
Winnebago people died along the way, and we were separated from lands
to which our culture was closely tied. Knowing this harsh history
strengthens us as we fight to protect and restore our homelands.
II. IMPACT OF ALLOTMENT ERA

With the treaty making era coming to an end in 1871, the federal
government shifted to an era of allotment and assimilation, which
sought to strip us of both our land and culture. The General Allotment
Act of 1887, also known as the Dawes Act, sought to break up
reservations and tribal lands by granting allotments to individual
Indians and encouraging them to take up agriculture.
By the time the Dawes Act was enacted, the federal government had
imposed allotment policies on the Winnebago for over 20 years,
allotting vast amounts of our lands. A treaty signed on April 15, 1859,
declared that each head of family would receive no more than eighty
acres, and each single male over eighteen years of age would receive no
more than forty acres. Further, the Winnebago Removal Act of 1863 (Act
of February 21, 1863) allotted Winnebago heads of families eighty acres
of land for cultivation and improvement.
Although our 1865 treaty made no mention of allotments on our new
reservation in Nebraska territory, the 1863 Act clearly intended that
the Winnebago lands be allotted once the Tribe was settled on the new
reservation. Under the provisions of this Act, the Interior Department
issued 420 patents to the Winnebago by 1872. These allotment policies
were just another way to take our land and were forced upon the
Winnebago, resulting in the Tribe owning just one-third of its
reservation lands by 1913.
While the federal government's allotment era ended 90 years ago,
the Tribe is still feeling the impact of those detrimental policies.
Our remaining lands were placed into federal trust status in order to
stop the rapid loss of land. Trust land, however, has had terrible
long-term economic consequences for the Winnebago people. Over the last
seven generations, much of our land has become highly fractionated,
weakening our ability to exercise our sovereignty, self-determination,
and limiting our ability to use our land for housing, development,
agriculture, and overall economic gain.
III. LAND BUY-BACK PROGRAM FOR TRIBAL NATIONS

The Tribe is very appreciative of the efforts of Elouise Cobell,
along Winnebago tribal leader Louis LaRose and many others, that led to
the Cobell Settlement, which established a $1.9 billion Trust Land
Consolidation Fund (``Consolidation Fund''). Signed into law in
December 2010, the Cobell Settlement aimed, in part, to solve the
fractionation problem that had been plaguing Indian Country for
decades. In 2012, the Secretary of the Interior launched the Land Buy-
Back Program for Tribal Nations (``Program'') to implement the land
consolidation component of the Cobell Settlement.
In May 2016, the Tribe signed an agreement with the Department of
the Interior to guide implementation of the Program and outline a
coordinated strategy to facilitate education about the Program to
landowners. At that time, former Winnebago Tribal Chairwoman Darla
LaPointe stated that the Tribe ``made a strategic decision to be
involved with the Buy-Back Program. This opportunity will provide the
tribe with communal use and land development that fits our priorities
as a whole. The Tribe will benefit with additional lands, the
landowners will benefit monetarily and our local agency's issue with
fractionalization will be drastically reduced. We see this decision as
mutually beneficial to all parties.''

In February 2018, the Department of the Interior provided the Tribe
with a Purchase Summary Report (``Report'') that outlined how the Tribe
was benefiting from the Program. Overall, the Program purchased nearly
12,000 fractional interests and more than 4,200 equivalent acres in 327
tracts on the lands of the Winnebago Tribe were consolidated under
tribal ownership. Other key findings included:

Offers were mailed to 3,500 landowners with fractional
interests in lands of the Winnebago Tribe;

Nearly $11.8 million was paid to landowners who chose to
participate in the Program;

A total of 1,159 landowners (33 percent of those who
received offers) sold 11,999 fractional interests;

The Program purchased $4,791,782 of Surface resource
tracts, $12,222 of Mineral tracts, and $6,905,012 of both
resource tracts;

73 tracts were in 100 percent tribal ownership, 291 tracts
in tribal management potential, and 339 tracts with more
than 50 percent tribal ownership;

643 tracts were still considered fractionated tracts under
the terms of the Cobell Settlement containing 48,090
purchasable fractional interests;

3,585 individuals own fractional interests at the
Winnebago Tribe;

+  Those landowners owned the equivalent of 13,684
purchasable acres: 3,545 Surface acres, 4,780 Mineral acres,
and 5,333 Both acres.

In September 2021, the Department of the Interior announced that
nearly 3,000 landowners with fractional interests at the Winnebago
Reservation had been sent more than $22 million in purchase offers from
the Program. Those landowners accepted $5.3 million in offers for 1,558
equivalent acres. Through both rounds of offers, approximately $17
million in offers were accepted for over 5,700 equivalent acres.
The Tribe as well as individual tribal members have benefited
significantly from the Program. By accepting Program offers, tribal
citizens have used those proceeds for various purposes, including
paying off debt, purchasing vehicles to have transportation for
employment, and purchasing homes. Others were able to purchase
necessities for their families and create savings or investments for
long term use. Having a buyer for these fractioned land interests
provided individuals with an opportunity to turn an asset with limited
practical or economic value with a limited pool of potential buyers
into actual capital under tribal members' direct control that could be
used to improve their lives.
Benefits to the Tribe include an increase in useable parcels of
land that are now under total or majority Tribal ownership and
increased agricultural lease income the Tribe. The Winnebago Tribe can
now exercise more direct control over who farms the land, what they
farm, and how they farm it because the Tribe now has majority control
over more land on the reservation. Previously, if the Tribe did not
control the land, it had to follow a very regimented federal government
mandated leasing and planting schedule. These policies did not allow
the Tribe to maximize its benefit because it had five-year leases that
did not take into account market fluctuations and forced farmers to
plant economically poor crops, such as oats instead or corn or
soybeans. The Tribe can now direct which crops can be grown to maximize
economic and environmental impact.
The increased control of our land has also helped boost the Tribe's
economic growth and community development efforts. For example, the
Winnebago Tribe's wholly owned farming company, Ho-Chunk Farms, leases
agricultural land from the Tribe for both commercial and organic
farming. Ten years ago, Ho-Chunk farms did not exist and did not farm
any tribal land. In 2024, Ho-Chunk Farms will farm over 7,000 acres of
tribal land, including 1,000 acres of organic crops. Ho-Chunk Farms
also provides much needed jobs, training, and income for the Tribe. The
Land Buy Program has been critical to the Tribe's farming efforts
because it now has more useable agricultural land that can be available
for lease by Ho-Chunk Farms. However, it is also critical to note that
Ho-Chunk Farms now farms all the Tribe's agricultural land and its
ability to grow will be limited to some extent by how much more land
the Tribe owns and can consolidate in the future.
IV. NEXT STEPS

Now that the funding authority for the Program has ended, the
Winnebago Tribe is committed to finding a way to keep building on the
successes of the Program. According to the Department of the Interior's
report titled Ten Years of Restoring Land and Building Trust 2012-2022,
``fractionation is predicted to exceed pre-Program levels in just 15
years without sustained efforts. Further, the Department of the
Interior has indicated that it would likely take billions of dollars to
resolve the fractionation problem.
The Winnebago Tribe, with limited tribal resources, is continuing
to prioritize land acquisition and land consolidation. Additional steps
that have been identified include personal finance and estate planning
education for tribal members, increased funding and resources for land
acquisition, consolidation and management, and development of
comprehensive land use plans.
The Program has greatly boosted the Winnebago Tribe's farming
operation by allowing the Tribe to have more direct control over the
land. The success of Ho-Chunk Farms allows the Winnebago Tribe to move
up the economic value chain beyond just leasing the land. The farming
profits can be used to acquire even more land--creating a continuing
cycle of job creation and economic activity. This provides the Tribe
with additional resources to acquire even more fractionated and
previously lost land.
Increasing federal funding to help address the fractionation
problem would greatly advance the Winnebago Tribe's efforts to continue
to consolidate our land base, increase economic self-sufficiency, and
strengthen our community.
The Tribe looks forward to continuing to work with the Subcommittee
and the Department of the Interior in an effort to solve Indian
Country's fractionation problem.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to the Hon. Victoria Kitcheyan,
Chairwoman, Winnebago Tribe

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your opinion, how good of a job did the Land Buy-
Back Program do in targeting lands that had a high economic value to
consolidate?

Answer. The Winnebago Tribe (``Tribe'') participated in two rounds
of the Land Buy-Back Program (``Program''). Through both rounds of
offers, approximately $17 million in offers were accepted for over
5,700 equivalent acres. While the Tribe appreciates the benefits it
received from this program, more effective communication with the Land
Buy-Back Program officials could have led to greater results.
During the first round of the Program, the Tribe was able to review
and prioritize highly fractionated lands with the Program officer. It
was a hands-on experience where the Tribe had the opportunity to weigh
in on key decisions. However, the Tribe's experience during the second
round was quite different as most of the decisions came from Program
staff without the Tribes input. Further, the Tribe had to constantly
reach out to Program staff for updates.
Overall, the Tribe found the Program to be highly effective, but
more effective communication with the Program staff could have led to
better results.

Question 2. How has your tribe approached long-term land use
planning?

Answer. The Tribe prioritizes land acquisition and land
consolidation because doing so will strengthen our community and
increase economic self-sufficiency. Our long-term land use planning
includes personal finance and estate planning education for tribal
members, advocating for funding and resources for land acquisition, and
developing comprehensive land use plans.
The Tribe is currently working with an external consultant to
develop a land use plan for the Winnebago Reservation. The plan will
include plans for business, residential, farming, hunting, recreation,
and preservation.

2a) How has fractionation and land consolidation impacted the
effectiveness of long-term use planning?

Answer. Fractionation has had and continues to have an impact on
our long-term planning. Many Winnebago families who hold fractionated
lands choose not to sell because of their ties to those lands that were
passed on from ancestors. The Tribe certainly understands those strong
connections to the lands and is working with families to ensure that
the lands will always be within the Tribe and for our people.
Without a consolidated land base, the Tribe has an extremely
difficult time developing the community, housing, and expanding
infrastructure. The processes and approvals for use of trust land
cumbersome and time consuming, especially when parcels are
fractionated. This adds costs to development and has the potential to
delay a project by months or even years.

Question 3. The Department created GIS maps and a database for use
in the Land Buy-Back Program and has stated that tribes have access to
that data to see the lands and help make land planning decisions.

3a) Does the Winnebago Tribe use this data specifically. And if
yes, how accessible is this data? And If no, please explain why not.

Answer. The Tribe does not have access to the Department's GIS maps
and database used in the Land Buy-Back Program.

Question 4. The Land Buy Back Report acknowledges that land
fractionation will exceed pre-program levels in 14 years without
further action.
4a) Can you further expand from your testimony on any legislative
or policy solutions that Congress should consider to help further
consolidate fractional interests?

Answer.

1.  Programs for tribal member estate planning resources and
education to help tribal members make informed decisions.

2.  Additional funding for tribal land acquisition so tribes can
continue to purchase fractionated interests and other
parcels within the reservation.

3.  Incentives for land sales to tribes within reservations.

Question 5. Your testimony mentioned the need for personal finance
and estate planning education for tribal members. What opportunities
has the tribe found to provide this education for tribal members, or
what kind of programs would you partner with for this purpose?

Answer. To date, there have been limited resources for this since
the BIA stopped providing will drafting services for tribal members
with trust lands. Currently, the Nebraska Legal Aid provides will
drafting services for elders. We are also aware of organizations such
as the Indian Land Tenure Foundation that have programs to help with
tribal elder education and will drafting. If grants were available, the
Tribe could apply or partner with another organization to provide this
service.

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. How would you describe the economic impacts that
fractionation may have on the Winnebago Tribe?

Answer. Fractionated land makes land use planning extremely
difficult, cumbersome, and often impractical. It limits the ability of
the Tribe to effectively develop infrastructure, housing, and other
projects within the reservation. This has major implications for
economic development, entrepreneurism, and growth of the community.
Every single project the Tribe is currently working on, such as
construction of a new grocery store, emergency services building and
childcare center, have had delays and challenges due to not having
consolidated and useable parcels of land for development. The delays
result in increased construction costs and excessive staff and
consultant time spent on analyzing options, often with a result that is
less than ideal and often a workaround due to various fractionalized
parcels of land scattered throughout the community and reservation.

Question 2. If no action is taken to reduce fractionated interests,
how do you expect the situation to look 10 years from now?

Answer. As tribal members pass away without wills, their trust land
interests will continue to be divided among all heirs. The more heirs
there are on a parcel of land, the more difficult it is for that family
to make use of the land. This results in many parcels of land sitting
idle or being leased to others for limited economic value to each
family member. Idle land adds no value to the Tribe as a whole and
hurts the Tribe's ability to effectively develop within the
reservation.

______

Ms. Hageman. Thank you. And, again, I am also proud of the
bill that we were able to pass out of this Subcommittee and the
Committee addressing the Winnebago lands along the Missouri
River. So, we appreciate you coming and testifying on that
particular issue as well.
And, finally, the Chair now recognizes Mr. Cris Stainbrook
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CRIS STAINBROOK, PRESIDENT, INDIAN LAND TENURE
FOUNDATION, LITTLE CANADA, MINNESOTA

Mr. Stainbrook. [Speaking Native language.] Good morning.
My name is Cris Stainbrook. I am President of the Indian Land
Tenure Foundation. I thank the Committee and the Chair for this
opportunity to provide some input on what has been a long and
arduous trip for the foundation that we began in 2002, and by
2003 we had been drawn into this issue of fractionated land
title and what it could do to Indian Country to help resolve
that.
I won't take long today, and I don't have long today.
Typically, this is a 1- or 2-hour conversation in most
communities to understand where it came from and where we are
going if we don't resolve the issues of fractionated land
title.
And I will admit I was probably an impetus for getting the
mindset that $2 billion would resolve the issue when I did
testimony before the Senate Committee in 2003. That has long
since passed, and land has appreciated in value substantially.
And I think that is why you see that it may not have met
everyone's expectations.
Having said that, I do think it was probably the most
efficient program that I have ever seen run by the Federal
Government. There are some real upsides to the program, and as
has been pointed out, it is a voluntary program, which is,
first and foremost, in the foundation's view, a positive. Most
of the actions that have been taken to resolve fractionation
have not been voluntary. They have been involuntary takings,
and probably the best example of that was the Indian Land
Consolidation Act and the escheat revisions on the 2 percent
interest at the time of probate.
There are efficiencies, everything from the appraisal
process to the titling process to mapping of Indian Country.
For many tribes, this was the first time they actually had
received maps that could tell them where their allotments were
and what the amount of fractionation was on each. I think, if
nothing else, continuing all of those efficiencies going
forward will help not just the future program but all of the
other programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
And the other thing it said was the sheer volume could be
handled, and that is not insignificant when we are talking
about fractionated title.
A few pieces that I would like to say there may have been
some drawbacks on. We face the resolution of fractionated
title, but people keep saying to us, ``Well, we are going to
wait for the next Cobell.'' And that isn't happening, and we
have to tell them it isn't happening.
The other drawback is it is expensive. This is a process
that essentially buys the land, and that makes it expensive.
The other thing I would say about it is this is really at
the end of the pipeline. There are ways to get ahead of it and
get on the front end of the fractionation issue, including
things that we have been working on for years, which is we
provide will-writing and estate planning services for Indian
people. Through that we can do consolidation, and we have
proven we can do consolidation by stopping it on thousands,
literally about 8,000 different titles that are out there.
The other thing, we were the pilot project for the American
Indian Probate Reform Act and doing estate planning. About 85
percent of those wills involved consolidation of undivided
interests. That is where we have been spending a fair bit of
time, and we have been doing that through resources that we can
garner from foundations and other sources like OST and also
USDA.
I see my time is going away. We also do gift deeds, helping
people write gift deeds. The thing that we would really like
Congress to consider is making transfer on death deeds
available to Indian landowners. It is much more efficient and
replaces even that.
We have done an entire package of the programs we offer and
tried to work out arrangements with the Department of the
Interior for that program, instituting that entire program, and
we have provided the Committee with some of the numbers and the
savings that are available through a consolidated program,
which is substantial.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stainbrook follows:]
Prepared Statement of Cris Stainbrook, President of Indian Land
Tenure Foundation

My thank you to Chair Hagerman and the members of this Subcommittee
for the privilege and honor of inviting me to testify today. The topic
today has been one of the Indian Land Tenure Foundation's focus for the
past twenty-two years.
Introduction

The Indian Land Tenure Foundation (ILTF) was created in 2002
through a community planning process that involved input from more than
1,200 Native people from throughout Indian Country. From the process
emerged a consensus on the matters to be addressed that included the
recovery to Indian ownership of the 90 million acres of reservation
lands lost through the allotment processes, increased management and
control of allotted land and the protection of off-reservation cultural
and religious sites. At inception, the Foundation adopted the mission/
goal statement of, Land within the original boundaries of every
reservation and other areas of high significance where tribes retain
aboriginal interest are in Indian ownership and management.
ILTF has had a number of successes over the 21 years of operation,
not the least of which has been assisting the Native Nations in the
recovery of approximately 100,000 acres to their ownership. This has
been accomplished through a combination of legal assistance, grants and
loans from ILTF's subsidiary CDFI, Indian Land Capital Company.
Early in ILTF's work it became apparent that because of the history
of federal probate of the estates of individual allotment holders, land
was being lost to Indian ownership and millions of acres of the
allotments were going underutilized by Indian people. The base cause
being that the allotted land remained intact in trust status by the
federal government but the title to the beneficial use was divided
among the heirs of the decedent in undivided interests as prescribed by
probate codes. The one way to avoid this prescribed division was for
the interest holder to have a will directing the division of their
assets. A quick survey conducted by the Foundation in 2003 showed that
less than 7 percent of Indian people had written, valid wills.
Therefore, the vast majority of trust allotment estates went through
probate intestate and the number of undivided interests in trust
allotments was growing exponentially and also included non-Indian
interests due to marriage and non-Indian children heirs.
There have been a number of attempts by Congress and the Department
of Interior to stem the growth of the number of undivided interests in
trust allotments, the first being as far back as the 1934 Indian
Reorganization Act that ended the allotment of reservation lands. The
next real effort was the 1983 Indian Land Consolidation Act with a
center point of escheating the undivided interests of less than 2
percent to the tribe at the time of probate. This provision was found
to be an illegal taking and the courts ordered return of taken interest
to the heirs. This effort did lead to the establishment of the Land
Consolidation Pilot Project aimed at purchasing the interests of 2
percent or less on a limited number of reservations.
It was in this back drop that the ILTF Board concluded that in
order for individual undivided interest holders to have control,
management and use of their allotments, further title fractionation
needed to be slowed and consolidation of interests needed to occur
before probate through will writing and other mechanisms. The
Foundation committed $3 million of its own resources in 2003 to provide
free estate planning services including the writing of wills to Indian
land interest holders to explore whether interest consolidation and/or
prevention of new interests could be accomplished.
To be very clear, this work was undertaken to empower Indian people
control their land interest assets, particularly as those assets were
passed to their next generation.
American Indian Probate Reform Act of 2004 and Estate Planning

In 2003, Senate Bill 550 was introduced to address changes to the
federal probate code affecting the Indian held trust land interests.
The initial bill contained a number of provisions that, while
addressing the needs and issues of DOI, did little to consider the
interests and issues of Indian land interest holders and their
families. The Senate Committee heard the comments from a number of us
who testified at the hearing and asked that we all join a committee to
address the concerns and re-write the bill. The committee consisted of
a number of non-profit Indian groups, including ILTF, tribal leaders
and BIA field staff. A re-drafted bill was submitted with more
provisions addressing the concerns of Indian land interest holders. DOI
reinstated a number of provisions and the American Indian Probate
Reform Act of 2004 passed as an amendment to the Indian Consolidation
Act.
Notable provisions in the Act were that a tribe could submit their
own probate code for approval by the Secretary of Interior with a time
limit for approval, there would be a pilot project of estate planning,
and funding available to work with trust land interest co-owners to
develop alternative management structures. The first provision was
negated almost immediately by an Undersecretary of Interior sending a
memorandum to the tribes saying that the Secretary would not review any
tribal probate code until the Department had developed a model probate
code. The co-owner alternative management model was not funded until
2015.
The Department of Interior as result initiated the Estate Planning
Services Pilot Project with the dual objective of providing community
outreach and legal training on the Act and evaluate the need for estate
planning services in Indian Country. The Indian Land Tenure Foundation
submitted a proposal to Interior to conduct the Pilot Project and was
awarded the contract to start in September, 2005.
Two regional organizations--the Northwest Justice Project and the
Dakota Plains Legal Services--were selected to provide the direct
services to approximately 15 Reservations. The result was impressive
given a new service and delivery approach was created with an ever-
growing interest from allotment owners. Starting new program services
on Indian reservations most often take time to build trust and
awareness and the early recipients of those services provided some of
the most effective marketing for the program. The final outcome of just
under 1,350 wills and 3,500 other estate documents were written in the
eight month period. An additional 1,640 requests for services were
pending when the contract ended. Eighty-four percent of the wills
written resulted in consolidation or avoidance of the creation of new
undivided interests. Further, gift deeds were used by many clients to
pass their assets to heirs and avoid probate and the extended amount of
time needed to get through the process. However, when a continuation of
funding was sought, ILTF was informed that the requirements of AIPRA
had been fulfilled.
Using numbers from the BIA at the close of the project, project
costs of $486,000 saved approximately $3.75 million in future DOI
administrative costs. More importantly, the project allowed clients to
direct the passing of their assets and have a much needed service
provided by the trustee.
ILTF has continued to seek funding for estate planning services for
Indian land interest holders. Over the past 18 years, ILTF has patched
together approximately $5.5 million for estate planning from sources
like the Office of Special Trustee, USDA and private foundations. ILTF
is approaching 8,000 wills written and executed as well as nearly
11,000 gift deed transactions. But for the breaks in available funding
that causes the loss of momentum with our contracted legal service
providers, these numbers would be much higher.
Four years ago, ILTF went to a performance contract model with its
legal services providers to test the model on a limited basis. The
providers are paid on a scale based on the number and type of documents
completed for clients. The model has worked particularly well with
private legal firms.
As a final comment regarding estate planning, the DOI should
consider using electronic wills and storage of original wills in the
Lenexa, Kansas facility. Many of the original wills stored by clients
cannot be located at the time of probate and results in the estate
being processed as intestate. The process for electronic wills could be
the same as that used by the federal court system.
Gift Deeds

Gift deeds are a valuable tool for consolidating interests
particularly if the interest holder has multiple interests on multiple
reservations and heirs that are also on those reservations. Many, many
trust land interest owners fit that description. The gift deed can be
used to give land interests to the heirs who would receive the
interests through probate or to any other person or entity, including
the tribe. The gift deed process takes considerable time to go through
and is currently a permanent transfer of the land interest.
While ILTF's legal services contractors have processed many of
these, the number of requests has been increasing dramatically the last
four years. The contractors report that clients would be more inclined
to make gift deeds if the process were simplified and the gift
recipient could be changed if circumstances changed. One significant
change that could be made is the requirement for an appraisal on the
property being gifted. Getting an appraisal or valuation for Indian
land processes can be delayed by many months and even years. As the
transaction is a gift without payment, ascertaining its monetary value
seems superfluous.
The advantage of gift deeds over wills accrues primarily to the
heirs or other gifted party. They will be the owners of the interest
upon completion of the deed. Gift deeding all of an interest holders
land interests and other trust assets will avoid the lengthy probate
process.
Transfer on Death Deeds

Transfer on Death Deeds (TDD) are now allowed and used in 30 states
but not allowed on trust assets of Indian people, land interests and
Individual Indian Monies Accounts (IIM). TDDs are used to streamline
the process of transferring assets to heirs or others without having to
go through the probate process. Most states allow the asset holder to
identify a beneficiary for one or more of their assets to transfer
immediately upon their death. The asset holder may also identify
multiple beneficiaries to receive an asset, generally on separate
forms. Many Indian people make use of TDDs in passing on their non-
trust assets in states where TDDs are allowed.
This is a tool of estate planning that would seem to be a good fit
for reducing administrative costs related to the probate process,
particularly small IIM accounts and small undivided land interests. In
the recent past BIA staff reported that there were approximately 50,000
IIM accounts with less than $15 in the account and accruing less than
$1 per year. Prior to his retirement, Office of Hearings and Appeals
Chief Judge, Earl Waites, estimated that OHA put these small accounts
through an expedited probate process requiring approximately $1,000 of
OHA staff time.
While only a modest amount of consolidation may occur due to the
use of TDD, the benefits to heirs in terms of timing of receiving the
assets would be substantial.
Land Purchase for Consolidation

The most recent example of buying out land interests for the
purpose of reducing the number of undivided interests is the Land Buy-
Back for Tribal Nations (LBBP). Arising in the settlement of the Cobell
lawsuit, in my opinion this program was perhaps the most efficient and
effective in reaching its goals of any federal government run program
in my lifetime. While there were many outcomes intended and unintended
that may prove to be problematic, it fulfilled its goals in
consolidating interests from willing Indian land interest owners. Past
programs concerning Indian land often involved involuntary
participation.
In marked contrast to the processes of Estate Planning, Gift Deeds
and Transfers on Death Deeds as outlined above, the outright purchase
and transfer of the interest to the tribes ends the possibility of
further fractionation of the undivided interest. The upside is, it
begins to return the land to the communal ownership much as before the
General Allotment Act of 1887. The downside is, those tribes that have
not before had leasing or assignment programs for tribal member land
usage will be playing catch up. Land management staff will need to
expand rapidly.
The processes under the LBBP for appraisal and titling of the
transactions set new standards for DOI and BIA. These efficiencies
should not be lost. This Program demonstrated that new thinking and
technology can be brought to bear within the DOI to more effectively
serve their beneficiaries. And, while large volumes of undivided
interests were consolidated into tribal interests, the ending of the
program will allow fractionation of land titles to resume despite many
willing sellers remaining available throughout Indian Country. While
the $30 million proposed in the FY2025 budget may keep the desired
processes in place, it will not keep up with the rate of fractionating
titles. ILTF's calculations would suggest that an annual allocation of
$60 million to $100 million is necessary for an extended time to
breakeven with new interests to be purchased. This does not take into
account the accelerating value of land throughout the country.
In short, the Land Purchase program is the most efficient program
for reducing fractionated titles, but it is also the most expensive way
to reduce fractionation as the land is being re-purchased. The cost of
other approaches is likely that of providing services and
administrative processing.
Even with the suggested amounts for a purchase program, it will not
solve the fractionated title issue. It is very clear that many Indian
people will not sell their land interests for any amount. Whether it is
because ``It is my Grandma's land and she said never to sell because it
is all we have.'' Or, there is an expectation that minerals may be
discovered on the allotment. Or, it is their touch point to their tribe
and reservation. That is where the other approaches come into play.
Performance Contract

In 2003 ILTF began trying to address the issue of fractionated
title of trust allotments and how the land could work for Indian people
rather than be used or leased out to non-Indians at less than market
rate. The first foray into estate planning showed that the legal
expenses would soon outstrip available resources and at the same time
there would be administrative savings at several levels for DOI. We
approached DOI in 2004 with a proposal to do a performance contract
based on the number of fractional interests consolidated or avoided and
the savings in administrative costs to DOI. ILTF was told it shouldn't
be a performance contract but rather a grant project but funds weren't
available. ILTF took the proposal back again in 2005 and again in 2018.
The latter model was based on a Social Bond model of initial injection
of private capital through bonds. ILTF was told it should be presented
as a performance contract not a Social Impact Bond by the very same
person we met with in 2004 who said it shouldn't performance contract!
ILTF has modelled the program for legal services to help Indian
people with Estate Planning, Gift Deeds, Transfer on Death Deeds, and
purchase of interests. The attachment is the summary of costs for the
first 10 years of program services ($696,781,426) and the savings of
DOI administrative costs (in a range of $7.5 billion to $15.2 billion)
over 40 years. The costs include an annual allocation of approximately
$60 million in purchases of undivided interests.
As you will note, the return on the cost of the purchase of land
interest component is the lowest. As noted above, that is due to the
actual purchase of land interests. The Transfer on Death Deeds is the
highest return on dollars expended largely due to the absence of
probate costs.
The provision of legal services covering any of the above
possibilities and informing clients of their options at one time
increases the efficiency of the service. It also allows for the client
to decide which approach best fits their personal situation.
Conclusion

ILTF would recommend that Congress and DOI consider approaching the
issue from multiple approaches to have any hope of correcting what your
predecessors created more than 100 years ago. Now would be the time to
take action and benefit from the reduction of undivided interest from
the Land Buy-Back Program as it will only grow from here. The
Foundation will continue to work on this issue as well but as would be
expected, the ILTF focus will be on serving the interests of the Native
Nations and individual Indian land interest owners.
If ILTF can provide any further information or input, please don't
hesitate to contact me.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments to the
Subcommittee.

*****

ATTACHMENT

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Cris Stainbrook, President,
Indian Land Tenure Foundation

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. In your testimony, you mentioned the Indian Land Tenure
Foundation's successes in implementing estate planning services for
tribal members over the past 22 years.

1a) Can you further elaborate on why in 2003 less than 7 percent of
tribal members had written valid wills?

Answer. While there has been little specific research on why, the
most common assumptions center on the lack of a cultural history of
estate planning and will writing. Prior to the passage of the General
Allotment Act (GAA) in 1887, assets of an Indian person largely passed
to the heirs in accordance with the specific tribal custom. Specific
land areas in individual ownership was extremely rare and were more
often assignments by the tribes for use by family groups. The need for
passing land assets and other assets did not arise legally until the
allotments were issued through the GAA. Under the GAA, the federal
government declared Indian landowners as incompetent to handle their
land affairs. Having a will was a completely unknown to Indian people
and, as an ``incompetent,'' any will they may have had would have been
deemed unlawful.
The early probates of Indian assets, including land allotments,
were subject to the state codes where the land was located. Few Indian
people understood the codes or had legal assistance to develop a will.
In reaction to the Howard-Wheeler Act of 1934, the federal government
developed a probate code for the division of land interests among heirs
followed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) writing wills for Indian
trust assets, including land interest holders. The vast majority of BIA
wills were written by non-legally trained individuals and simply
followed the distribution structure in Department of Interior
regulations. There was little reason to have a will unless the Indian
person had some very large estate and could afford independent legal
advice.
The passage of the Indian Land Consolidation Act (ILCA) of 1983 was
the first significant effort to begin trying to stem the amount of
fractionation of land title in the allotments. Several provisions in
the ILCA drew the attention of Indian land interest holders for their
negative effects, including the administrative taking of small
interests. This resulted in the first real uptick of Indian wills being
created by those who could afford legal assistance. Amendments to ILCA
in 2000, led to another bump but also led to many allotments being
taken out of trust status rather than passing through the federal
probate code.

1b) Which of these reasons still hold true today that Congress
should take into consideration when legislating in this area?

Answer. Few of the issues discussed above are current impediments
to estate planning for allotment interest holders. The largest one that
still exists, particularly for the elderly, is the financial cost of
legal services. In 2004, the BIA discontinued writing and storing wills
for trust assets. The Indian trust land interest holders are therefore
required to find legal services elsewhere. Complicating this further is
the low number of attorneys trained in the will preparation under the
American Indian Probate Reform Act (AIPRA) provisions.

Question 2. Your testimony also mentioned the increase of interest
from allotment owners and writing of wills after the American Indian
Probate Reform Act was passed.

2a) Has interest continued to increase among allotment owners?

Answer. Yes, the interest has continued because AIPRA contains
provisions that are seen as onerous to many land interest owners. The
only way for the land interest owners to avoid having the provisions,
including forced sale at probate, implemented is to have a will
designating heirs and the distribution of assets. Indian people know
and understand the issues of further fractionation of land title. They
are willing to have wills that stop, or at least reduce, the creation
of new undivided interests. They also are willing to consider gift
deeds (Transfer on Death Deeds if made available) to further prevent
more fractionation.
The bottom line is, Indian people want to control their land assets
and the outcome when they pass on.

2b) Are there other considerations or factors that the Foundation
has found that work to engage tribal members and Indian landowners in
the estate planning process?

Answer. Sadly, yes. The request for legal services jumped
dramatically during the COVID crisis. The legal service providers
attempted to meet the demand through different means, including
providing online services, and at one site providing a drive-through
service with staff in full protective gear. Unfortunately, several
clients were unable to execute their wills before contracting the virus
and passing on.
Educating people on their options and what will occur if they
choose the No Action option generally is sufficient to move people.
However, it is a continual process. What might not be on their mind 1
day, will become urgent for them on a different day.
Word of mouth and continuity of services are also very important.
After ILTF's providers serve a few initial clients in a community, word
spreads but the providers need to be there regularly.

Question 3. Please expand on the difficulties that the Indian Land
Tenure Foundation faced while working with the Department to put in
place a program that would address estate planning for individual
Indians.

3a) How can this be avoided in the future?

Answer. It seems the DOI and BIA keep looking for the silver bullet
that will fix the issue of increasing fractionation of land title. The
ILCA in 1983 included the escheat provision--small interests less than
two percent and earning minimal revenue would be taken at probate by
DOI and given over to the tribe. These were found to be
unconstitutional takings.
The next attempt was the Land Buy-Back Pilot Project of the 1990s.
It had some promise but also major flaws. It focused on purchasing very
small (less than two percent) interests and returning the interest to
the tribes, but it also put a lien on each purchase and needed to
account for revenues against each small interest purchased. This did
not reduce the BIA management costs significantly. Also, by not
purchasing the larger interests from elderly willing sellers, the BIA
missed the opportunity to do one transaction as opposed to many
multiple transactions once an estate went through probate. The
administration costs were prohibitive.
Next was AIPRA. This was a legislative attempt to change the
probate outcomes for intestate estates and reduce fractionation by
limitations on who could inherit interests. This was done with the
``single heir rule'' but also included provisions for ``forced sale''
at probate. These provisions are modestly successful, but will likely
take 30 to 40 years to come close to ending fractionation, and will be
effective only if Indian land interest holders do not write wills.
AIPRA also contained provisions for an estate planning/will writing
pilot project. The Foundation was selected to do the pilot project.
While it was successful serving clients and reducing fractionation in
line with clients' wishes, we were told further program funding would
not be available as, ``The Department has fulfilled its
responsibilities under the AIPRA legislation.''
The most recent attempt came out of the Cobell Settlement, the Land
Buy-Back Program (LBBP) for Native Nations. To their credit, DOI took
lessons from the prior land buy-back pilot project, added much needed
technology applications, and applied the program across a wide
geography of Indian Country at a scale sufficient to have an impact.
This was clearly their best effort to date. However, not every Indian
land interest holder was willing to sell their interests. Whether it
was their tie to their reservation, or it was Grandma's land, or it is
their only source of regular income, some percentage of Indian people
have no intention of selling at any price.
Our difficulty in working with DOI and BIA seemed to be that we
were proposing a multi-pronged approach using all the tools in the
toolbox to stem the tide of creating more undivided interests. The
Foundation also came at the issue initially from the perspective of
doing something to help Indian people control their assets, not to save
the federal government administrative costs. Admittedly, we were naive
in thinking the trustee would have the beneficiaries' interest as a
priority.

3b) Do you think the administrative costs that could be saved have
increased or decreased since the Foundation suggested their program?

Answer. Clearly, it has increased from our first attempt in 2003 to
undertake the project. At that time, the administrative cost of
managing one undivided interest in Indian land was an average of $125
per year. This number was included by the Secretary's Office in
testimony to the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs. In our most recent
modeling (2017), the calculation of $168 per undivided interest per
year was provided by the Secretary's Office. While we have not run the
numbers since the Land Buy-Back Program was completed in November,
2023, it is likely that the total administrative costs are
approximately the same but began rising literally the day the Buy-Back
Program ended.

______

Ms. Hageman. Again, I want to thank all of you for your
testimony, your insight, and the expertise that you bring to
this discussion.
I am now going to recognize the Members for 5 minutes of
questioning, and I am going to start with myself, and there are
just a couple of comments that I would like to make.
In listening to you, one of the things that I really
appreciate that you have brought today is you have brought
solutions. We don't always see that. We don't always see where
our witnesses come in and have a list of things that they think
need to be done to address the issue that is creating the
problem at hand. So, I appreciate that.
Congress sometimes doesn't always act as quickly as you
would think or that you would want, but at the same time,
bringing this list to us allows us to better focus on what is
actually going to be a solution, because a lot of times I think
government is always trying to fix its last solution, and that
becomes very inefficient and very wasteful of our resources.
I especially appreciate the comment that we need to be
interpreting regulations and statutes in favor of the tribes
and in favor of resolving the issue rather than creating more
barriers. That is another thing is, as an attorney who has
dealt with regulations and administrative agencies for decades,
I feel that so much of the work that our agencies do is to
create barriers rather than to create roadmaps.
And I appreciate the idea of coming up with more ideas or
coming up with more solutions as to how these things can be
interpreted to actually address and solve the problem rather
than creating more problems or more barriers.
I also want to note that the Land Buy-Back Program spent
$1.69 billion to reduce land fractionation on reservation
lands, but the fractionization has still not on a consistent
basis been on a downward trajectory. So, we need to consider
the fact of whether just throwing more money or providing more
money for this is the solution or whether there are other ways
that we can address this.
Again, with your expertise, your knowledge of the on-the-
ground situation, I think that you are absolutely in the best
position to educate us on those other opportunities.
I am going to start with you, Mr. Weatherwax. In your
testimony, you note that the Blackfeet Nation has utilized
innovative technology when it comes to land management. Could
you elaborate just a bit further on that and also if it would
be useful to have regional organizations collaborate on land
management. If you could just tell us a bit about some of the
innovative things that you have done for land management.
Mr. Weatherwax. For land management, we have used the GPS
system, historic maps and photos, to try to give the Tribe the
most accurate picture of landownership and jurisdictional
issues. We are tracking land with our own software because we
do not have access to TAAMS. We have had to reinvent the wheel
because we don't have access to the concise Federal database.
Ms. Hageman. Well, then maybe that is one of the areas that
we could address. And I appreciate Mr. Stainbrook's comments
about the fact that sometimes with this mapping program it was
the first time that our tribes even had a map of their lands,
which is rather stunning to me as I sit here in 2024 to learn
that. So, I appreciate that information because I think mapping
and understanding what is there is absolutely critically
important in terms of knowing where we go from here.
Mr. LeBeau, I am going to go to you next. I just have a
quick comment. You indicated that your allotments for your
ranchers or for your cattle producers is about 1,000 acres per,
and it takes 28 acres per cow-calf pair, which means that each
1,000 acres would sustain about 35 head of cattle, which coming
from a ranch, that doesn't seem like a lot. That seems to me a
very restrictive way to raise livestock.
Have you found that there are ways that we can increase
that to increase the economic development and opportunity for
our tribal members? And he just interrupted me, but that is OK
because we like Dusty. That we can increase that allotment or
increase those numbers, so that we can have additional economic
development for our tribal members in terms of cattle
production.
Mr. LeBeau. Yes. That would be great, if we could increase
the production. One way is to study the land. Perhaps the grass
can support more animals, more calf-cow pairs, than originally
thought. And the other way would be to do the land buy-back
thoroughly through the reservations once again.
This program has helped our tribal members a lot, and we
have benefited from it, whether it was through farming or
through ranching. We come from a reservation where the vast
majority of our lands are used for ranching. So, it makes sense
for this program to continue once again.
Ms. Hageman. I appreciate that. I am out of time. I wish I
had more of an opportunity to visit with you, but we will have
other opportunities.
And, Representative Johnson, thank you for joining us
today.
With that, I am going to call on the Ranking Member for her
5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I will say
one of the things we often don't hear in this Committee is that
a Federal program is working and working well. I think that is
the most efficient program you have seen, and I think that that
is a testimony to the fact of how bad things were and how
important it was to finally address it. And thank heaven for
Cobell and the courageous leadership that her and their
attorneys took in taking on the United States about its
failures of trust responsibility.
We have heard that maybe money is not important and that we
don't need to throw more money at this issue. But let me ask
each of the witnesses, is it necessary for the Federal
Government to actually allocate more money to assist with the
Land Buy-Back Program? Is that an essential element?
And I will just maybe go from left to right. Honorable
Councilmember Weatherwax, do we need more Federal money to
assist with the Land Buy-Back Program?
Mr. Weatherwax. Yes, ma'am. The funding is pivotal. The
fractionation just spirals unless you can stop it.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And because there isn't enough tribal
money to actually buy back the land, it was the Federal
Government who did that. Chairman LeBeau?
Mr. LeBeau. Yes. This program has definitely been a win for
our Tribe, and I think for Congress. I think it worked out
great. And the Tribe doesn't have the funds to fund programs
like this. We often do land purchases with our own funds, but
that is on a limited basis.
We currently have tribal members that come in very often to
sell their land, and like I said, we are not always able to do
that with the funds available. So, we think this program worked
great on our reservation, and we would like it to continue.
Thank you.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you. Chairwoman Kitcheyan?
Ms. Kitcheyan. Yes. More funding is needed, and I would say
we need to expand the scope of how we reacquire the land. In
Winnebago, like many other reservations, there were many ways
that we lost the land. So, now we have these farm families that
are retiring, and the children or the grandchildren no longer
want to farm. That is our situation. So, there is this massive
acreage that the Tribe can't afford to buy, but are also once-
in-a-lifetime opportunities.
So, beyond just the fractionization and all of the things
we have covered today, there are many other ways that this land
came out of the Tribe's hand. We just saw this movie ``Killers
of the Flower Moon''. We are peeling back the layers of what
happened to the tribes, and how we reacquire the land is going
to take an awareness and acknowledgement of those things, and
also expanding the scope on other lands that are largely held
by non-Natives within the reservation boundaries.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right. And I think that is another big
issue of, how do we get other lands that were taken in fact? As
we know, listening to the need for Black Hills to be restored
is something that we all should constantly remember on this
Committee.
Mr. Stainbrook, the one who is willing to compliment the
BIA.
Mr. Stainbrook. Well, the reality of it is this situation
is going to get much worse unless actions are taken and taken
over a period of time. And I think what the program ended up
demonstrating is that, yes, you can do large-scale purchases
back to the tribes, but the tribes aren't even in the ballpark
when it comes to being able to do that at the scale it needs to
be done. Only the Federal Government is at that place.
We have examples. The Rosebud Sioux Tribe, for instance,
has been buying undivided interests under the Tribal Land
Enterprise since the 1940s, have spent probably at least tens
of millions, if not almost $100 million, on purchases. And they
are still a long ways from being done, maybe half of the way
there.
I think if you don't get on the front end of this deal, and
stop fractionation at the source, it will cost anywhere from--
in fact, in the proposal we made to the Department, it was $60
million a year for 10 years for the buy-back program, and about
$6 million to $7 million a year for providing legal services to
help people reduce the fractionation through estate planning
and other means. So, there is a cost efficiency that needs to
happen.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you, Mr. Stainbrook.
My time has expired, but I do appreciate the chart that you
provided us which shows both the savings, the upfront savings
that we can do, because it is not just money, it is also legal,
and $15 billion is a significant amount of money to be saved by
your proposals. Thank you very much.
Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes Representative
LaMalfa for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, help me understand this a little bit, a private party,
a tribal member, has land that they wish to sell, they want to
move on, they want to go somewhere else, whatever it might be.
Not unlike in the agricultural world where maybe the family
wishes to sell, move on, or not make any money farming, and the
kids/grandkids don't want to do it anymore. So, this is kind of
what we are looking at.
So, we want in this program to not lose that land as tribe
or tribal member ownership. That is the bottom line, right?
Anybody on the panel?
Ms. Kitcheyan. Yes, sir. And these are large corporations
that are coming in and buying this land on the reservation.
Mr. LaMalfa. The same thing in agriculture we face all the
time as farmers.
Ms. Kitcheyan. Or these auctions that we are learning about
and how we participate in these auctions. And just taking
control of how we buy back our reservation is not only an
effort we are successfully doing through the Land Buy-Back
Program, but we are like pulling all our pennies together and
we are trying to leverage our resources as to how can we get
this done?
Mr. LaMalfa. Sure. I get it. Let me reclaim my time here. I
am just looking at it from a very broad context here, and I
sympathize. I sympathize with how land and treaties and how
much has been broken by the Federal Government, outsiders,
against tribes over the decades, the many decades and such.
But I guess at what point do we say we don't have to do
this anymore? At what point does a Federal taxpayer not have to
come in behind because individuals are making individual
decisions on their land and saying we need to subsidize tribes
to buy this land to keep it in tribes?
Are there provisions in here that would cause that a tribe
would permanently own the land, that they cannot sell it, or
should we even have such a provision that says if the Federal
Government helps purchase this land from the private tribal
member and convey it to the tribe, is the tribe allowed never
to sell it then?
Councilman Weatherwax, would you wish to touch on that,
please?
Mr. Weatherwax. Yes, thank you. I believe the misconception
that we are not taxpayers kind of stuck out there to me. I am
sorry.
Mr. LaMalfa. I didn't mean it that way, sir. We are talking
billions of dollars of programs that 50 states and everybody is
going to pay on. I am sympathetic to what you are talking
about, but I am just saying what is this going to look like
long term? When is there an expiration date, like, yay, we have
gotten there, we have done it right?
Mr. Weatherwax. I don't believe there is an expiration date
on this. I believe when----
Mr. LaMalfa. So, there needs to be a permanent program that
every time an individual tribal member wishes to sell the land
that the Federal Government should purchase it and give it to
the tribe as a whole?
Mr. Weatherwax. I think providing tribal land buy-back
money directly would help us, and it would allow us direct,
quick, local decision-making, and that would help.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. Sir, don't let me be misunderstood on
this. I am very sympathetic to a lot of this, but these will be
questions I get asked at home, like, when do these programs
finally culminate here?
Because I am very frustrated about the tribal process to
purchase land, say surplus lands that the Federal Government
has, and we are working on that with some of our locals at home
and such, and/or to build housing and they have to go through
all these, it requires legislation in Washington, DC.
I am happy to do my job and help do that. We have done
that. But it shouldn't require you having to come hat in hand
to this place and ask a Congress Member to run a bill so you
can purchase a piece of land that might be surplus already to
the government. There is a lot of frustration with all of this,
across the board.
But one of my questions was, should there be a revolving
fund that Indian Country can then consolidate their needs over
a longer term without having to worry about the whims of
Congress here in the Capitol? Would a revolving fund be helpful
in that?
Mr. Weatherwax. Yes, sir. I think we need to work together
to try to solve this. I mean, this is a bigger problem.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. Absolutely. Is there something that you
can look at long term and that this is going to finally work
out well, because I think many folks would look at the program
and say, ``All right. We are willing to help for a time period
here.''
But if there keeps constantly being this changing of hands
of land, and then the Federal Government has to come in and
somehow try to fix that, it is a lot like agricultural land. Ag
land ends up being put into land trusts where it can be tied up
forever or for certain payment, and all that, which I have a
little mixed feeling on that, too, about someone saying you
have to tie up your land forever as well, too, if something
changes on your farming operation.
So, these are just kind of the bigger, broader questions I
want us to think about a little bit. My time is way over, and I
better yield back. Thank you all for being here.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. LaMalfa. And I understand that
some of the frustration is the Land Buy-Back Program did not
have a mechanism to provide revolving funds, which could have
worked to sustain land consolidation funding. And I think that
is something that we do need to look at.
I think that could be something that could be helpful at
funding future land purchases, so you don't have to come back
to this body to be able to move more quickly and address a
specific parcel. It could more readily deal with the concerns
that you have.
I want to, again, thank all of you for your testimony
today, for traveling here, addressing this issue, because I do
think that this is an incredibly important issue.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Committee Clerk by 5
p.m. on Friday, February 2, 2024, and the hearing record will
be open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, and without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned. Thank you.

[Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
Darryl LaCounte
Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs
United States Department of the Interior

Good morning, Chair Hageman, Ranking Member Leger Fernandez, and
members of the Subcommittee. My name is Darryl LaCounte, and I am the
Director of the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) at the U.S. Department
of the Interior (Department). Thank you for the opportunity to discuss
opportunities and challenges of land consolidation in Indian Country.
Background

Although the federal policy of allotment ended in 1934, the impacts
of that policy continue to reverberate across Indian Country.
Approximately 90 million acres of Tribal lands--an area larger than the
state of New Mexico--were taken through the allotment process, with
most of that land sold to non-Indians in forced sales. In addition,
some allotments designated for individuals were held in trust or
restricted status. These trust and restricted allotments are often
inherited by the children, spouses, and other relatives of the original
and successive landowners, creating undivided common ownership
interests in the land. As a result, fractionation of those original
trust and restricted allotments has grown exponentially over
generations.
The fractioned ownership interests affect nearly 5.6 million acres
of allotted land throughout Indian Country, locking up a significant
area and creating an overly complicated land tenure status where single
tracts of land could have more than 1,200 individual landowners. When
tracts have multiple co-owners, it is difficult to obtain the required
approvals for leases or other uses of such lands. As a result, many
tracts are unavailable for any purpose. During FY 2022, approximately
64 percent of the 100,978 fractionated tracts did not generate any
income for the individual Indian landowners.
In addition, as a result of fractionated ownership of allotted
lands and the checkerboard nature of landownership patterns on many
reservations, Tribes are experiencing major challenges that impact
Tribal sovereignty and self-determination. For example, fractionated
ownership may make it difficult to protect or obtain access to sacred
or cultural sites, and the checkerboard ownership pattern creates
jurisdictional challenges and ties up land within the reservation
boundaries, making it difficult to pursue economic development and
address unique climate-related challenges.
Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations

In the 1996 class action lawsuit Cobell v. Salazar, five litigants
sued the United States for the alleged mismanagement of trust funds
belonging to approximately 300,000 American Indians. The Cobell
plaintiffs made numerous allegations including that the government did
not fulfill its trust responsibility through a failure to account for
the trust funds of the individuals generated by mining, oil and gas
extraction, timber operating, grazing, or similar activities.
The Cobell case settled in 2009 for $3.4 billion (Cobell
Settlement). As part of the Cobell settlement, $1.9 billion was
allocated to establish the Trust Land Consolidation Fund (Consolidation
Fund). The Cobell Settlement and the creation of the Consolidation Fund
resulted in the development of the Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal
Nations (LBBP).
The LBBP was established in 2012 by the Secretary of the Interior
to implement the land consolidation aspects of the Cobell Settlement,
which required that the $1.9 billion Consolidation Fund be expended
within a 10-year period that ended in November 2022. The principal goal
of the LBBP was to consolidate the maximum number of fractional trust
or restricted fee land interests through voluntary sales with
individual landowners. All interests that were purchased were put into
trust for the Tribe with jurisdiction over the interest. Consolidating
the fractionated interest into Tribal ownership creates opportunities
for economic development, conservation, cultural stewardship, or other
uses deemed beneficial by Tribes. As summarized in the December 2023
LBBP report, the Tribes are using the newly-restored lands for vital
matters, such as to make infrastructure improvements, deliver water for
agricultural operations, secure utility corridors, protect oyster beds,
and expand school facilities and recreation areas. See U.S. Department
of the Interior, ``Ten Years of Restoring Land and Building Trust 2012-
2022, Land Buy-Buy Back Program for Tribal Nations,'' pgs. 30-31
(December 2023).
During its first year, the LBBP largely focused on planning,
consultations, research, analysis, reviewing the lessons of the
previous BIA Indian Land Consolidation Program (ILCP), and active
engagement with Tribal leaders and individual landowners. The LBBP
began making land consolidation purchases in December 2013 and by its
conclusion had made $4.3 billion in offers to 163,763 individuals for
fractionated interests at 53 locations.
Throughout the 10-year duration of the LBBP, $1.69 billion was paid
to landowners. Tribal ownership was created, or increased, in more than
51,000 tracts of allotted land with 1,916 of those tracts achieving 100
percent Tribal ownership. These efforts resulted in more than one
million interests being consolidated, thus restoring approximately
three million equivalent acres of land to Tribal ownership. On average,
the cost of these acquisitions was approximately $570 per equivalent
acre.
The LBBP intentionally sought to maximize the funding available to
purchase as many fractionated interests as possible through limiting
the program's implementation costs. Accordingly, implementation costs
were kept to less than 8 percent--considerably below the 15 percent of
what was permitted pursuant to the Cobell Settlement--which allowed the
LBBP to transfer $135.2 million from the implementation portion of the
Consolidation Fund to the land purchase portion. Although the LBBP
significantly reduced and helped slow the growth of fractionation,
without continued sustained efforts going forward, fractionation is
predicted to exceed pre-LBBP levels in approximately 14 years. See
Chart A.
Future Work to Address Fractionation

In a December 2009 Senate Hearing, former Deputy Secretary David J.
Hayes testified that while the $1.9 billion established for land
consolidation as a result of the Cobell Settlement would make a
significant impact in addressing fractionation, resolution of the
problem would likely require $6-8 billion. In the 2016 Status Report on
the LBBP, former Secretary of the Interior Sally Jewell reiterated
concerns that the Consolidation Fund would not be sufficient to
purchase all fractional interests, and that the value of remaining
fractionated land would probably be several billion dollars at the
LBBP's conclusion in 2022.
The LBBP demonstrated that with adequate resources, establishment
of efficient processes, and working in close coordination with Tribes,
continued land consolidation through voluntary sales is, and will
remain, an effective approach for addressing fractionation. Moreover,
these efforts continue to receive broad support in Indian Country. To
build on the achievements of the LBBP and maintain the already existing
infrastructure, the Department continues a sustained effort to reduce
fractionation through ILCP as described in the FY 2024 budget request.
The current ILCP has incorporated lessons learned from the LBBP and the
previous BIA ILCP to ensure effective program implementation.
To keep pace with the predicted growth in fractional interests and
maintain the existing infrastructure, the Administration's FY 2023
budget request included $80 million for voluntary land acquisitions.
This funding was critical to take full advantage of consolidation
opportunities where land appraisals were complete, such as for the Pine
Ridge Reservation where $78 million in offers were ready to be
extended, subject to availability of funds. Ultimately, $8 million was
appropriated to BIA in the FY 2023 budget for land consolidation
efforts. For FY 2024, the President's budget request for the ILCP is
$30.5 million.
In addition to land consolidation through voluntary sales, other
ideas for addressing reduction of fractionation and its impact should
continue to be discussed going forward. Several ideas were brought to
the Department's attention in the last few years. Among them are
facilitating co-owner purchases and expanding land consolidation
opportunities beyond the original 53 locations involved in the LBBP.
The Department will continue to engage individual Indians, Tribes, and
organizations in conversations and consultations that may lead to
possible proposals and eventual solutions for fractionation.
Conclusion

Tribal homelands are at the heart of Tribal sovereignty, self-
determination, and self-governance. By continuing to address the
lingering effects of previous allotment policies, including the
resulting land loss, landlessness, and ongoing fractionation, the
Department will support the cornerstone principles of protecting Tribal
homelands. A comprehensive approach to addressing fractionation is
appropriate given the breadth and complexity of the ongoing impact. The
Department is committed to working with the Subcommittee to develop
meaningful strategies and tools to address fractionation while
continuing to seek appropriate resources.

Chart A

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. Department of the Interior, ``Ten Years of Restoring Land
and Building Trust 2012-2022, Land Buy-Buy Back Program for Tribal
Nations,'' pg. 1 (December 2023)

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Darryl LaCounte, Director, Bureau
of Indian Affairs

Mr. LaCounte did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Despite spending $1.69 billion dollars to reduce land
fractionation on reservation lands, the Land Buy Back Program's own
report showed that further actions would be needed to keep the downward
trajectory, and without further action in 14 years the rate of
fractionation will surpass pre-program numbers. How can the Department
continue to advocate for increased funds for land consolidation when it
seems clear from DOI's own report that more is needed than just
additional funds being allocated for voluntary buyback purchases?

Question 2. Under the Indian Land Consolidation Act, when a
fractionated tract was sold to Interior, the Department would transfer
the land title into trust and place a lien on the tract. The lien would
be paid off with any revenues gained through development of the land--
creating a revolving fund for additional purchases.

2a) Would the Department consider a similar sustainability
mechanism in any future land consolidation efforts?

2b) What further policy changes would the Department suggest to
make funding sustainable without requiring congressional appropriations
every year?

Question 3. It is the Committee's understanding that the GIS maps
created through the Land Buy Back Program can continue to assist the
Department and tribes in land consolidation efforts.

3a) How accessible are the GIS maps created through the Land Buy
Back Program for tribes looking to consolidate land on their own? Is
there any data about the parcels that tribes cannot access?

3b) What, if any, legislative changes are needed to ensure full
access for tribes and continued use by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in
all agencies to the GIS maps and any other supportive technologies and
databases created for the Land Buy Back Program.

Question 4. Are all the GIS maps created for the Land Buy Back
Program able to be used in conjunction with TAAMS and other Department
land use programs, or are there legislative changes Congress can do to
ensure the data is usable across programs?

Question 5. Would the Department having any concerns with Congress
passing legislation to allow BIA to store electronic wills?

Question 6. Would the Department have any concerns with Congress
passing legislation to centralize where wills and estate planning
documents are stored?

Question 7. At the end of the Land Buy Back Program 29,975
``whereabouts unknown'' account holders remained. Has there been any
progress made on this list? And if so please provide the updated
numbers.

Question 8. The Land Buy Back Program took any land interests
acquired through voluntary sales and placed it into trust for the
benefit of the tribe of jurisdiction.

8a) What statutory changes would need to be made to ensure that
restricted fee was also an optional land status for voluntary land
purchases? Would the Department support a process that would allow land
interests purchased to be classified as restricted fee? Why or why not?

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. Could you explain the impact of the Land Buy Back
Program on bringing new infrastructure to Indian Country, particularly
on highly fractionated reservations?

Question 2. How does DOI assess and prioritize fractionated
interests in lands for acquisition in its re-established Indian Land
Consolidation Program? Additionally, does the Department take into
consideration instances where the land can be immediately put to
beneficial use?

Question 3. What is the current estimate of departmental costs
associated with managing fractionated interests in land? And of that
estimated cost to purchase remaining fractionated interests, how much
is needed for administrative costs compared to land purchases? How do
you anticipate that will change over the next 10 years?

Question 4. What could be the potential cost advantages or
disadvantages of hiring third-party contractors to assist with program
implementation?

Question 5. How many tribal allotments pass through probate in an
average year? How successful has estate planning been in reducing this
number? What is DOI doing to reduce the probate backlog?

Question 6. How does DOI ensure that tribes and tribal members are
aware of DOI probate processing and estate planning services?

[all]
