- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R., TO IMPROVE RECREATION OPPORTUNITIES ON, AND FACILITATE GREATER ACCESS TO, FEDERAL PUBLIC LAND, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, "EXPANDING PUBLIC LANDS OUTDOOR RECREATION EXPERIENCES ACT" OR "EXPLORE ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. ____, ``EXPANDING PUBLIC LANDS OUTDOOR RECREATION
EXPERIENCES ACT'' OR ``EXPLORE ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, November 30, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-80

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-200 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                       Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                  Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Tom McClintock, CA                     Jared Huffman, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                         Ruben Gallego, AZ
Garret Graves, LA                      Joe Neguse, CO
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS           Mike Levin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                       Katie Porter, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                     Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR           Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                       Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Pete Stauber, MN                       Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
John R. Curtis, UT                     Kevin Mullin, CA
Tom Tiffany, WI                        Val T. Hoyle, OR
Jerry Carl, AL                         Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                     Seth Magaziner, RI
Lauren Boebert, CO                     Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Cliff Bentz, OR                        Ed Case, HI
Jen Kiggans, VA                        Debbie Dingell, MI
Jim Moylan, GU                         Susie Lee, NV
Wesley P. Hunt, TX
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan, CNMI
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mike Levin, CA
John R. Curtis, UT                   Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Jim Moylan, GU
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, November 30, 2023......................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     1
Neguse, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado................................................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     4
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................    70

Statement of Witnesses:

French, Chris, Deputy Chief, National Forest System, U.S.
Forest Service, Washington, DC.............................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8
Reynolds, Michael T., Deputy Director for Congressional and
External Relations, National Park Service, Washington, DC..    11
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Turner, Jessica Wahl, President, Outdoor Recreation
Roundtable, Washington, DC.................................    14
Prepared statement of....................................    16
Benitez, Luis, Chief Impact Officer, Trust for Public Land,
Denver, Colorado...........................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19

DiGiulian, Sasha, Professional Rock Climber, Boulder,
Colorado...................................................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Andrews, Katherine, Director, Office of Outdoor Recreation,
Arkansas Department of Parks, Heritage and Tourism, Little
Rock, Arkansas.............................................    29
Prepared statement of....................................    30

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

American Sportfishing Association, Letter to the
Committee dated November 29, 2023......................    53
International Mountain Bicycling Association, Letter to
the Committee..........................................    54
Motorcycle Industry Council, Specialty Vehicle Institute
of America, and Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle
Association, Letter to the Committee dated November 29,
2023...................................................    56
Outdoor Industry Association, Letter to the Committee
dated December 1, 2023.................................    58
People for Bikes, Letter to the Committee dated November
29, 2023...............................................    59
Specialty Equipment Market Association, Letter to the
Committee dated November 29, 2023......................    60
The Wilderness Society, Letter to the Committee dated
November 30, 2023......................................    61

Submissions for the Record by Representative Tiffany

American Mountain Guides Association, Letter to the
Committee dated December 6, 2023.......................    66
Submissions for the Record by Representative Grijalva

National Parks Conservation Association, Letter to the
Committee dated November 29, 2023......................    71
Outdoor Alliance, Letter to the Committee dated November
29, 2023...............................................    73

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. ____, TO IMPROVE RECREATION OPPORTUNITIES
ON, AND FACILITATE GREATER ACCESS TO, FEDERAL PUBLIC LAND, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES, ``EXPANDING PUBLIC LANDS OUTDOOR RECREATION EXPERIENCES
ACT'' OR ``EXPLORE ACT''

----------

Thursday, November 30, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Tiffany, Lamborn, Fulcher,
Stauber, Bentz, Kiggans, Moylan, Westerman; Neguse, Levin,
Leger Fernandez, Peltola, and Grijalva.
Also present: Representative Duarte.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to consider Chairman
Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva's bipartisan bill, the
``Expanding Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act.''
I am going to call it the EXPLORE Act.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance in accordance with
Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I would also like to ask unanimous consent that the
gentleman from California, Mr. Duarte, be allowed to
participate from the dais.
So ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. Today, the Committee on Federal Lands will
consider historic, first-of-its-kind legislation to improve
access to our public lands and transform recreational
experiences for Americans across the country.
Throughout the year, this Subcommittee has considered
numerous pieces of bipartisan legislation that would help
bolster the $1.1 trillion outdoor recreation economy. The
legislation before us today, the EXPLORE Act, is the
culmination of these efforts.
Whether you are a hunter, fisher, rock climber, target
shooter, paddler, or adventurer, there is something in this
legislation for you. That is because the central theme of the
EXPLORE Act is improving access for the hundreds of millions of
people who recreate on our public lands annually across the
country. The EXPLORE Act expands access not by spending
millions of dollars or creating complex new programs, but by
reducing red tape and cutting bureaucracy.
Title III of the bill, which is based on the Simplifying
Outdoor Access for Recreation Act, or SOAR, would make it less
cumbersome and expensive for guides and outfitters to get
special recreation permits to use our Federal lands.
This issue is personal to me. For 20 years, I owned and
operated a dinner and excursion business called Wilderness
Cruises in Wisconsin. I know what it is like to lead a small
business that depends on reliable access to public lands.
Guides and outfitters across the country are experienced,
knowledgeable professionals who provide safe and affordable
excursions for millions of visitors. Whether it is white water
rafting or horseback riding, our nation's guides and outfitters
will all benefit from a streamlined, simplified permitting
process.
This legislation also addresses specific access barriers
that certain groups face that make it difficult to fully enjoy
or experience our public lands. In particular, this bill
contains targeted provisions to tackle many of the barriers
that prevent members of our military, veterans, people with
disabilities, and young people from fully accessing our public
lands. The legislation does this by building new accessible
trails, directing land managers to prioritize recreational
visits among our military service members, and reauthorizing
the successful Every Kid Outdoors program. By creating this new
access, we will help not only the overall outdoor recreation
economy, but rural and local economies, as well.
Last year, visitors to national parks generated a record
high $50 billion in economic benefits and supported over
378,000 jobs in and around gateway communities. The EXPLORE Act
would help address some of the most pressing issues facing our
gateway communities, including lack of affordable housing,
dilapidated infrastructure, and antiquated technologies. This
will not only help the residents of these communities, but also
improve visitor experiences broadly.
I look forward to seeing the benefits this legislation will
bring to communities near the Apostle Islands National
Lakeshore in my district, as well as communities across the
country. I would like to thank Chairman Westerman and Ranking
Member Grijalva for their work on this bipartisan and bicameral
legislation.

I look forward to hearing the testimony from our panel of
witnesses, and thank them each for joining us today.

With that, I will now recognize Ranking Member Neguse for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE NEGUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany. I am equally
excited to join you this morning for this hearing on a highly
anticipated legislative package on outdoor recreation, as you
aptly noted, the EXPLORE Act.
Amidst the political disagreements here in Washington,
which can often dominate the airwaves, it is important to
recognize that there are many areas where we do agree.
Expanding access to outdoor recreation is one of those areas,
and certainly critically important to the people of Colorado
that I am privileged to represent here in the Congress, and to
Americans throughout the country, as is conserving our
country's national resources.
Outdoor recreation is incredibly important economically. A
recently-released a report by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
found that the outdoor recreation economy is now a $1 trillion
industry, accounting for 2.2 percent of our nation's GDP in
2022. Outdoor recreation employment, just by way of example in
my state, increased 9.2 percent in 2022, above the national
average of 7.4 percent, and Colorado ranks sixth in the nation
for fastest-growing outdoor recreation economies. This comes as
no surprise to me and I am sure to many of my constituents and
my colleague from Colorado, Mr. Lamborn here on the dais, who
regularly enjoy the wonderful outdoor recreational
opportunities that our great state has to offer.
The EXPLORE Act is the product of years of hard work. It
includes many pieces of legislation from both my Democratic and
Republican colleagues, and I want to thank Chairman Westerman
and Ranking Member Grijalva, in particular, for their
leadership and their partnership and the stakeholding work that
they have engaged in in putting together this legislative
product.
I, of course, am thrilled that many of my office's
priorities are included in the package, including the bill we
introduced earlier this year, the BOLT Act, Biking on Long
Distance Trails, which is a bipartisan piece of legislation to
identify additional potential long distance biking trails; the
Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination Act, which would
permanently codify the Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor
Recreation, which works to improve outdoor recreation
management across the Federal Government; and the Forest
Service Flexible Housing Partnerships Act, which would extend
Forest Service authorities to lease under-utilized
administrative sites to address local needs such as affordable
housing.
The EXPLORE Act also includes a number of other bills that
we have been proud to work on, including, just by way of
example, and I am not going to go through the whole litany
here, because it is a big package, but the Simplifying Access
to Outdoor Recreation Act, the SOAR Act, which I have been
proud to partner with my colleague, John Curtis from Utah, on,
and which I led in the prior Congress, which would essentially
reform special use permits to expand recreational opportunities
and promote access to our nation's public lands.
I also am very excited to see many of my Democratic
colleagues' priorities included in this legislation. There are
provisions from Representative Barragan's Outdoors for All Act;
Representative Stansbury's Promoting Accessibility on Federal
Lands Act; and of course, my good friend, Representative Levin
from California, who has worked for years to get the GROW Act
across the finish line, and I am excited that his legislation
is included in this package. It includes incredibly important
provisions, in connection to the Every Kid's Outdoors program,
as well. And suffice to say, this is a monumental piece of
legislation that I think is going to protect our public lands
and expand outdoor recreation for years to come.
And again, I want to thank the Chairman, the Ranking
Member, and, of course, the Chairman of the Subcommittee,
Chairman Tiffany, for their partnership.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses. I know this
will be an iterative process here in the coming weeks and
months as we work to improve and enhance the legislation, and I
am certainly looking forward to hearing from the two Coloradans
on today's panel, as well. We are punching above our weight
class in terms of the population size of our state, so to have
two of the six witnesses here from the great state of Colorado
certainly gives me great pride.
I thank the Chairman, and I thank the witnesses.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Neguse, and we will certainly
be keeping score in that regard.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. I will now recognize the Chairman of the Full
Committee, Mr. Westerman.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and thank you
to all the witnesses for being here today. It is an honor to be
here to talk about some important legislation that will
transform recreational experiences on our public lands across
the nation and in my home state of Arkansas, as well.
Our public lands are treasures that are owned by the
American people, and we want to ensure that American people are
always able to have access to these lands, to enjoy these
lands. We want to be good stewards of these lands and take care
of them so that people who will come after us long after we are
gone will be able to have the same experiences, just like
people who were here generations before us were able to
experience the great outdoors of America.
I will brag about my home state a little bit. It is
actually called the Natural State. That is our state motto, and
it is for a reason. The Ouachita and Ozark National Forest are
there, and Hot Springs National Park, where I am from. It was
the first land set aside by the Federal Government in reserve,
predating Yellowstone by decades. We also have the Buffalo
National River, which was the first National Wild and Scenic
River ever established in the United States. They are not only
in my home state, but all of those are in my district.
We also have many fish and wildlife areas. We have, I would
say, the world's best duck hunting in the state of Arkansas in
the White River, which is not in my district, but the White
River National Wildlife Refuge is a wonderful place, as well.
These are world class destinations. They are there for people
who like to mountain bike, who like to hike, camp, rock climb,
float, hunt, fish, and much, much more.
These recreational activities are not just a part of our
outdoor economy, they are a part of our heritage. And I believe
that is a shared heritage of enjoying and recreating on our
public lands, a heritage that has brought us together to form
the EXPLORE Act.
This legislation, as has been said, is bipartisan, it is
bicameral, and it didn't come from the top down. There are more
than 15 individual bills in here from Members on both sides of
the aisle that have been worked on for years.
One piece of legislation that I am particularly excited
about in this package is my Ouachita National Forest Overnight
Camping Act, which would reopen a beloved camping area that has
been closed for over a decade. I would like to thank Katherine
Andrews, the Director of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor
Recreation, for joining us today and for highlighting the
importance of restoring this camping area for my constituents
and for many people who live outside of my district, as well.
I am also pleased that the Protecting America's Rock
Climbing Act is included in this legislation, as Arkansas,
which is surprising to many, is a world-class rock-climbing
destination. I am pleased that we are joined here today by
Sasha DiGiulian. Did I get that right? She participated in our
press conference yesterday. She is a professional rock climber
who has worked on a provision in the EXPLORE Act that would
allow for the continued use of fixed anchors in wilderness
areas for rock climbers. I have not done a lot of rock
climbing, but I know when you hook onto one of those anchors,
you want to know that it is a good anchor.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Westerman. There is a lot hanging on that.
And like Chairman Tiffany said in his opening statement,
whether you like scaling 1,000-foot limestone cliffs or
floating down a river, you need reliable and easy access. I
believe our public lands should be accessible to all, and I am
proud that the EXPLORE Act includes provisions targeted at
making these lands accessible to our military service members,
veterans, Gold Star families, individuals with disabilities,
and kids.
I especially want to thank Ranking Member Grijalva for his
work on this legislation, as well as Ranking Member Neguse, and
also Chairman Manchin and Ranking Member Barrasso on the Senate
side for their hard work on the bill.
Of course, this legislation would not be possible without
the support of outside groups such as the Outdoor Recreation
Roundtable, who have long advocated for comprehensive outdoor
recreation policy. I want to thank ORR's President, Jess
Turner, for being here today to talk about the impact this bill
will have, as has been mentioned, on the over $1 trillion
outdoor recreation economy.
I hope that this hearing is the first step that we can take
to get this bipartisan legislation signed into law quickly so
that every man, woman, and child in this country can get out
and explore the vast greatness of our public lands and all that
they have to offer.
Again, I want to thank our panel of witnesses and the
experts that are here today. I look forward to hearing each of
your testimonies.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Chairman Westerman. Now I would
like to recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Mr.
Grijalva.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAUL M. GRIJALVA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the comments
that I have, I will submit them for the record. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Mr. Neguse, Chairman Westerman for their partnership
in bringing the elements and the package of the EXPLORE Act
before us today, and the witnesses, welcome them, as well. It
is an important step. It is common ground for all of us,
politically speaking and policy speaking. And I am appreciative
of the work that has gone into this, and also to acknowledge
our respective staffs for the time and effort that they put in.
With that, I will submit the formal statement for the
record. And I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Mr. Neguse. Now we will
move on to our witness panel--my apologies, Mr. Grijalva.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Grijalva. I don't know which one of us is offended.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. I think either way I lose here.
Let me remind the witnesses--I have to rewrite my script
here, don't I?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. Let me remind the witnesses that under the
Committee Rules, you must limit your oral statements to 5
minutes, but your entire statement will appear in the hearing
record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
First, I would like to introduce Mr. Chris French, Deputy
Chief of the National Forest System at the U.S. Forest Service.
Deputy Chief French, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Welcome back to the Committee.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS FRENCH, DEPUTY CHIEF, NATIONAL FOREST
SYSTEM, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. French. Thank you, and what a pleasure it is to be here
on this day to talk about this bill. Good afternoon, Chairman
Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, Chairman Westerman, Ranking
Member Grijalva. I am Chris French, Deputy Chief for the
National Forest System, and I am glad to be here on behalf of
the U.S. Department of Agriculture to talk about the EXPLORE
Act, and to focus on one of the most critical pieces of public
land management of our National Forest System, the focus on
where most Americans first engage public lands, which is
through recreational activities.
The Forest Service provides countless opportunities for the
public to connect with the outdoors. Providing equitable access
is important for us for many reasons, for community well-being,
and economic opportunity, and we are currently focusing on
building a new contemporary vision for how we deliver
recreation access across our National Forest System through our
reimagined recreation initiative focused on engaging diverse,
existing new audiences to develop a National Recreation Action
Plan that sets clear priorities for the Agency and identifies
what sort of conditions and pathways we need to get there.
Outdoor recreation attracts people to visit, live, and work
in communities, especially rural communities associated with
our public lands, and supports the health, well-being, and
economic vitality of those communities. In Fiscal Year 2021,
recreation on National Forest System lands contributed more
than $13.7 billion to America's gross domestic product, and
supported more than 161,000 full and part-time jobs, the vast
majority of which are in gateway and rural communities.
Recreation on national forests is most people's first
experience with the Agency, and it is where their memories are
made, it is where they bring their families, and the people can
choose their own adventure however they wish on our national
forests.
Visitation to America's national forests has increased
steadily since 2021. Our initial analysis of the past year
indicated that, again, we have had an increase and have over
158 million national forest visits; 85 percent of those are
based on recreation. These include nearly 25 million ski
visits, 17 million wildlife visits, and over 114 million
recreation visits, generating an estimated $11 billion in
direct spending at the local or community level. This is the
largest economic driver of the National Forest System.
Recreation represents the largest economic output of the
National Forest System.
The Forest Service administers over 30,000 commercial
recreation special use authorizations for activities that
generate nearly $2 billion in revenue for special use
authorization holders. In particular, the Forest Service
administers 127 ski area permits and approximately 8,000
outfitting and guiding permits. According to the Bureau of
Economic Analysis, as of November of the past year the outdoor
recreation economy accounted for $1.1 trillion in total
economic output.
We value the support of this Committee and the bill
sponsors to address the issues of streamlining of our
authorities to make them more efficient and equitable for
everyone. This important work happens concurrently with our
facilities work made possible by the tremendous support of
Congress when they provided the funding for the Forest Service
and other public land management agencies through the Great
American Outdoors Act. Supporting our facilities is vital to
any and every outfitter guide who utilizes public lands to
bring outdoor recreation's many benefits to everyone.
Since the passage of GAOA, major infrastructure investments
to improve public land access and recreational opportunities
have occurred on over 615 recreation sites and over 8,000 miles
of trails. With certain exceptions, the United States
Department of Agriculture has previously testified before this
Subcommittee and its counterpart in the Senate in support of
the goals and intent of the provisions of the draft EXPLORE
Act.
The USDA would like to note some high-profile issues from
our prior testimony.
The Agency recently released proposed guidance on rock
climbing, which is an important topic in this legislation. We
are committed to our public comment periods and creating a
workable solution for all users.
Commercial filming is also a noteworthy inclusion, and the
Agency would like to discuss this proposal, as it does create a
regulatory environment and fee structure that we would like to
engage the Committee on.
Finally, the methodology for calculating fees and allowing
permit holders and concessionaires to choose from multiple
options is another area that we would like to talk about
consistent approaches with the Committee.
However, the Department appreciates the interest from the
Committee in all of these bills and the Forest Service to work
through some of the guidance that we have provided, and we are
committed to work with the Committee to ensure that this goes
forward.
Thank you for this focus on recreation and the time to be
in front of the Committee today.

[The prepared statement of Mr. French follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chris French, Deputy Chief, National Forest
System, U.S. Department of Agriculture--Forest Service
on H.R. ____, ``EXPLORE Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's (USDA), Forest Service, to discuss the ``Expanding Public
Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act'' or the ``EXPLORE Act.''
The Forest Service provides countless opportunities for the public
to connect with the outdoors by recreating on National Forests and
Grasslands. Equitable access is important for so many reasons including
community well-being and economic opportunity. USDA appreciates the
recognition by this Subcommittee of the importance of recreation on
Federal lands to our national economy, as well as the sustained
interest in finding solutions to recreation management challenges. We
understand these challenges, and we know we can further enhance
recreation opportunities on Federal lands. We are building our vision,
called Reimagine Recreation, by engaging with new and diverse audiences
to develop a national recreation action plan that sets clear priorities
for the agency and identifies the conditions and pathways to get us
there. The Reimagine Recreation effort is built on a Forest Service-,
community-, and partner-driven collaborative planning effort aimed at
coalescing shared interests and maximizing the greatest good. USDA is
building on the momentum created through the Great American Outdoors
Act as well as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL). Under the BIL,
the Forest Service received $35 million to improve infrastructure at
developed recreation sites where visitation demands are affecting
public safety, the environment, and the visitor experience, as well as
$20 million to support Forest Service regions in implementing a
comprehensive recreation cabin strategy, including renovating existing
cabins and historic buildings and constructing new cabins. We look
forward to keeping you apprised of all these efforts and believe they
can address many of the issues targeted by the proposed legislation we
are discussing today.
BACKGROUND

The USDA Forest Service manages 155 national forests and 20
national grasslands, comprising 193 million acres in 41 states and
Puerto Rico. National forest and grassland outdoor recreation offers
the widest possible array of opportunities to experience Federal lands,
and are home to three million acres of lakes, 400,000 miles of streams,
130 Wild and Scenic Rivers for rafting, kayaking and other watersports,
and 163,706 miles of trails for horseback riding, hiking, snowmobiling,
mountain biking, hunting, and more.
The Forest Service is deeply committed to connecting all Americans
to the outdoors, and the agency values the important role played by
outfitters and guides, resorts, non-profit organizations, and other
concessioners in connecting people to recreation opportunities in the
national forests and grasslands. Outdoor recreation attracts people to
visit, live, and work in gateway and rural communities and supports the
health, well-being, and economic vitality of those communities. In
Fiscal Year 2021, recreation on National Forest System (NFS) lands
contributed more than $13.7 billion to America's gross domestic product
and supported more than 161,500 full- and part-time jobs, the vast
majority of which are in gateway and rural communities.
In Fiscal Year 2021, there were 156 million recreation visits to
national forests and grasslands. When we include the number of people
who pass through these beautiful forests and grasslands to enjoy the
scenery and travel on scenic roads and byways, that number increases to
456 million visits. Recreation pressure has been particularly
significant in national forests close to urban areas. Moreover, the
recreation program on NFS lands sustains more private sector jobs per
program dollar than any other Forest Service program. Outdoor
recreation opportunities and amenities are consistently ranked as one
of the primary reasons people move to rural towns and can be a leading
contributor to small town economies. The Forest Service administers
over 30,000 commercial recreation special use authorizations for
activities that generate nearly $2 billion in revenue for special use
authorization holders. In particular, the Forest Service administers
127 ski area permits and approximately 8,000 outfitting and guiding
permits. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, as of November
2023, the outdoor recreation economy accounted for 2.2 percent ($563.7
billion dollars) of America's gross domestic product.
USDA recognizes the important role and needs of gateway communities
in sustaining the recreation economy. We are helping to invest in
community well-being, expand the outdoor recreation economy, and
enhance accessibility on NFS trails and at developed recreation sites.
The Forest Service partnered with the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency and the Northern Border Regional Commission to launch the
Recreation Economy for Rural Communities program, which provides
planning assistance to help rural communities leverage outdoor
recreation as an economic development strategy. USDA's Forest Service,
Rural Development, and the National Institute for Food and Agriculture
are also collaborating to target the recreation economies of rural
forest gateway communities for technical expertise and funding to
develop recreation infrastructure and capacity beyond the boundaries of
NFS lands. We have identified a strong need to engage across
jurisdictions in more comprehensive recreation planning to identify
sustainable solutions to the growing demand for outdoor recreation on
Federal lands.
EXPLORE ACT

The discussion draft of the EXPLORE Act sets out to ``improve
recreation opportunities on, and facilitate greater access to, Federal
public land.'' The draft bill compiles several separate recreation-
related bills that relate to public recreation on Federal lands,
gateway communities, access, permitting, and other provisions included
in the following titles.
Title I: Outdoor Recreation and Infrastructure

The first title of the draft bill would include a declaration of
policy that states the Federal Government's interest in fostering and
encouraging recreation, would direct Federal land management agencies
to identify recreation opportunities, would formally establish the
Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation, and would require
the Office of Management and Budget to produce a budgetary report about
outdoor recreation.
This title would also address many important recreation issues on
Federal lands and waters, including biking on long-distance trails,
rock climbing, camping, commercial filming, invasive species
prevention, and other important recreation management issues. The bill
would address overcrowding and gateway community issues, as well as
broadband connectivity on Federal recreation lands and waters. In
addition, this title would address public-private partnerships on
Federal Lands and waters, including such issues as Federal employee
housing, campground modernization, and parking opportunities at
federally owned developed recreation sites.

Title II: Access America

The second title of the draft bill would require the Federal land
management agencies to conduct a comprehensive assessment of outdoor
recreation facilities under their jurisdiction with the goal of
enhancing access for individuals with disabilities. This title would
also direct the Federal land management agencies to work with the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense to promote
outdoor recreation to veterans and military servicemembers and to
coordinate with the Department of Veterans Affairs on that effort. This
title would also direct the Federal land management agencies to develop
a joint strategy for increasing the number of young people visiting
Federal recreational lands and waters and would extend the Every Kid
Outdoors authority for seven years.

Title III: Simplifying Outdoor Access for Recreation

The third title of the draft bill would change authorization of
outfitting and guiding on Federal lands. The draft bill would also
amend the Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act and reauthorize that
Act until 2031. This title would revise issuance of special recreation
permits for new and existing uses and replace and amend the existing
Service First authority used by Federal land management agencies to
streamline their operations and enhance customer service. This title
would further makes changes to concessioner liability and insurance
requirements as well as cost recovery authorities. Additionally, this
title would make changes to Federal land management agencies' volunteer
programs. Finally, this title would establish good neighbor authority
for recreation services and make other amendments to authorities
governing commercial recreation permits issued by Federal land
management agencies.
With certain exceptions, USDA has previously testified before this
subcommittee and the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee in
support of the goals and intent of several provisions of the draft
EXPLORE Act. USDA would like to note some high-profile issues and
concerns from its prior testimony. For instance, Forest Service
recently published for public comment proposed guidance on climbing
opportunities on NFS lands, including in wilderness, consistent with
requirements described Section 122 of this Act, and the Joint
Explanatory Statement that accompanied the 2021 Consolidated
Appropriations Act. Additionally, the draft EXPLORE Act extends the
Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act through 2031. Should that
authority expire, implementation of many elements of this Act would be
impacted. The EXPLORE Act also includes the Federal Interior Land Media
Act, which USDA continues to believe would create confusion for permit
administrators and the public, would impose unnecessary paperwork
burdens on the public, and could result in resource damage. The
provision in Section 311 allowing concessioners to choose their land
use fee calculation method would be inconsistent with existing Federal
law requiring land use fees based on fair market value, would be
extremely challenging to implement, and would cause wide variation in
permit administration.
The Forest Service also strives to ensure developed recreation
sites on all NFS lands, including the Ouachita National Forest, are
located outside the 100-year floodplain for visitor safety reasons and
litigation risk. USDA would like to work with the committee and bill
sponsors to explore how best to maximize the visitor experience and
address public safety at developed recreation sites operated and
maintained by the Forest Service while minimizing the potential
liability of the United States.
USDA appreciates the interest from the committee in working with
the Forest Service to address concerns previously identified in
testimony and concerns identified in new provisions of the draft bill.
USDA looks forward to further reviewing the draft bill to better
understand how these issues have been addressed as well as to analyze
the implications of new provisions for recreation opportunities on
National Forest System lands. After this review, we would like to
provide additional recommendations and comments, including technical
amendments, before the committee moves forward with this legislation.
CONCLUSION

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the draft bill. USDA
looks forward to continued work with the Committee and bill sponsors as
they further develop the legislation.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Deputy Chief French. I
would now like to introduce Mr. Michael Reynolds, Director for
Congressional and External Relations at the National Park
Service.
Director Reynolds, welcome back to the Committee, and you
have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL T. REYNOLDS, DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR
CONGRESSIONAL AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS, NATIONAL PARK SERVICE,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Reynolds. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Tiffany,
Ranking Member Neguse, Mr. Westerman, Mr. Grijalva, and members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide
the views of the Department of the Interior on the newly-
introduced EXPLORE Act. I would like to submit the Department's
full written statement for the record, and summarize our views.
I would note that our written statement refers to the bill
as a discussion draft, because that is what it was until just
yesterday. when it was introduced.
The Bureau of Land Management, the Fish and Wildlife
Service, the National Park Service, and the Bureau of
Reclamation all contribute to the Department's overall
recreation mission and the Secretary's recreation and equitable
access priorities. The places managed by these bureaus, as well
as those managed by the U.S. Forest Service Army Corps of
Engineers, provide a diversity of outdoor recreation
experiences for tens of millions of Americans each day, and
improve the social well-being of urban and rural communities
across the United States.
Outdoor recreation also contributes significantly to the
national economy and the economies of local communities, as we
have all just been talking about.
The EXPLORE Act includes multiple individual measures
related to outdoor rec and resource management on these Federal
lands, many of which were first introduced as separate bills.
Our written statement summarizes the bill, title by title.
The individual provisions of the EXPLORE Act are
representative of the wide range of issues and interests that
Federal land management agencies are responsible for managing
on behalf of the American people. The Department appreciates
the willingness of Congress to engage with these complex issues
thoughtfully, and is broadly supportive of congressional
efforts to provide the Federal land management agencies with
greater authorities and flexibility to respond to the changing
needs and evolving challenges in a time of increased
visitation.
The Department has previously testified on many of the
provisions in the EXPLORE Act in the 117th and 118th
Congresses. Although we have been supportive of the goals of
many of these provisions, we have opposed or expressed
significant concern on some others. We have appreciated the
interest from the Committee in working with us to address these
concerns, and the Department previously identified through its
testimony proposed amendments and technical assistance.
However, it is important that we further review the bill to
better understand how these concerns and recommendations have
been addressed. We need to analyze the implication that the
bill's provisions, both those that we have seen before and
those that are new, might have for the management of our
Bureau's resources and services. After this review, we would
like to provide additional recommendations and comments,
including technical amendments before the Committee moves
forward with this legislation.
Through its land management bureaus, the Department is
continually striving to improve its ability to provide
outstanding recreational opportunities balanced with the need
to preserve and protect the incredible resources the land
management bureaus were established to steward. The EXPLORE Act
represents an important opportunity to support these goals.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement, and I would be
pleased to answer any questions ahead that you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Reynolds follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael T. Reynolds, Deputy Director for
Congressional and External Relations,
National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior
on H.R. ____, ``EXPLORE Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the views of the
U.S. Department of the Interior (Department) on the discussion draft of
H.R. ____, the EXPLORE Act. This discussion draft includes multiple
individual measures related to outdoor recreation and resource
management on Federal lands, many of which have been first introduced
as separate bills in this Congress.
Federal land management agencies oversee approximately 640 million
surface acres. The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) is responsible for
approximately 245 million acres, while the U.S. Forest Service (USFS)
manages another 193 million acres. Most other Federal land is managed
by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), with over 95 million
acres, and the National Park Service (NPS), with approximately 80
million acres. The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) and the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers also manage Federal lands used for recreation.
The Department's bureaus, including the BLM, FWS, NPS, and
Reclamation, contribute to its overall recreation mission and the
Secretary's recreation and equitable access priorities. The National
Park System, which preserves some of our nation's most important
national treasures, hosts over 300 million visitors annually. The
public lands managed by the BLM host a remarkable variety of
recreational activities and received more than 73 million recreational
visits in 2022--an increase of three million visits from 2019. The
National Wildlife Refuge System welcomes more than 67 million visitors
annually and provides world-renowned places for visitors to engage in
wildlife-dependent recreational activities, such as birding, fishing,
and hunting. The water projects of Reclamation, which is the largest
wholesale water supplier in the nation, are among America's most
popular sites for water-based outdoor recreation.
Our Nation's federal lands, waters, and the fish, wildlife and
plants they support are an important resource for the American public.
These places provide a diversity of outdoor recreation experiences for
tens of millions of Americans each day and improve the social well-
being of urban and rural communities across the United States. These
recreational opportunities are supported by agency work both on and off
Federal lands. Outdoor recreation also contributes significantly to the
national economy and the economies of local communities.
Significant investments from the Great American Outdoors Act, the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Inflation Reduction Act, and recent
emergency disaster supplemental appropriations have supported the NPS,
BLM, and FWS in addressing critical needs and enhancing or recovering
the visitor experience. Yet, these Federal land management bureaus face
many of the same challenges and constraints that other Federal
agencies, cities, towns, organizations, and businesses face across the
country.
The individual provisions of the discussion draft are
representative of the wide range of issues and interests that Federal
land management agencies are responsible for managing on behalf of the
American people. The Department appreciates the willingness of Congress
to engage with these complex issues thoughtfully and is broadly
supportive of congressional efforts to provide the various Federal land
management agencies under its jurisdiction with greater authorities and
flexibility to respond, based on the best available data and evidence,
to changing needs and evolving challenges in a time of increased
visitation to our Federal lands.
The Department has previously testified on many of the provisions
of the discussion draft of H.R. ____, the EXPLORE Act, in prior
hearings in the 117th and 118th Congresses. Although we have been
supportive of the goals of many of these provisions in testimony, we
have opposed or expressed significant concerns on other provisions. We
have appreciated the interest from the Committee in working with the
Department to address the concerns the Department previously identified
through testimony, proposed amendments, and technical assistance.
However, it is important that we continue to further review the
discussion draft to better understand how these concerns and
recommendations have been addressed, as well as to analyze the
implications that these and several new provisions might have for the
management of resources and services by the Department's bureaus. After
this review, we would like to provide additional recommendations and
comments, including technical amendments, before the committee moves
forward with this legislation.
We defer to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) regarding
provisions affecting the management of lands administered by the USFS.
Title I: Outdoor Recreation and Infrastructure

The first title of the discussion draft includes a declaration of
policy that states the Federal Government's interest in fostering and
encouraging recreation, directs Federal land management agencies to
identify recreation opportunities, and requires the Office of
Management and Budget to produce a crosscut budget report related to
the funding of outdoor recreation. It statutorily establishes the
Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation, a multi-agency
council including representatives from the BLM, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, FWS, NPS, Reclamation, USFS, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
This title of the discussion draft also addresses many important
recreation issues on Federal lands and waters. Topics include biking on
long distance trails, rock climbing and filming on Federal lands,
motorized and nonmotorized access maps on certain public lands, and
invasive species prevention on Federal lands and waters, among other
provisions. The discussion draft also considers the impacts of
increased visitation on Federal lands and waters and on the communities
that are adjacent to them, as well as broadband connectivity at
developed recreation sites.
This title of the discussion draft also focuses on partnerships to
address issues including housing options for Federal employees,
cooperative management of Federal lands and waters, campground
modernization on certain public lands, and parking opportunities at
certain Federal developed recreation sites.
Finally, this title of the discussion draft would codify the
Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership grant program.
Title II: Access America

The second title of the discussion draft focuses on access to
Federal lands and waters. This title would require the Federal land
management agencies to carry out a comprehensive assessment of outdoor
recreation facilities under their jurisdiction with the goal of
enhancing access for individuals with disabilities. This title also
directs the Federal land management agencies to work in partnership
with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense to
promote outdoor recreation to veterans and military servicemembers and
to liaise with the Department of Veterans Affairs toward that effort.
This title also directs the Federal land management agencies to jointly
develop a strategy for increasing the number of young people visiting
Federal recreation lands and waters and reauthorizes the popular Every
Kid Outdoors program for several years.
Title III: Simplifying Outdoor Access for Recreation

The third title of the discussion draft makes changes to the
authorizations that Federal land management agencies use to authorize
and permit certain providers of recreation services on Federal lands
and waters. The discussion draft would amend the Federal Lands
Recreation Enhancement Act (FLREA) and make changes to the process for
administration and issuance of special recreation permits and
requirements related to concessioner liability. The discussion draft
would also extend the sunset date of FLREA through fiscal year 2031 and
directs the agencies to consider extending recreation seasons. This
title would also replace and amend the Service First authority and
would modify volunteer programs conducted by the Federal land
management agencies. Finally, this title provides a good neighbor
authority for recreation services and makes other changes to the
authorities that govern permits issued by Federal land management
agencies.
The Department appreciates the efforts of the Committee to engage
on these complex and important issues and looks forward to closely
reviewing this discussion draft and working with the Committee and
providing additional recommendations and comments, including technical
amendments, on this draft legislation. Through its land management
bureaus, the Department is continually striving to improve its ability
to provide outstanding recreational opportunities while preserving and
protecting the incredible resources the land management bureaus were
established to steward. The discussion draft of H.R. ____, the EXPLORE
Act, represents an important opportunity to support those goals.
Chairman Tiffany, this concludes my statement. I would be pleased
to answer any questions you or other members of the Subcommittee may
have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Director Reynolds. I will
now recognize Ms. Jessica Turner, President of the Outdoor
Recreation Roundtable.
Ms. Turner, good to have you here. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA WAHL TURNER, PRESIDENT, OUTDOOR RECREATION
ROUNDTABLE, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Turner. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and
members of the Committee, on behalf of the Outdoor Recreation
Roundtable, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony
in support of the EXPLORE Act, truly historic legislation that
will increase access to and equity in the outdoors, strengthen
the outdoor recreation economy, and provide better
opportunities for everyone to enjoy our shared public lands and
waters.
ORR is the nation's leading coalition of outdoor recreation
associations, collectively representing more than 110,000
American outdoor businesses and the full spectrum of outdoor-
related activities. As we have heard today, data released
earlier this month by the Department of Commerce shows that in
2022 outdoor recreation generated $1.1 trillion in gross output
and 5 million American jobs, comprising 2.2 percent of the U.S.
GDP and 3.2 percent of all U.S. employees, and doubling the
growth of the national economy in all indicators.
The EXPLORE Act is the culmination of years of hard work by
Members of Congress and their staffs, as well as partners from
across the outdoor industry, states, and the conservation
community. It is the first-ever recreation package that
combines many bipartisan and bicameral bills into a single
piece of legislation, lifting all boats in the recreation
economy's rising tide. The landmark package contains bills that
have existed for years, as well as newer concepts that would
create more transparency and certainty for businesses operating
on or near public lands, and better experiences for the 165
million Americans who recreate outside every year.
With increased visitation and participation, as more people
flock to the outdoors and value how important time outside is
to physical, mental, and societal health, there are many
opportunities before us, but also growing challenges to
consider. How do we accommodate more visitors while ensuring
quality outdoor recreation experiences and the continued health
of our shared national treasures? How do we support businesses
impacted by canceled trips from closures of fires, floods,
droughts, and other natural disasters? And how can we advance
equitable access to front and backcountry recreation
experiences?
Thankfully, you all came together to develop a
comprehensive legislation that addresses these challenges and
more, and the Federal Government now has the necessary tools,
if we pass this bill, to manage recreation for our businesses,
our visitors, tribes, states, and the communities who rely on
recreation assets.
Whether it is a manufacturer in Wisconsin, a guide and
outfitter in Arkansas or Arizona, or a family-owned diner
outside a popular national park in Colorado, the EXPLORE Act
provides much-needed certainty through good government. Now is
the time to update these antiquated systems and manage for 21st
century recreation demands that will provide opportunities for
Americans in every corner of the country to benefit from time
spent outside.
And these common-sense provisions do not cost taxpayers any
additional money. On the contrary, if this bill passes, it is
likely to bring in new revenue as we manage lands with better
tools and data.
Long-standing components like the SOAR Act will streamline
permitting to provide significant improvements not just for
guides and outfitters, but also non-profits and education
institutions that have been burdened by a complicated process
that too often places undue stress on business owners and
employees whose livelihoods depend on their ability to obtain
these permits.
The bill contains other important aspects like establishing
online payment processing for certain Federal fees and passes,
enabling Americans to plan their visits from the comfort of
their home. It also engages the private sector in volunteer
opportunities to efficiently steward our public lands and
enhance recreation opportunities in shoulder seasons.
New provisions will help break down government silos so we
can see a better return on investment from taxpayer dollars and
come up with the best policies for our industry's biggest
opportunities and challenges. As outdoor recreation continues
to grow in importance from rural economic development to
transportation, health, and equity, this level of coordination
across agencies is critical.
Additionally, the bill will help communities plan for
authentic and sustainable recreation economies as more people
choose to live where they can work and play, and businesses are
now using recreation access and the outdoors as a recruitment
and retention strategy. Addressing housing and overcrowding and
workforce development is critical to supporting not only the
conservation of our natural resources, but also the small to
mid-sized Main Street businesses who are really the backbone of
so many communities.
As Congress has many areas of disagreement, this
legislation has become a beacon of bipartisan cooperation and
consensus building that highlights the importance of
policymakers working together, developing innovative solutions,
and partnering with a diverse group of stakeholders.
Everyone wins when our industry is able to do what we do
best: create jobs, healthy communities, people, and economies.
There is no bigger and better legislative priority for the
entire recreation industry than passing the EXPLORE Act. We
hope this transformative bill will be signed into law this year
as a win for Republicans and Democrats, American businesses,
and the American people not just of today, but the future
generations of outdoor enthusiasts. The time is now to get this
done, and the entire industry stands with you. Thank you again.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Turner follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jessica Wahl Turner, President, Outdoor
Recreation Roundtable
on H.R. ____, ``EXPLORE Act''

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
committee, on behalf of the Outdoor Recreation Roundtable, thank you
for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of the EXPLORE
Act--historic legislation that will increase access to and equity in
the outdoors, strengthen the outdoor recreation economy, and provide
better opportunities for everyone to enjoy our shared public lands and
waters.
ORR is the nation's leading coalition of outdoor recreation
associations collectively representing more than 110,000 outdoor
businesses and the full spectrum of outdoor-related activities. Data
released earlier this month by the U.S. Department of Commerce's Bureau
of Economic Analysis shows that in 2022 outdoor recreation generated
$1.1 trillion in gross output and 5 million American jobs, comprising
2.2% of the nation's economy and 3.2% of all U.S. employees. The data
also shows that from 2021-2022 the recreation economy grew 2.5 times
faster than the U.S. economy as a whole and our job growth doubled that
of the national economy as we continued to see more people flocking to
the outdoors and valuing how important time outside is to our mental,
physical, and societal health.
The EXPLORE Act is the culmination of years of hard work by Members
of Congress and their staffs--including many on this committee--as well
as non-government partners from across the outdoor industry, states and
conservation community. It is the first-ever recreation package that
combines many bipartisan and bicameral bills into a single piece of
legislation, lifting all boats in the recreation economy's rising tide.
This landmark package is truly transformative; it contains many
bills that have existed for years, including the Simplifying Outdoor
Access for Recreation Act, Recreation Not Red Tape Act, and Outdoors
for All Act, as well as newer concepts like the Biking on Long-Distance
Trails Act, Gateway Community and Recreation Enhancement Act, Federal
Interior Land Media Act, and more. If passed, EXPLORE would create more
transparency and certainty for businesses operating on or near public
lands and better experiences for the nearly 165 million Americans who
benefit from outdoor recreation activities each year.
With the increased visitation and participation numbers our
industry has seen since the beginning of the pandemic, there are many
opportunities before us but also growing challenges to consider. How do
we accommodate more visitors while ensuring quality outdoor recreation
experiences and the continued health of our shared natural treasures?
How do we support businesses impacted by canceled trips or closures
from fires, floods, droughts, and other natural disasters? How do we
make sure communities have the assistance they need to support
sustainable recreation? How can we advance equitable access to front
and backcountry experiences? How do we modernize infrastructure to
better serve visitors' changing needs and enjoyment of the outdoors?
How do we coordinate across all the agencies implementing policies
related to outdoor recreation?
Thankfully, recreation champions came together, working across the
aisle and all forms of outdoor activities, to develop this
comprehensive legislation that address these issues and more, ensuring
the federal government has the necessary tools to manage recreation for
our businesses, visitors, Tribes, states, and the communities who rely
on recreation assets. Whether it is a manufacturer in Wisconsin, a
guide and outfitter in Arkansas, or a family-owned diner outside a
popular national park in Colorado, businesses in our industry are like
others in that they need certainty to continue to make investments in
their employees and serve their customers. The EXPLORE Act provides
this much-needed certainty through good government collaboration at the
highest levels and on-the-ground tools to connect main street
businesses with the benefits of recreation.
The outdoor recreation community has been working with Congress to
advance these policies for years. Now is the time to update antiquated
systems and manage for 21st century recreation demands that will
provide opportunities for Americans in every corner of the country to
benefit from time spent outside. And, these commonsense bipartisan and
bicameral provisions do not cost taxpayers any additional money. On the
contrary, if passed this bill is likely to bring in new dollars for
land and water management agencies as it includes more tools in the
toolbox to manage lands with better data, which in turn will have an
enormous impact on preserving natural resources and securing recreation
opportunities for future outdoor enthusiasts.
Long-standing components like the Simplifying Outdoor Access for
Recreation Act (SOAR) will help streamline the permitting process on
public lands to provide significant improvements for guides and
outfitters, nonprofits, and education institutions that have been
burdened by a process that too often does not authorize new permits.
These businesses and organizations are often small and local and have
limited staff and bandwidth. Despite these constraints, they spend
months navigating complicated permit processes without any certainty
they will receive agency approval to run the trips that will keep them
in business next year. This extreme uncertainty places undue stress on
business owners and employees whose livelihoods depend on their ability
to obtain these permits. The EXPLORE Act would change that for the
better.
The Recreation Not Red Tape Act adds onto SOAR's benefits with
important provisions like establishing online payment processing for
certain federal passes and fees, enabling Americans to plan their
visits from the comfort of home. It also engages the private sector in
volunteer opportunities to efficiently address stewardship, which
eliminates unnecessary duplication of efforts through interagency
coordination, encourages land managers to account for outdoor
recreation in planning efforts, and enhances outdoor recreation
opportunities in shoulder seasons, among other necessary proposals.
New provisions like the Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination
Act--which would codify the Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor
Recreation (FICOR)--will help break down government silos so we can see
a better return on investment for taxpayer dollars and come up with the
best policies for our industries' biggest opportunities and challenges.
As outdoor recreation continues to grow in importance--from rural
economic development, conservation, and transportation to health and
equity--this level of coordination is critical because it ensures that
agencies are aligned internally and provides a single point of contact
externally for outdoor recreation stakeholders--including our members
and the adjacent conservation community.
Additionally, the Gateway Communities and Recreation Enhancement
Act will help communities plan for recreation in ways that support key
areas like housing, over-crowding, and workforce development. More
people are choosing to live where they can work and play and businesses
are utilizing access to outdoor assets as a recruitment and retention
strategy. Attention to the authentic and sustainable development of
recreation economies in places near parks, forests, and Bureau of Land
Management lands is critical to supporting not only conservation of
those natural resources that are often the driving forces behind this
growth, but also the small to mid-sized Main Street businesses who are
the backbone of these communities.
As Congress has many areas of disagreement between the two parties,
it is also important to note how the EXPLORE Act is bringing both sides
of the aisle together around shared priorities. This legislation is a
beacon of bipartisan cooperation and consensus building that highlights
the power of policymakers working together, developing innovative
solutions, and partnering with a diverse group of stakeholders.
Everyone wins when this collaboration occurs, and our industry is able
to do what we do best: create healthy communities, jobs, people, and
economies.
There is no bigger legislative priority for the entire outdoor
recreation industry than passing the EXPLORE Act. We hope this
transformative bill will pass and be signed into law this year and we
look forward to working with you and your Senate counterparts to ensure
that happens. Thank you for your continued commitment to the outdoors
and for advancing this important bill. The legislation discussed here
today is a win for Republicans and Democrats, American businesses, and
the American people--not just today but also future generations of
outdoor lovers who will gain the same benefits we do from time spent in
nature. The time is now to get this done and the entire industry stands
with you. Thank you again.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ms. Turner. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Luis Benitez, the Chief Impact Officer for the
Trust for Public Land.
Welcome, Mr. Benitez, and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LUIS BENITEZ, CHIEF IMPACT OFFICER, TRUST FOR
PUBLIC LAND, DENVER, COLORADO

Mr. Benitez. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, and other members of the Subcommittee, and thank you
for the opportunity to appear today on behalf of the Trust for
Public Land to express our support for the EXPLORE Act, with an
enthusiastic focus on the bipartisan Outdoors for All Act you,
Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva, have included
in this important legislation. Your leadership on this bill is
an inspiring demonstration of your commitment to ensuring that
everyone has access to a quality park, not just those who can
afford to live near one. By codifying and enhancing one
critical programmatic expression of that commitment, the
Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership, or ORLP, that is exactly
what the Outdoors for All Act will do.
Mr. Chairman, my name is Luis Benitez, and it has been my
great honor to have served in a wide spectrum of roles in
support of outdoor recreation as an Outward Bound instructor in
my younger days, then as a mountaineering guide who has led
expeditions around the world, including six summits of Mount
Everest, and was then appointed by then Governor, now Senator
John Hickenlooper as the first Director of Colorado's Outdoor
Recreation Industry Office, and now as the Chief Impact Officer
for the Trust for Public Land, a national non-profit
organization working to connect everyone to the outdoors.
From that diverse perspective, I could not agree more with
my colleagues at the witness table on the vital importance of
the outdoor recreation economy. I appreciate my good friend Ms.
Turner's on-target reflections on the value of Federal
leadership in guiding this continued juggernaut of outdoor
recreation participation, and the rural and urban economic
development opportunities in communities across the country
that this massive participation creates.
I can tell you that, without the kind of comprehensive
attention to outdoor recreation that this bill represents, I
fear the momentum of this trillion-dollar economy will begin to
falter, and our outdoor recreation obligations to all Americans
will fall woefully short.
Outdoors for All will finally establish in law and make
some important improvements to the ORLP that Congress has been
funding for a decade and the Park Service has been
administering. With recognizing that 100 million Americans,
including 28 million kids, lack access to a park within a 10-
minute walk of their homes, ORLP provides vital support for our
nation's more populous communities, where parks and open spaces
are lacking, which deprives kids of the connection with nature
that is part of their American inheritance.
Reflect for a moment, if you can, to your first experience
in a local park. Perhaps it was a school playground, perhaps a
neighborhood gathering spot. Maybe it was filled with
adventure, perhaps a little intimidating, depending on your age
or the community you were in. Was it where you first noticed
the seasons changing, collected leaves, played in the snow,
climbed a tree, or simply reveled in unstructured play?
Outdoors for All helps to codify equitable access to all of
these things and more by expanding its reach and heightening
its focus. By lowering ORLP's population threshold, it will
bring the program's benefits for the first time to hundreds
more cities and towns, including Superior, Wisconsin;
Texarkana, Arkansas; and Florence, Arizona. And yes, I know
those examples may have a particular resonance for a few
members of this Committee.
For the first time, ORLP would be open to direct
participation by Indian tribes, Alaskan Natives, and Native
Hawaiians, a particular priority for TPL that I know is shared
by many of you.
Prioritization language will help ensure that ORLP
effectively works to close the outdoor access gap, and concise
reporting language will ensure transparency and help facilitate
your oversight.
ORLP grants are creating new parks where recreational
opportunities did not exist for Midway Peace Park in
Minneapolis, Minnesota to North Deering Park in Portland,
Maine, and to Disciple Park in Jonesboro, Arkansas. All of this
emerging natural infrastructure, which contributes to our
physical and mental health and helps us all to reconnect in a
post-pandemic world, has never been more important.
Mr. Chairman, this trillion-dollar outdoor economy just
doesn't depend on designing and marketing awesome puffy vests
and hiking boots. It relies on the protection of and the access
to our parks and public lands. We need Outdoors for All, along
with the broader coordinated approach to outdoor recreation
that the EXPLORE Act represents. That is why today's hearing is
so vital, and why enactment of this bill will be so
consequential. TPL and I stand ready to help, and we are
grateful to the sponsors for their remarkable leadership in
this continued effort to provide equitable access to the great
outdoors.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Benitez follows:]
Prepared Statement of Luis Benitez, Chief Impact Officer, Trust for
Public Land
on H.R. ____, ``EXPLORE Act''

Introduction

Good morning, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse and other
members of the subcommittee, and thank you for the opportunity to
appear today on behalf of Trust for Public Land to express our support
for the EXPLORE Act, with an enthusiastic focus on the bipartisan
Outdoors for All Act that you, Chairman Westerman, and Ranking Member
Grijalva have included in this important legislation. Your leadership
on this bill is a demonstration of your commitment to ensuring everyone
has access to a quality park, not just those who can afford to live
near one. By codifying and enhancing one critical programmatic
expression of that commitment--the Outdoor Recreation Legacy
Partnership, or ORLP--that is exactly what the Outdoors for All
language will do. This and other critical provisions of your bill will
be a huge boost to the outdoor access and experiences Americans need
and deserve.
My Background

Mr. Chairman, my name is Luis Benitez, and I serve as Chief Impact
Officer for Trust for Public Land (TPL), whose staff I recently joined
after a three-year term on TPL's national board of directors. My
perspective, though, comes not just from my current day job, but from a
connection to outdoor recreation that has been the through-line of my
entire career. That experience includes my early days as an Outward
Bound instructor, working with young people and adults to help them
develop the confidence, critical thinking, and sense of self that only
immersive encounters with nature can provide; my time as a climber and
guide, having summitted the ``Seven Summits'' a total of 32 times,
including six summits of Everest; my gratifying experience as an Eagle,
CO City Councilman, and my subsequent appointment by then-Governor,
now-Senator John Hickenlooper as the first director of our state's
Outdoor Recreation Industry Office; my time in private industry as Vice
President of Global Impact and Government Affairs for VF Corporation,
the parent company of North Face and other outstanding outdoor brands;
and my continuing role as an educator, serving on the faculty of the
University of Colorado's Masters of the Environment program.
That history has shown me just how powerful outdoor recreation is
as a force in American life. I have seen the economic juggernaut it
represents, as affirmed by statistics just released by the Bureau of
Economic Analysis showing the outdoor recreation economy now accounts
for some $1.1 trillion annually in economic activity, over 2% of total
domestic GDP, and over 3% of all employment--more than 5 million jobs.
I have witnessed, up close and personal, the life-changing impacts it
has each time we test ourselves in nature or just pause to take in its
magic and majesty. And I have appreciated the surpassing impact it has
across the nation at the community level, where economic vitality,
public health, and quality of life in our neighborhoods, towns, and
cities are all deeply affected by the presence or absence of
opportunities for outdoor experiences.
In that light, I am grateful for the broad approach the EXPLORE Act
takes to enhancing public access to and experiences on America's public
lands. Having overseen outdoor recreation for a state renowned for its
natural wonders, I know firsthand the rewards we will reap nationally
from the coordinated emphasis the Act would place on a full spectrum of
outdoor recreation issues by codifying the Federal Interagency Council
on Outdoor Recreation. I am similarly appreciative of a wide array of
provisions in EXPLORE that would lower barriers to outdoor
participation and enhance the outdoor experience for countless
Americans. And I want to provide some particular focus today on one
particular provision of EXPLORE that will address a particular need for
community conservation and park access--the Outdoor Recreation Legacy
Partnership language adapted, as section 113 of EXPLORE, from the
Outdoors for All Act authored by Representatives Nanette Barragan and
Mike Turner--and that lies at the heart of Trust for Public Land's
support for this legislative package.
About Trust for Public Land, and the ``Park Access Gap''

TPL is the leading national nonprofit organization working to
connect everyone with the benefits and joys of the outdoors. We create
parks collaboratively with communities and local governments so that
Americans can have healthy, livable communities for generations to
come.
Since 1972, TPL has protected 4 million acres of public land and
created 5,364 parks, trails, schoolyards, and iconic outdoor places.
We've raised $94 billion in state and local public funding for parks
and public lands; and connected nearly 9.4 million people to the
outdoors.
Our mission has become even more critical over the last several
years as the entire nation felt the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
When so many indoor places were closed, our nation's public parks and
outdoor spaces served as a critical respite for Americans to engage
safely with family and friends while also enjoying the outdoors.
That national stress test affirmed what most of us intuitively have
long understood, and what key data described below reinforce: outdoor
public spaces are an essential part of American life, and that all
children and families, regardless of their zip code, should have a
quality park or outdoor space close to home, a place to play, exercise,
unplug, and connect with others in our communities, with all the
benefits that follow. Parks are critical infrastructure that improves
quality of life and supports a healthy future, with particularly acute
and demonstrated impacts on the physical and emotional well-being of
kids, veterans, and others. They are instrumental in promoting well-
being, providing crucial nourishment in the form of better physical and
mental health, increased social cohesion, relief from heat island
effects, and natural defenses from flooding and other extreme weather
events. While parks aren't the solution to every problem, they do
provide multiple benefits to thriving communities.
At TPL, we believe access to the outdoors is a fundamental human
need and an inalienable right, and that all communities are stronger,
healthier, and more connected when everyone can get outside and engage
with nature. Across the nation, however, over 100 million people,
including 28 million children, do not have access to a quality park
within a 10-minute walk from home.
Unfortunately, large disparities in park access persist, and they
break down along familiar lines especially in low-income communities
both in our big cities and our smaller towns. Over the course of TPL's
50-year history, we have seen firsthand the park access gap faced by
far too many in this great country: one in three Americans do not live
with a park near their home, and those without access
disproportionately reside in lower-income areas. In low-income
communities, parks are smaller, more crowded, and less well-maintained
than parks in higher-income communities. Parks serving primarily low-
income households are, on average, four times smaller than parks
serving a majority of high-income households.
TPL and our many partners--local community leaders and governments,
private foundations and nonprofits, committed members of the House and
Senate--are working to change this. We are engaged in these communities
and work hand in hand with municipalities and local leaders with the
goal of generating investments and funding for more parks. Communities
need support from Congress to continue this important work; that is why
we are grateful to so many House and Senate members, including many on
this Committee, who support Outdoors for All, and to the EXPLORE Act
sponsors for recognizing the urgency in including the Barragan-Turner
Outdoors for All language in this bill.
More on the Benefits of Parks, Particularly in Low-Income Areas
Economic Benefits

According to the U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic
Analysis, the value added of the outdoor recreation economy accounted
for 2.2 percent ($563.7 billion) of current-dollar gross domestic
product (GDP) for the nation in 2022. At the state level, value added
for outdoor recreation as a share of state GDP ranged from 5.6 percent
in Hawaii to 1.4 percent in Connecticut. An investment in local parks
is an investment in our nation's economy. Local parks in the US
generate more than $150 billion in economic activity annually, and
support over 1.1 million jobs. $1 million spent on parks creates, on
average, between 16 and 23 jobs--on par with job creation rates from
highway building.

These cold hard statistics are themselves compelling, but they pale
in comparison to the real-world impacts in communities where park
investments truly light the way to a better future. Take for example
these ORLP success stories:

The Lincoln Park neighborhood is one of the most vulnerable in
Duluth, MN with higher unemployment and older housing stock.
However, that is changing with the revitalization of Lincoln
Park, which celebrated its reopening just over a month ago with
help from a $750,000 ORLP grant to update and rehabilitate this
site of one of Minnesota's oldest playgrounds. This 37-acre
park was originally constructed in 1908 and was the site of the
City's first playground. Today, the park features 1.5 miles of
hiking trails, a pavilion, outdoor grills, a playground, and
disc golf. ORLP funds were used to design Lincoln Park with
accessibility and community needs in mind. The plan included
efforts to highlight the historic and cultural significance of
the Indigenous community. The city worked with the Fond du Lac
tribe on including native history and Ojibwe language into the
interpretive signage. The revitalization of the park has not
only created much needed outdoor cultural and recreation space,
the Lincoln Park Craft Business District, is quickly
establishing itself as an incubator for entrepreneurs and a
shopping and entertainment destination for locals and tourists
(http://www.lisc.org/duluth/what-we-do/economic-development/).

In the heart of San Francisco, CA a five-block stretch of
revitalized urban greenspace will soon welcome nearly 30,000
nearby residents at the Buchanan Mall Park, giving the Fillmore
community a place to celebrate the rich history of their
neighborhood and a place to inspire hope for a healthier, safer
future. The renovated park will provide equitable access to the
outdoors and cater to every generation, with a new fitness
area, playgrounds, and multi-purpose sport courts in addition
to much-needed green space to relax and connect with nature and
others within the community.

In Cleveland, OH, Clark Avenue Park will connect two of
Cleveland's most densely populated neighborhoods providing
direct access to green space for underserved communities where
few residents have access to quality open space. The new park
will offer much-needed space for the community to enjoy the
outdoors with playgrounds, sports facilities, seating, and
spaces for future farmers' markets and social gatherings. And
the park is expected to generate at least $2.08 million in
economic benefits over the next 10 years.

An additional positive side-effect of this sort of investment is
the rise in home values associated with proximate parks. For example,
Mississippi State University estimates Three Mile Creek Greenway, in
Mobile, AL will raise local property values by 2%. Nationally, a study
by John Crompton for NRPA found houses near parks are 8-10% more
valuable than houses farther from parks.
Health Benefits

Studies both compiled and conducted by TPL have shown clear health
benefits from spending time in parks and open spaces. Those health
benefits include both mental and physical. In terms of mental health,
exposure to green settings has been shown to decrease stress and
improve concentration. Moreover, in children these types of mental
health improvements may subsequently result in improved academic
achievement and more positive social interactions. Physical health is
influenced by a myriad of factors including physical activity.
Proximity to parks and open space increases physical activity levels
during childhood and adolescence which may have sustained long-term
impacts on physical health as an adult. This could lead to a long-term
decrease in health problems like Type II diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, and physical strength.
Additionally, parks bring environmental benefits to surrounding
neighborhoods, including cooling and flood prevention. A TPL study
found that neighborhoods within a 10-minute walk of a wooded park were
up to 6 degrees cooler than park-poor areas. A well-designed park can
absorb tens of thousands of gallons of storm water and help reduce
flooding.
Outdoors for All and the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership Program

The Outdoors for All provision would codify and improve the Outdoor
Recreation Legacy Partnership Program (ORLP), ensuring a secure pathway
for competitive funding to communities without adequate access to local
parks, and that this important program will continue to have lasting
impact, and in more communities, nationwide. Giving the program a
statutory foundation will give the National Park Service and community
leaders a reliable footing from which to make longer-term ORLP plans,
and to work together in a sustained fashion. And providing broader
benefits to a broader pool of applicant communities will give the
program even more reach to the places where it is most needed.

TPL has more experience with the ORLP program than virtually any
other organization in the country. TPL worked with Congress to create
the program 9 years ago and we have worked with the National Park
Service and communities across America since then to leverage ORLP
resources on the ground. In that context, I can share that the ORLP
improvements that would be authorized under the Outdoors for All
language will make a big difference. I would like to highlight three of
those crucial improvements:

The Outdoors for All provision will, for the first time, allow
for direct ORLP participation by Indian tribes and Indigenous
communities. Over the years, TPL has worked with more than 70
tribes and Native groups to protect homelands and culturally
significant places such as ancestral burial grounds, fishing
sites, and lands that supply traditional foods and medicines.
Through these efforts we have protected or helped return more
than 200,000 acres of land to Native Americans and Native
Hawaiians. Our efforts range from restoring ancestral lands to
the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians in Northern California, the Nez
Perce Tribe in eastern Oregon, and Native Hawaiians. Tribal
management and conservation of these lands has delivered the
benefits of parks easily as much here as in non-tribal
communities, and TPL believes freeing up ORLP to meet these
needs is not only appropriate but also necessary.

Adjusting ORLP's population floor for eligible applicants to
communities of at 25,000 residents--and allowing two or more
adjacent areas to join in ``clusters'' to apply for ORLP
grants--may seem like a technical tweak, but if enacted will
expand the program's reach to hundreds more cities and towns.
This change will significantly increase the applicant pool and
raise the competitive bar, ensuring an even better complement
of annual projects. At the same time, by allowing community
clusters to apply together in partnership on outdoor recreation
lands of shared importance to them, it will facilitate
participation by smaller and more rural municipalities that may
not have the capacity to apply on their own.

Codifying the program and including explicit reporting
requirements will bring an added measure of transparency and
accountability to ORLP. TPL firmly believes in striking while
the iron is hot through the establishment of pilot programs
that do not necessarily entail regular-order authorization;
once these programs have proven their worth, as the ORLP
program certainly has, they ought to be enshrined in federal
law to provide lasting value for the American people.
Conclusion

Parks are not `nice-to-have' amenities; they are `must-have' public
infrastructure. They provide multiple benefits to the communities that
rely upon them. And now is the time to work together to ensure these
benefits are available to more of the neighborhoods that need them
most.
That is why we are pleased to see the Outdoors for All language
included in the EXPLORE Act. With that language, we fully support the
Committee's work to advance this legislation, and we look forward to
working with you to enact comprehensive recreation legislation that
expands ORLP's reach as we have discussed. Thank you again for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and I look forward to answering
any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Benitez, and flattery never
hurts.
I would now like to introduce Ms. Sasha DiGiulian, a
professional rock climber and the CEO of Send Bars from
Boulder, Colorado.
Ms. DiGiulian, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SASHA DiGIULIAN, PROFESSIONAL ROCK CLIMBER,
BOULDER, COLORADO

Ms. DiGiulian. Thank you so much for having me today. My
name is Sasha DiGiulian, and I am here today on behalf of the
Access Fund, which represents and advocates for more than 8
million climbers across the United States. Thank you to Chair
Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and the rest of the Committee
members for considering this testimony.
As a professional climber and environmental advocate, I am
honored to be here today to support the EXPLORE Act, and I
would like to thank Congressmen Westerman and Grijalva for
leading bipartisan support for this important initiative.
Access Fund is the national advocacy organization for
climbers in the United States. Access Fund has worked for more
than 30 years to ensure that climbers can enjoy safe and
sustainable access to climbing, while leading the climbing
community's efforts to protect and care for the land.
I strongly support the EXPLORE Act because it will improve
America's recreation economy, promote healthy lifestyles, and
protect public lands.
I started climbing when I was 6 years old at a climbing gym
in the Washington, DC area. Some of my greatest memories
include trips that I took to go camping and climbing in
wilderness areas, including Joshua Tree, the High Sierra, and
the majestic Rocky Mountain National Park, which is close to
where I currently reside. My life was transformed by these
experiences, and I started to think about my testimony while I
was climbing on El Capitan in the wilderness area, arguably the
world's greatest climbing venue. As I climbed one of the most
iconic routes in the world, I thought about how privileged I am
to be able to experience wilderness. My experiences climbing in
wilderness areas have taught me self-confidence, transformative
leadership skills, humility, and the deep appreciation for the
conservation of American wilderness and public lands.
The Protecting America's Rock Climbing Act, or PARC Act,
passed out of this Committee with unanimous consent because it
specifically protects America's climbing legacy and supports
the health and wellness of the American public. For me, the
PARC Act is one of the most important bills included in the
EXPLORE Act, and it is especially important right now. However,
2 weeks ago the U.S. Forest Service and the National Park
Service proposed a new interpretation of the Wilderness Act,
going against nearly 60 years of precedent to prohibit fixed
anchors in wilderness.
For over 100 years, our Federal land agencies have allowed
climbing and the use of standard climbing equipment to explore
public lands in wilderness areas. John Muir, David Brower, and
many of the early proponents of the National Park Service and
the Wilderness Act were climbers. Climbers have a long history
of stewarding our exceptional public lands, and I am proud to
continue this tradition so that the next generation of climbers
can benefit from these experiences as I have for more than two
decades.
It is through the use of fixed anchors, I brought one,
super small, that the majority of climbs are relatively safe.
If we prohibit these fundamental climbing tools, we could
potentially erase America's historic climbing achievements
while at the same time preventing climbers from mitigating risk
and safely enjoying these majestic landscapes. I want future
generations to have the same privileges as I did to climb, and
to climb safely. Although climbers have been allowed to use
fixed anchors in wilderness areas for almost 60 years, we are
now facing an unprecedented level of uncertainty due to the
land agency proposals.
If we cannot support the safe practice of our sport, then
we are not encouraging people to participate in the outdoors in
a responsible way. Everyone wins when we can all enjoy the
outdoors, the economy and our climbing included. The EXPLORE
Act, on the other hand, will bring consistency to climb
management by providing Federal land managers with clear
direction from Congress. It is a simple and elegant solution
that will clarify that climbing and the use of fixed anchors
are allowable and not prohibited uses within wilderness areas,
and preserve the existing authority of land management agencies
to regulate climbing to ensure it protects wilderness
characteristics, natural resources, and cultural values.
Climbers have long supported wilderness designations. The
EXPLORE Act protects historic climbing areas, modernizes
recreation policy, stimulates rural economies, gets kids
outdoors, simplifies permitting processes, helps Federal land
managers, improves recreation infrastructure, and benefits our
veterans.
The EXPLORE Act represents potential, and that is why I am
honored to provide my testimony today. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. DiGiulian follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sasha DiGiulian, on behalf of Access Fund
on H.R. ____, ``EXPLORE Act''

My name is Sasha DiGiulian, and I am here today on behalf of Access
Fund, which represents and advocates for the more than 8 million
climbers across the United States. Thank you to Chair Tiffany, Ranking
Member Neguse, and the rest of the committee members for considering
this testimony.
As a professional climber, world champion, and environmental
advocate, I am honored to be here today to support the ``Expanding
Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act'', or EXPLORE Act. I
thank Congressman Westerman for leading bipartisan support for this
important initiative. Access Fund is the national advocacy organization
for climbers in the United States. Access Fund has worked for more than
30 years to ensure that climbers can enjoy safe and sustainable access
to climbing, while leading the climbing community's efforts to protect
and care for the land. Our experiences in wild places inspire us to
become champions for conservation and protection of public lands.

I strongly support the EXPLORE Act because it will:

1.  Update recreation policy to meet the increasing demand for high-
quality recreation experiences;

2.  Protect America's climbing history, as well as safe and
sustainable access for climbers on federal public lands;

3.  Promote economic development and job opportunities in rural and
gateway communities;

4.  Simplify access to recreation on federal lands;

5.  Inspire new recreation opportunities for kids, veterans, and
people with disabilities;

6.  Improve public-private partnerships and to help address land
agency workforce housing shortages; and

7.  Reform long-outdated and inefficient policies that permit guides
and outfitters to provide services on federal public lands.

The EXPLORE Act has also been endorsed by the Outdoor Industry
Association, Outdoor Alliance, Outdoor Recreation Roundtable, American
Mountain Guides Association, and American Alpine Club as well as dozens
of businesses and conservation groups around the country. We are united
in support of this bill.
Background

I started to think about my testimony for this hearing while I was
in Yosemite National Park climbing in the designated Wilderness on El
Capitan--arguably the world's greatest climbing venue. As I climbed one
of the most difficult routes in the world, I thought about how
privileged I am to be able to experience wilderness in the way it was
intended when the Wilderness Act was passed in 1964. I am humbled by
the lessons I continue to learn while navigating complex vertical
terrain. My experiences climbing in Wilderness areas have taught me
self reliance, humility, and a deep appreciation for the conservation
of American Wilderness and public lands. I cannot think of a better way
to experience wilderness than accepting what the natural landscape
offers, and adapting my mind and body to the lessons that climbing in
wilderness provides. Climbing has been my primary focus since I was six
years old, and my life's mission is to inspire other people to
challenge their preconceived notions of what is possible as well as to
introduce people to the profound benefits of America's Wilderness
areas.
The Protecting America's Rock Climbing Act, or PARC Act, passed out
of this committee with unanimous consent because it specifically
protects America's climbing legacy and supports the health and wellness
of the American public. The PARC Act is one of the important bills
included in the EXPLORE Act and it is especially important right now.
Harmful new federal agency proposals

Two weeks ago, the U.S. Forest Service and the National Park
Service proposed a new interpretation of the Wilderness Act, going
against nearly sixty years of precedent, to prohibit fixed anchors in
Wilderness. For over one hundred years, our beloved federal land
agencies have allowed climbing and the use of standard climbing
equipment to explore public lands and wilderness areas. John Muir,
David Brower, and many of the early proponents of the National Park
Service and the Wilderness Act were climbers. The mountains opened
their minds to the importance of adventure, recreation, and
conservation. Climbers have a long history of stewarding our
exceptional public lands, and I am proud to continue this tradition so
that the next generation of climbers can benefit from these experiences
as I have for more than two decades.
First, the federal land agency proposal would create significant
safety issues by forcing local rangers to consider fixed anchors
prohibited and implement a costly administrative exception process,
called a ``Minimum Requirements Analysis,'' to determine whether to
allow the standard maintenance of gear that allows climbers,
mountaineers, backcountry skiers, hunters, canyoneers, and other
backcountry travelers to safely ascend and descend dangerous terrain.
For over a century, climbers have taken responsibility for making sure
that wilderness adventurers can get off of mountains safely. The new
proposal places unnecessary obstacles on the routine and standard
practice of replacing fixed anchors, which are slings, bolts, and other
gear that become weathered in unforgiving environments.
Fixed anchors are essential pieces of the climber's safety system
that allow people to safely and sustainably access vertical terrain.
Without fixed anchors, many of the most inspiring places in America--
like many of the walls on El Capitan--would become inaccessible to the
American public.
Second, the federal agency proposal threatens appropriate historic
climbing routes that have already been authorized and managed by our
federal land agencies. For example, the route I was climbing just last
week was legally established through Yosemite National Park's
programmatic approval process. The fixed anchors on the climbing route
protect blank sections of rock where removable climbing gear is not
available. While climbing in Wilderness, climbers always prefer
removable protection, such as spring loaded camming devices, to fixed
anchors. We subscribe to a low-impact ethic, but the judicious
placement of fixed anchors is required to provide a modicum of safety.
In fact, every single climbing route on Yosemite's El Capitan,
including routes established prior to the passage of the Wilderness
Act, include fixed anchors. I live in the Front Range of Colorado, and
look up at Longs Peak in Rocky Mountain National Park where The
Diamond, America's highest elevation wilderness big wall, is located.
Climbers first ascended the thousand foot tall Diamond in 1960, and
since then, climbers have tested their skills and experienced wild
conditions on The Diamond. Every single route on The Diamond includes
at least one fixed anchor to protect especially dangerous, blank
sections of rock. Every established climbing route in Wilderness that
includes a fixed anchor, over approximately 90% of the established
climbing routes in America's Wilderness areas, are now threatened by
the agency proposal. America's climbing history and mountain culture is
at risk. At the minimum, the federal land agency proposals need to
exempt existing climbing routes that have already been authorized and
have always been managed as appropriate wilderness recreation
opportunities.
Third, the proposal does not align with current National Park
Service policies and management practices. In 2013, the National Park
Service issued Director's Order 41, which provided specific guidance
for managing climbing in wilderness. The guidance clearly allows for
the occasional use of fixed anchors in Wilderness and requires
programmatic or site-specific authorization for placing new fixed
anchors. The policy made it clear that fixed anchors were allowed, yet
regulated, and the climbing community accepted it.
Now, federal solicitors assert that their new proposal aligns with
existing policy. But if fixed anchors were actually considered
prohibited installations, wouldn't the 2013 National Park Service
policy mention that important detail?
The National Park Service and U.S. Forest Service currently--and
successfully--implement numerous Wilderness Management Plans at park
units and national forests that specifically allow the conditional
placement and replacement of fixed anchors in wilderness. Reversing
these existing plans with impractical and costly proposals would create
safety concerns, erase historic climbing achievements, and block future
generations from safely experiencing the world's greatest climbing
venues.
Wilderness climbing

Climbing in the United States has a long and distinguished history
that includes many of the leading conservationists of our time. What
started out as a fringe activity enjoyed by a few privileged
adventurers has grown into a national pastime, with over 500 climbing
gyms sprouting up in communities all across the country. At last count
there are over 8 million climbers in the country, and climbing as a
whole contributes at least $12.5 billion to the economy each year (2019
State of Climbing Report). And every day, we are learning more and more
about the many benefits of spending time outside.
There are about 40,000 crags--individual climbing areas--in the
United States. Nearly 60% of those are on federal public lands.
Climbers feel a special connection to federal Wilderness areas across
the country because they offer some of the most iconic and historic
climbing opportunities in the world. The Wilderness offers unmatched
opportunities for adventure, recreation, and solitude.

Despite this long history, the management of climbing has been
inconsistent over the years and across land management agencies, which
has resulted in waste of taxpayer resources, serious threats to climber
safety, confusion among land managers, and unpredictability for rural
gateway communities attempting to build their outdoor recreation
economies. This confusion often relates to the use of fixed anchors in
Wilderness areas. Although climbers have been allowed to use fixed
anchors in Wilderness areas for almost 60 years, we are now facing an
unprecedented level of uncertainty and inconsistency due to the agency
proposals I described earlier. The EXPLORE Act, on the other hand, will
bring consistency and predictability to climbing management by
providing the land management community with clear direction from
Congress, especially regarding climbing management within Wilderness
areas. It is a simple and elegant solution that will:

1.  Require the Secretaries of Interior and Agriculture to issue
national guidance on management of climbing within
Wilderness areas;

2.  Clarify that climbing and the use of fixed anchors are allowable,
and not prohibited, uses within Wilderness areas;

3.  Preserve the existing authority of land management agencies to
regulate climbing to ensure it protects Wilderness
characteristics, natural resources, and cultural values;
and,

4.  Provide for public participation in decisions affecting climbing
in Wilderness areas.

Climbers as conservationists

Climbers have been exploring the mountains and cliffs of the United
States for more than 100 years. Those adventures have inspired many
people to become advocates for public lands and conservation. I'm one
of them. Throughout that history, climbers have depended on fixed
anchors to safely ascend and descend technical, vertical terrain.
Climbers have supported the Wilderness designations that post-date many
of America's most inspiring climbing achievements.
In 1920, Albert Ellingwood and Barton Hoag climbed Lizard Head Peak
in Southwest Colorado using pitons along with their hemp rope and
hobnailed boots. Congress designated this area as the Lizard Head
Wilderness in 1980, 60 years after this historic climb.
In 1931, Norman Clyde led an ascent of the East Face of Mt. Whitney
in the Sierra Nevada range using pitons. Congress designated this area
as the John Muir Wilderness in 1964, more than 30 years after this
historic climb.

In 1960, Bob Kamps and David Rearick made the first ascent of the
Diamond on Longs Peak in Rocky Mountain National Park using pitons as
fixed anchors. Congress designated this area as the Rocky Mountain
National Park Wilderness in 2009, 49 years after this historic first
ascent. Recently, the congressional members who introduced the Senate
and House versions of the Rocky Mountain National Park Wilderness bill
issued powerful statements that articulate their intent to not prohibit
fixed anchors when they introduced the Wilderness legislation. I am
proud to be a resident of Colorado's 2nd district, so I was glad to see
Governor Polis, our former district representative and current
governor, send a letter to the Department of Interior and the
Department of Agriculture which stated:

We should be doing everything we can right now to grow the
coalition of champions for public lands and to support our land
management agencies in responding to climate change and taking
care of the places entrusted to our care. A new prohibition on
fixed anchors in Wilderness would jeopardize the safety of
climbers, harm our recreation economy here in Colorado,
establish unnecessary bureaucracy, and restrict access to some
of the wildest places in America.

Similarly, former Colorado Senator Mark Udall recently wrote that:

As the primary sponsor of the Rocky Mountain National Park
Wilderness and Indian Peaks Wilderness Expansion Act, I want to
be absolutely clear: Nothing in those bills was intended to
restrict sustainable and appropriate Wilderness climbing
practices or prohibit the judicious and conditional placement
of fixed anchors--many of which existed before the bills'
passage. I used fixed anchors to climb in these areas, and I
want future climbers to safely experience profound adventures
and thereby become Wilderness advocates themselves.

These examples begin to paint the picture of the rich history of
climbing and mountaineering in this country, and they also show how
climbing and the use of fixed anchors long predate the Wilderness Act
and the designation of Wilderness areas across the country. These are
truly historic recreational uses that have contributed to outdoor
legacy and mountain culture that Americans enjoy today.
In 2015, President Obama called Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgenson
to congratulate the climbers after their improbable first ascent of
Yosemite's Dawn Wall--a Wilderness climb that inspired a generation of
conservationists, including myself. That climb would have been
impossible without the occasional fixed anchor.
The climbing community advocated strongly in support of the 2019
John D. Dingell Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act. In that
landmark piece of legislation, Congress designated approximately
600,000 acres of new Wilderness in Emery County, Utah, a place that has
been explored by climbers for decades. The Dingell Act states
explicitly that the Wilderness designation does not prohibit the
placement, use or maintenance of fixed anchors. The EXPLORE Act will
build on the important climbing management guidance that Congress
provided for Emery County.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that President Biden recently
designated the Camp Hale-Continental Divide National Monument to honor
the contributions of the 10th Mountain Division. The 10th Mountain
Division trained at Camp Hale prior to fighting fascism in World War II
and developed many of the techniques used today for climbing, skiing,
and moving through risky, vertical terrain. The proclamation
designating Camp Hale calls out the ``original pitons used to train
technical climbing'' and then declares them to be ``an object of
scientific or historic interest in need of protection.''
In short, the history of climbing and exploration of areas that are
now designated as Wilderness contributes to America's rich legacy and
culture of outdoor adventure. The EXPLORE Act will help to protect and
celebrate this history so that it may inspire future generations of
outdoor enthusiasts who will continue to visit and explore and fall in
love with these special places.
Bipartisan support for EXPLORE Act

Our country is divided on so many issues, but recreation is not one
of them. I am so grateful that the Senate has unanimously supported the
recreation package known as--America's Outdoor Recreation Act--and I
hope that this committee will unanimously support the EXPLORE Act.
I think most Americans agree that protecting our public lands and
supporting sustainable recreation are nonpartisan issues. I am so proud
to be a professional climber because exploration and adventure is part
of our American DNA.
The EXPLORE Act modernizes recreation policy, stimulates rural
economies, gets kids outdoors, simplifies permitting processes, helps
federal land managers, improves recreation infrastructure, and benefits
our veterans. The EXPLORE Act represents America's potential, and that
is why I am honored to provide my testimony today. The EXPLORE Act will
ultimately lead to better results for the land and for the American
public, and I strongly urge this Committee to pass this important
legislation.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ms. DiGiulian. I would now like to
recognize Ms. Katherine Andrews, the Director of the Office of
Outdoor Recreation at the Arkansas Department of Parks,
Heritage and Tourism.
Director Andrews, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHERINE ANDREWS, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF OUTDOOR
RECREATION, ARKANSAS DEPARTMENT OF PARKS, HERITAGE AND TOURISM,
LITTLE ROCK, ARKANSAS

Ms. Andrews. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Tiffany and
Ranking Member Neguse, and thank you for inviting me to be here
with you today. My name is Katherine Andrews, and I am Director
of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor Recreation at the Arkansas
Department of Parks, Heritage and Tourism, and incoming Chair
of the Confluence of States, a bipartisan organization of my
outdoor recreation counterparts across the United States. I am
pleased to testify in support of this important legislation,
and I am especially proud to appear before the Natural
Resources Committee, chaired by the Honorable Bruce Westerman,
my fellow Arkansan. I thank him for the tireless work he does
on behalf of all Arkansans.
Arkansas is known as the Natural State for a reason. From
our clean running streams and pristine wilderness to our
diversity of outdoor recreation options that range from hiking
and biking to floating and climbing, Arkansas is home to the
mountain bike capital of the world, the duck hunting capital of
the world, the trout capital of the USA, and we are quickly
becoming the climbing capital of the South. We have the world's
longest bayou, the highest waterfall between the Rockies and
the Appalachians, and the nation's first national river.
Arkansas is also the only state where you can hunt both an
elk and an alligator in the same state.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Andrews. At the Arkansas Department of Parks, Heritage
and Tourism, our mission is to protect and promote our state's
natural, cultural, and historical resources, ultimately
contributing to a thriving economy and higher quality of life.
The BEA has cited benefits for areas with high outdoor
recreation assets like business attraction, workforce
retention, public health and wellness, getting kids outside and
off screens, and the conservation of our natural assets.
A robust outdoor recreation industry isn't just nice to
have; it is necessary and deeply impactful. In 2022, 4.3
million visitors spent $278 million in local gateway regions
while visiting National Park Service lands in Arkansas. These
expenditures supported 3,900 jobs, $107 million in labor
income, and $362 million in economic output in the Arkansas
economy.
My goal as Director of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor
Recreation is to leverage our state's unmatched natural beauty
to promote tourism and grow our outdoor economy. We want to
ensure that Arkansas does not just compete in the space, but
rather we envision Arkansas as a true national leader in
outdoor recreation and the outdoor economy. We market the
beauty and potential of the Natural State to the world for
recreation tourism and outdoor business opportunities. To
achieve this, access to the outdoors is critical.
Access provides our residents and visitors from across the
world the ability to engage with our greatest natural
resources. These gifts are to be enjoyed, respected, and
revered by us today, and we must conserve and preserve them for
future generations to also enjoy. The issue of access to these
natural places leads me to the reason I am here today.
I am here to offer my support for Congressman Westerman's
legislation, which will allow thorough but pragmatic movement
toward reopening the Albert Pike campgrounds, a unique area
that has long been a draw for tourism and outdoor recreation in
Arkansas. By doing so we will open countless opportunities for
young families and new residents while providing our seasoned
residents with joy and adventure in a beloved location.
In addition, it will provide access to the rugged Ouachita
mountains and clear streams, providing hiking, fishing, and
other recreational opportunities for all.
I fully support the new legislation, and ask for your
support.
Part of my role as Director of the Arkansas' Office of
Outdoor Recreation is to help craft outdoor recreation
opportunities for future generations so that they can enjoy and
care for nature, just as we do today. Access to outdoor
recreation inspires generations of Arkansans to care for and
champion the future of our natural places, ensuring that we
remain the Natural State.
There are two parts of the state that our office serves:
first, our industry partners, bike shops, boat manufacturers,
river guides, outfitters, duck lodges, any company in the
outdoors that you can think of, we help them access resources
to grow and help understand their barriers to growth; second,
we work with our community partners, towns, counties, and
advocacy groups, hoping to support the growth in access to
outdoor recreation. We help them understand the great benefits
of outdoor recreation on the local economy, and we help them
access grants, resources, and other funding so that they have
more ability to leverage their natural resources and assets,
and build infrastructure to attract visitors.
The legislation proposed today will solve some of our most
pressing issues facing our Federal land managers, cut red tape
for providers and small businesses, allow states and outdoor
recreation leaders to further our missions of conservation and
preservation of our natural assets, strengthen the outdoor
economy, and increase access to outdoor recreation
opportunities across the country on our Federal lands.
Thank you so much for having me here today.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Andrews follows:]
Prepared Statement of Katherine Andrews, Arkansas Department of Parks,
Heritage and Tourism
on H.R. ____, ``EXPLORE Act''

Good morning Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse and thank
you for inviting me to be here with you today. My name is Katherine
Andrews, and I am the Director of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor
Recreation at the Arkansas Department of Parks, Heritage and Tourism,
and incoming chair of the Confluence of States, a bipartisan
organization of my outdoor recreation counterparts across the United
States.
I am so pleased to testify in support of this important
legislation, and I'm particularly proud to appear before the Natural
Resources Committee, which is chaired by the Honorable Bruce Westerman,
my fellow Arkansan. I thank him for the tireless work he does on behalf
of all Arkansans.
Arkansas is known as The Natural State for a reason--from our clean
running streams and pristine wilderness to our diversity of outdoor
recreation options that range from hiking and biking to floating and
climbing. Arkansas is home to the mountain bike capital of the world,
the duck hunting capital of the world, the trout capital of the world,
and we are quickly becoming the climbing capital of the South. We have
the world's longest bayou, the highest waterfall between the Rockies
and the Appalachians, and the nation's first national river. Arkansas
is also the only state where you can hunt both an elk and an alligator.
At the Arkansas Department of Parks, Heritage and Tourism, our mission
is to protect and promote our state's natural, cultural and historical
resources, ultimately contributing to a thriving economy and higher
quality of life.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis has cited benefits for areas with
high outdoor recreation--like business attraction, workforce retention,
public health and wellness, getting kids outside and off screens, and
the conservation of our natural assets. A robust outdoor recreation
industry isn't just nice to have; it is necessary and deeply impactful.
In 2022, 4.3 million visitors spent an estimated $278 million in local
gateway regions while visiting National Park Service lands in Arkansas.
These expenditures supported a total of 3,900 jobs, $107 million in
labor income, $191 million in value added, and $362 million in economic
output in the Arkansas economy.
My goal as Director of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor Recreation is to
leverage our state's unmatched natural beauty to promote tourism and
grow our outdoor economy. We want to ensure that Arkansas does not just
compete in this space, but rather, we envision Arkansas as a true
national leader in outdoor recreation and the outdoor economy. We
market the beauty and potential of The Natural State to the world for
recreation tourism and outdoor business opportunities.
To achieve this, access to the outdoors is critical. Access
provides our residents and visitors from across the world the ability
to engage with our greatest natural resources. These gifts are to be
enjoyed, respected and revered by us today, and we must conserve and
preserve them for future generations to also enjoy.
The issue of access to these natural places leads me to the reason
I am here today. I am here to offer my support for Congressman
Westerman's legislation, which will allow thorough but pragmatic
movement toward reopening the Albert Pike campgrounds, a unique area
that has long been a draw for tourism and outdoor recreation in
Arkansas. By doing so, we will open countless opportunities for young
families and new residents while providing our seasoned residents with
joy and adventure in a beloved location. In addition, it will provide
access to the rugged Ouachita Mountains and clear streams, providing
hiking, fishing and other recreational opportunities for all. I fully
support the new legislation and ask for your support.
Part of my role as Director of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor
Recreation is to help craft outdoor recreation opportunities for future
generations so that they can enjoy and care for nature just as we do
today. In our state, we've taken a bold approach involving multiagency
and private partners working together. Access to outdoor recreation
inspires generations of Arkansans to care for and champion the future
of our natural places, ensuring that we remain The Natural State.
There are two parts of the state that our office serves. First, our
industry partners: bike shops, boat manufacturers, river guides, duck
lodges, outfitters, technology companies in the outdoors, any kind of
outdoor recreation company you can think of. We help them access
resources to grow, help them understand their barriers to growth, and
help them overcome those barriers.
Second, we work with our community partners: towns, counties, and
advocacy groups that are hoping to support the growth and access to
outdoor recreation. We help them understand the great benefits of
outdoor recreation on a local economy, and we help them access grants,
resources, and other funding so they have more ability to leverage
their natural assets and build infrastructure to attract visitors and
outdoor recreationists.
The legislation proposed today will solve some of our most pressing
issues facing our federal land managers, cut red tape for providers and
small businesses, allow states and outdoor recreation leaders to
further our missions of conservation and preservation of our natural
assets, strengthen the outdoor economy, and increase access to outdoor
recreation opportunities across the country on our federal lands.
Thank you so much for having me here today.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Director Andrews, and I suspect the
Chairman from Arkansas has partaken in those activities that
you mentioned, from alligator to elk.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. I would now like to recognize Members for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Lamborn, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, for holding this
hearing, and thank you to all the witnesses for being here
today. I am pleased to be a co-sponsor of the EXPLORE Act.
Representing Colorado, along with Ranking Member Neguse, is a
pleasure with all of our public lands.
I am an avid visitor to national parks, having been to 300
units of the National Park Service. I have seen that many are
well maintained, but I have also seen parks in major need of
revitalization. Mr. Reynolds, in many national parks employee
housing, guest lodging, inventory, and related facilities are
outdated and need attention, despite compliant efforts by the
various concession companies operating the properties. Has NPS
considered looking to the concession industry to support any of
these immediate capital investment needs?
And if so, please describe how NPS can allow for increased
capital investment from the concession industry under existing
contracts to improve the park guest experience.
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, Mr. Lamborn. Thank you so much for those
comments. I am really glad that you have also visited 300-plus.
That is probably a record, right?
We can use our concessions contracts, and do utilize them
for shared housing. The LODGE Act, which I should say the
provision of the LODGE Act inside the EXPLORE Act now, is
something that we would really appreciate moving forward
because it gives us a lot of flexibility with perhaps
partnerships that we have not been able to achieve, and it
would probably expand our ability under concessions.
The way concessions contracts usually work is we let the
concessionaire supply the housing for their folks, and under
provisions like this we could look at how to work together to
house employees and to improve the conditions, as you describe.
Mr. Lamborn. As a follow-up, I understand that NPS is
submitting new concession contracts for bid with some
regularity. Mr. Reynolds, considering the immediate capital
needs that we are discussing, is NPS evaluating how best to
encourage increased capital investment in new concession
contracts that have not yet been issued?
And if so, please describe those efforts, particularly any
efforts relating to evaluating the need for concessionaire
investment and NPS calculation of the minimum franchise fees
set forth in the new concession opportunities.
Mr. Reynolds. I think I would answer that as
straightforward as I could to say, yes, we would be looking at
any ways that we can improve investment in the parks through
the concessionaires. And we have a pretty extensive business
management group. We would be happy to also meet with your
staff to answer specific questions perhaps about a certain
contract that we are working on.
But otherwise, yes, we would love to move forward with any
ideas that increase investment possibilities.
Mr. Lamborn. Yes, and I am thinking industry-wide, but I
know that there is concern that sometimes it is hard to recoup
investments under the terms of contracts. And companies would
be willing to make investments to improve some of these iconic
properties, but the contracts don't make that viable.
Mr. Reynolds. Right. The one area that gets a little
complicated is the lease holder surrender interest, which is a
way that we, I guess you could say, pay back the concessionaire
for their investments.
There is a kind of a public trust segment of LSI, as we
call it, to not let it grow too big. But there are ways that we
can negotiate that with the private sector.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Well, that is something I would certainly
like to discuss more. And lastly, I am going to switch gears to
the Great American Outdoors Act. How does NPS intend to fund
critical efforts to maintain park assets, given that some
things are not subject to GAOA funds for some kinds of the
infrastructure, where the needs are?
Mr. Reynolds. Right. So, if I understand the question,
Congressman Lamborn, it is how we keep up on the maintenance,
right, once we have invested through the GAOA LRF funding.
Without the time of great detail, the fee programs that we
use under FLREA, which also has some provisions in the EXPLORE
Act, with our fee programs we require our parks to utilize up
to 55 percent of the funds they keep to be back into deferred
maintenance. So, that is going to be a very big part of the
investment strategy.
The other thing we could do is prioritize, as much as we
can, maintenance and continued investment programs through LRF,
the Inflation Reduction Act positions that were also provided.
So, those are the kind of things that we are focused on
right now.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Levin for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and I really thank
the witnesses for speaking on the EXPLORE Act. It is an
important bipartisan bill, and it recognizes the need for
accessible recreation opportunities, and responds to many of
the pressing needs to improve experiences for Americans and
ensure continued conservation of vital ecosystems, and I just
thank everybody across the aisle for working together on this.
Some of America's most important national treasures lie
within our public lands. These lands support healthy ecosystems
with diverse wildlife and plants, and offer an array of outdoor
recreation opportunities for millions of visitors from all
across the country and the world. Outdoor recreation also
supports millions of jobs and is a significant driver of
economic output. It also offers opportunities for individuals
to appreciate and learn about our natural environment.
It is no secret that the great state of California,
including my district, is home to some of the most beautiful
parks, lands, and beaches, and offers truly extraordinary
outdoor recreation opportunities. I know that my constituents,
and I think all of our constituents cherish the opportunities
to get outside, enjoy the mental, physical, and social benefits
of outdoor recreation.
I appreciated the comments about keeping kids off screens.
I have an 11-year-old and a 9-year-old at home, and if my wife
and I can get them outside as opposed to them being on YouTube
or whatever it is that they are doing, that is much more
preferable. I am proud to co-sponsor the bipartisan EXPLORE Act
to support the outdoor recreation economy and ensure equitable
access to those opportunities for all.
I would also like to remind my colleagues that our
constituents' ability to enjoy our public lands relies upon
proper conservation, restoration, and management of our natural
resources. That starts with providing adequate funding to our
Federal land management agencies. So, as Congress works towards
the final appropriations bills for Fiscal Year 2024, I hope
that we avoid detrimental budget cuts that would hinder our
response to the climate crisis, threaten endangered species,
and undercut key conservation efforts.
I look forward to working with my colleagues and our great
land management agencies to invest in America's great natural
treasures and to further refine the EXPLORE Act to ensure that
we promote access while also protecting our natural resources.
And I also want to thank Chairman Westerman for including
provisions from my legislation, the Get Rewarding Outdoor Work
for Veterans, or GROW Act, in this package. I was proud to
introduce this bipartisan bill in March with Representative
Wittman to employ more veterans in outdoor jobs at the
Department of the Interior. The Federal Government has a duty
to ensure veterans returning to civilian life can obtain
meaningful jobs that align with their values. The Department of
the Interior, in particular, is well-positioned to provide
rewarding career opportunities that allow veterans to get
outside and reap the benefits of being in nature for their
mental and physical health.
The GROW Act establishes a pilot program at DOI aimed at
employing veterans in conservation and resource management
activities directly on our public lands. I place a great
importance on conserving our Federal lands and waters, and I
can think of no better group of individuals to continue their
service by protecting our natural treasures than our veterans.
By engaging the expertise and passion of veterans in
safeguarding these lands for all Americans to enjoy, we honor
their dedication to our nation and provide them with meaningful
career development opportunities.
In addition, I believe it will create a veteran hiring
model for all Federal agencies in the future. It is a win for
the Federal workforce, it is a win for the environment, it is a
win for veterans. Most importantly, it is a win for our
country.
Let me just ask briefly, Mr. Reynolds, I want to thank DOI
for supporting the GROW Act when it received a legislative
hearing in July. I also appreciate that DOI has already made
efforts to hire veterans through its special hiring authorities
and programs like SkillBridge. Can you discuss how DOI has
already benefited from employing veterans, and perhaps what are
some of the unique skills and strengths that veterans bring to
the table?
Mr. Reynolds. Thank you, Mr. Levin. We really appreciate
our veterans in the National Park Service and in all our
bureaus in the Department.
We have a recruitment team that we have put together that
is a first-time effort that, I think, spawns a lot off of your
efforts and others around the GROW concept, and we are hoping
to increase our levels very much by that. We have used veterans
not only in different programs where we can hire them more
easily than other categories of folks, but there are also
extremely strong volunteer teams. I can think of a number of
them that have gone out, and they bring a certain level of
training, of esprit de corps, if you will, that really benefits
public lands.
Mr. Levin. Do you have any sense of what portion of your
existing veteran workforce is in hands-on conservation and
resource management?
Mr. Reynolds. I don't, sir, but we could get you those
numbers. I think that we do try to track them as best we can,
working also with our partners at the VA.
Mr. Levin. I am out of time, but extremely grateful to
Chairman Westerman, Ranking Member Grijalva, everybody for
working together on this.
I will yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would now like to
recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Bentz, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank all of all the
witnesses for being here. This is a bill I support. But from
Oregon, my district actually takes up three-quarters of that
state, it has millions of acres of forest, millions of acres of
rangeland, and millions of opportunities for people to be
locked out of these spaces. So, I am happy for this bill.
But I have also been involved in situations where change is
occurring, particularly around Central Oregon, the Bend,
Redmond area, and that brings me to Lemon Gulch, which was a
situation where about 50 or 70 miles of bike paths were
suggested in an area that was not accustomed, shall we say, to
this new use. And I want to call out and thank the Forest
Service for eventually doing the right thing, it took a while,
and basically withdrawing that opportunity for expansion
because the local community did not support it.
So, I am just anxious for you folks to weigh in on this
bill and say, what can we do to make it work better in
situations where this access is going to be new to the folks
that are not accustomed to people pedaling bicycles through the
middle of what used to be a grazing permit or, more to the
point, is immediately adjacent to places who now have housing
opportunities that weren't there before. So, I am just saying
this is a really good bill, but the rubber meets the road where
you folks in charge of these lands try to figure out how you
are going to allow this new type of use, given the already
existing uses.
But I want to thank the Forest Service for eventually doing
the right thing. It required a rising up of the community,
gathering together and backing up on the NEPA process, and that
was very awkward. Eventually, the right result was reached, and
there has been an indefinite hold put on the bike paths. That
is good. And then somehow, if those uses are going to change,
it has to be handled more cleverly than was the case at Lemon
Gulch.
And I just want to say how happy the community is that it
is not happening, which is contrary to the focus of this bill.
But we know this bill is well-meaning, and you guys need to
weigh in and say what we need to do to try to avoid those kinds
of occurrences.
Mr. Benitez, I have worked with TPL on any number of
situations, and actually to positive results most of the time.
So, I appreciate your organization's efforts to try to protect
land. But in many cases that flies in the face of access. And I
am now talking about wilderness areas. And actually, there was
a suggestion for a monument in my home county, 2.5 million
acres that would have been locked up.
I am curious. My area, much high desert, very fragile
environment, and a national conservation area was put in place
on a mountain called the Steens Mountain, and no money was put
into place to try to address the thousands of people that are
now swarming down into that space. No public bathroom
facilities, no places to pick up the trash, and folks all over
the place accessing this land but leaving it a mess.
So, to go back to the points that were made earlier about
funding this access, I am extremely interested in what you
might suggest. I have been involved as a lawyer in drafting
concessionary contracts. I know that in low-volume spaces, you
are not going to make enough money to do any good. So, you are
going to have to come up with ideas that you can suggest to us
that, if you are going to attract all kinds of people that this
bill does, and I am happy for it, we had better be figuring out
how to take care of the land. And if you have good ideas, share
them, for goodness sakes, because it is really sad, in an area
I grew up in, to go out and see trash and human waste. Not
good. That is bad. We want to have the access, but we want to
have the land protected while we are at it.
And finally, going back to the forest for a moment, I drive
through literally tens of thousands, if not hundreds of
thousands of land that has been burned. And the Forest Service,
many times not its fault, does not allow logging to occur
following those fires. And as a result, there are thousands of
acres of land that are far too dangerous for anyone to go into
because there are trees standing up everywhere that are rotting
out and ready to fall over at any instant.
And what needs to happen, of course, is if we are going to
have public access, where people aren't worried about being
crushed by a falling tree, burned-out tree, of course, in these
tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, if not
millions of acres of burned-over land, we need to be getting in
more quickly and cleaning up the forest.
So, this bill of access, yay, but I don't want to be
sending people to their death in forests that have not been
appropriately maintained. I am very anxious to see the Forest
Service step in and, in anticipation of the impact of this
bill, make our forests a safer place to go.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let
me, as the impetus of more visitation is happening to our
public lands, and the discussion today on a piece of
legislation that tries to deal with issues that are not
necessarily in contradiction, but sometimes turn out that way,
the issue of conservation, the issue of restoration, and the
very important issue of inclusion, equity, and access to these
special places.
For Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Benitez, and for Mr. French, let me
ask you, how do you see this initial step with the package of
bills under the EXPLORE Act that we have today moving in that
direction and dealing with that fundamental question of how do
you deal with these missions?
Mr. Reynolds. I will start and hand it off.
Mr. Grijalva. OK.
Mr. Reynolds. I think it is the comprehensive nature that
is exciting for us. We have testified on a lot of sections of
the bill. And the good news, sir, is that we have a lot of work
together between us. Already there are some things that we
still need to work on this bill. We need to catch up to you,
and look at some of the nuances.
But other than some fixes that might make things
technically work better, we are excited about the equity
questions with Every Kid in the Park being one example where I
think the figure is 73 percent of these kids that use the 4th
grade pass, their families would not have visited public lands
right then and there.
There are provisions in here that talk about dealing with
transportation access, and we are very excited about that.
Transportation is actually one of our larger, the data shows
the larger blockages with getting especially kids in urban or
underserved areas out to public lands.
Mr. Grijalva. Chris?
Mr. French. I will keep it short. I agree, and we have a
very similar mindset.
I really appreciate the comprehensiveness of the bill and
the multiple provisions that are really focused on how do you
create easier conditions for people to access their public
lands, whether it is through the streamlining of the outfitter
guide permitting processes, or the Every Kid in the Park
approach. Or, as was talked about earlier, the way that we can
connect and honor the service of our veterans to connect.
I think for us right now, anything that creates an
authority or an approach that allows us to better connect with
communities that haven't had access to their public lands is
one that we wholly support and get behind.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you. Mr. Benitez?
Mr. Benitez. Thank you for the question, Congressman. And I
am going to take it back into our inner cities.
I think when we talk about outdoor recreation access and
that gap right now, especially in urban corridors, candidly, at
TPL we think this is an under-reported crisis in America, and
it is really acute in low-income communities. In these
neighborhoods, parks, which are essential for physical and
mental health, for protection from summer heat, for our
connection to nature, are on average four times smaller than
parks in more well-off neighborhoods, and each acre receives
four times as much use. So, again, 100 million Americans and 28
million kids don't have access to parks within a 10-minute walk
from home. We have to fix that.
And in our estimation, this bill, specifically ORLP, will
help.
Mr. Grijalva. I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to now
recognize the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Stauber, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much, Chairman Tiffany and
Ranking Member Neguse, for holding this.
I do want to first begin by also thanking Chairman
Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva for their work on this
bipartisan piece of legislation. This is a great bill that will
expand access and ensure all Americans can enjoy our public
lands. I am proud to join Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member
Grijalva as a co-sponsor on this bill.
Our public lands should be open and accessible for the
American people. The bill before us today takes important steps
to ensure we are doing just that.
The district I represent includes vast amounts of public
lands. Minnesota's 8th Congressional District is home to the
Chippewa and Superior National Forests, Voyageurs National
Park, and the Grand Portage National Monument. Recreating and
enjoying our vast public lands is part of our way of life in
northern Minnesota. There are several provisions of this bill
that will directly benefit the constituents I represent.
For example, I believe the provisions directing the Forest
Service and the Bureau of Land Management to update vehicular
use maps are incredibly important. Unfortunately, on some of
the public lands in my district, many of these maps are
completely out of date. Certain trails intended for vehicle use
have been completely mismanaged to the point that you can
barely hike the trails on foot, let alone drive them in a
vehicle. By requiring our Federal land managers to conduct an
inventory of these trails and update vehicle use maps, we will
get a better understanding of the conditions of these trails,
and thus manage them more effectively.
I appreciate the inclusion of the Range Access Act,
originally introduced by Representatives Moore and Panetta,
ensuring that we have safe, quality shooting range access in
our National Forests and on BML lands. It will benefit not only
our sportsmen, but all Americans who wish to recreate on our
public lands.
And one of the most important provisions that I am happy to
see included focuses on expanding and enabling access for our
nation's active duty service members, veterans, and their
families. These individuals and their families have sacrificed
so much for our country. The least we can do to thank them for
their service and sacrifice is to ensure that they have the
opportunity to enjoy our vast public lands.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Westerman and Ranking
Member Grijalva for this work on this piece of legislation, and
I look forward to supporting this bill as it continues through
the Committee process.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields, and I would now like to
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse.
Mr. Neguse. I thank the Chairman and want to thank the
witnesses again for their testimony, and in particular to our
Coloradans and my constituent, Ms. DiGiulian.
Thank you for your testimony, which I thought was very
compelling.
I just want to make one note, or perhaps one observation,
and then I have a question for Mr. Benitez. And it is in
response to a comment from Mr. Bentz, who I know is one of our
distinguished Subcommittee Chairmen, and I have great respect
for him, and understand the argument that he is making with
respect to the collateral consequences of overuse on our
Federal public lands, and that is certainly something that we
encounter in Colorado, and I spend a great deal of my time
interacting with local officials in Grand County, Routt County,
Larimer County, Boulder County, Gilpin County, and Summit
County, talking about the collateral impacts of folks using the
trails and enjoying these incredible public lands that we are
so treasured and blessed to have.
I would simply say, and it underscores a point that Mr.
Levin from California made previously, to the extent that is a
concern that is shared on both sides of the aisle, there is a
solution, and the solution is to adequately fund the agencies
that protect and manage these public lands. And it is striking
to me, of course, I am very supportive, as I said from the
outset, of this legislation, and grateful to the Chairman and
the Ranking Member for their leadership on it. Insofar as we
follow the typical schedule for consideration of this
particular bill, it is likely that this will be hitting the
Floor early next year, and we will simultaneously be facing yet
another potential government shutdown in mid-January, and again
in mid-February, around the same time that this bill perhaps
might be considered by the House for final passage.
So, I just offer as an observation that I hope that my
colleagues will work with us on this side of the aisle to
ensure that the Forest Service, the BLM, the Department of the
Interior, and the Department of Agriculture are adequately
funded so that they can do the important work that I believe we
all agree they must be engaged in. And a good place to start
would be adhering to the Fiscal Responsibility Act levels that
we had all agreed to back in May of last year, because I think
that clearly would enable the agencies to be able to address
some of these collateral consequences that are, of course,
important for us to consider.
With that being said, as I said, I am grateful to all of
the witnesses for their testimony, and I think they have all
made a very compelling case about why this legislation is not
just prudent, but necessary.
Mr. Benitez, I thought your testimony in particular about
the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership Program improvements
that are included in the EXPLORE Act was powerful. And I guess
I just wonder if you could talk a bit about the benefits of
promoting urbanized outdoor recreation, which I think is a part
of the conversation that is often lost. And it is important, I
think, for us not to neglect it.
Mr. Benitez. Thank you, Congressman. And I have to say, in
appreciation of your hard work on behalf of the state of
Colorado, you truly do come across as the hardest working
gentleman in show business, seeing you all across the state,
visiting with all the counties. So, thank you for your service
and your time.
With respect to ORLP and some of those components that you
are talking about, respectfully, we believe that parks and
access to nature are not just nice-to-haves. This is essential
to our lives and experience as Americans. So, when we talk
about how this is important to urban corridors and what this
looks like, I will share this from TPL's grassroots level
perspective.
In poll after poll and in local ballot measures that we
run, where citizens actually tax themselves to pay for parks,
and given the overwhelming support of your colleagues when
Congress recently passed the Great American Outdoors Act by 3-
to-1 margins in both chambers, it seems that that is the
prevailing bipartisan view here, too.
So, when we talk about a 10-minute access to green space
within the United States, and that statistic of 28 million
children not having that kind of access, and diving down deeper
into that conversation about really what does that access look
like, is it safe, is it equitable, are we providing that for
communities of various sizes? These are some of the questions
that I think are in front of us moving into considering this
legislation, and we find it incredibly important. Thank you for
the question.
Mr. Neguse. I say thank you, Mr. Benitez, for your
testimony. And I certainly couldn't agree with you more. As I
said, my wife and I consider ourselves the luckiest people in
the world to live in our community in Boulder County. Our 5-
year-old daughter has access to trails within 5 minutes of our
home, perhaps less. And I think ensuring that 28 million other
children across the country have that same level of access is
incredibly important to me.
So, really, again, I am grateful to all of the witnesses
for your testimony, and look forward to working with you all on
this bill in the months ahead.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would like to
recognize the gentlewoman from Virginia, Mrs. Kiggans.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have the
privilege of representing the Hampton Roads area in Virginia,
which is home to one of our nation's largest veteran
populations. Today, I am excited that my bill, the Military and
Veterans in Parks Act, or MVP Act, has been included in the
Committee's expansive recreation package and the EXPLORE Act.
The MVP Act aims to improve veterans' physical and mental
health by increasing disabled veteran access to outdoor
recreational activities in national parks and on certain
Federal lands. National parks often play an important role in
the rehabilitation of those who have served in our military,
helping heal both the visible and invisible wounds of war.
Unfortunately, the lack of accessible trails, activities, and
lodging often prevents disabled Americans, particularly
veterans, from enjoying all that our treasured parks have to
offer.
As a Navy veteran and primary care nurse practitioner, I
understand the positive impact of outdoor activity, and I am
hoping to provide our veterans with every resource they need to
build healthy, happy lives. I am proud to support the MVP Act
and EXPLORE Act, and I am confident this legislation will allow
our heroes to enjoy all that our beautiful national parks have
to offer.
Between the beach and the bay in my district, southeast
Virginia is home to some of the most beautiful natural
resources in the country. Although we don't have alligators or
elks, or at least many of them, residents and visitors alike
enjoy hunting, fishing, hiking, kayaking, camping, and
countless other forms of outdoor recreation. Often in one of
our many national wildlife refuges.
Mr. French and Mr. Reynolds, your agencies manage some of
the most beautiful lands in the country. What efforts, if any,
has the Forest Service and National Park Service taken over the
last decade to improve access to our Federal lands for people
with disabilities, and what gaps might remain?
How can the EXPLORE Act help your agencies fulfill their
mission to the American people?
Mr. French. I really appreciate the question, and I agree
with you. I think we do have the honor of stewarding some of
the most beautiful lands in the entire country.
There are two things I will focus on. One of the great
opportunities that happened with the Great American Outdoors
Act, which really allowed us to start getting at our deferred
maintenance, it also gave us the space to re-envision and look
at many of the opportunities we were providing, and to try to
expand that, to look at were there opportunities that we should
be providing to create greater access, especially in places
where we weren't. And that has helped a lot. We have had more
than 850 projects, and that is one of the key things that we
look at is, do we need to change the way that we are providing
access?
We have also initiated our Reimagine Recreation initiative
across the Forest Service. And one of the key focuses of it is
to identify groups that we haven't really been talking with
before, or providing a level of service in the past that meets
contemporary needs. And this is one of those.
As you have heard here before, probably the greatest factor
we deal with is not just the deferred maintenance side of
things, but as we change things, that takes capital
improvements. So, it really comes down to either finding the
right partnerships or funding sources in order to make those
changes to really provide that access.
Mr. Reynolds. I would just add that we really appreciate
your comments on this and your support of it, and we want to
meet and exceed your expectations. This Act would really help
us to continue to prioritize accessibility.
We have a couple of things that come to mind, one of which
might be visible, one not. We have some teams working on
accessibility. We have an accessibility coordinator in the
National Park Service now who is focusing much more on working
with our tourism group and our recreation groups to reach out
to folks, as Mr. French described, new audiences, if you will,
that we haven't reached out to as much.
We also actually, while this might sound minor, it is not
because it empowers employees at all levels of the Service. We
have an employee resource group now for empowering people with
accessibility needs in the Service. So, by them also being
advocates for themselves in the workplace, they also, we are
finding, are thinking a lot about accessibility in our parks
for the public.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you very much for that.
And then Ms. DiGiulian, as a professional rock climber,
could you just speak briefly to some of the mental health
benefits of outdoor recreation?
Ms. DiGiulian. Sure. As I have been climbing for 25 years,
I have found an incredible amount of mental health benefits
through climbing. Climbing has helped me set goals, find
confidence in myself, understand what failure feels like. I can
recall more accounts of times when I have learned from failure
than my competition and world champion victories.
And I would say that, from the friends that I have who are
veterans who are climbers, they have found incredible mental
health benefits, as well. Climbing connects you with nature. It
brings you to these wild places and enables you to kindle this
really intense appreciation for the planet, for our climate,
and for the places that we get to recreate. So, I have found an
immense amount of mental health benefits from climbing.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. I would now like to
recognize Ms. Leger Fernandez for 5 minutes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Chair. And thank
you to Chair Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva, for putting
together this incredible bipartisan EXPLORE Act. Every time I
read through it, it is like, oh yes, that is great, that is
great. Oh, I love that bill that is in there.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Leger Fernandez. The Good Neighbor Recreation Act
inclusion I think is wonderful, as is everything else in there.
I am a proud co-sponsor of it. I love the fact that up here we
are all talking about, well, in my district we have the most
beautiful, and in my district we have the most beautiful
outdoor opportunities, from skiing the slopes in Taos, hiking
through our otherworldly landscapes of the Bisti Badlands. The
Continental Divide Trail goes through almost the entire state.
The outdoor economy in New Mexico is growing exponentially.
Last year, we saw a 7 percent growth, employing about 28,000
New Mexicans. Mr. French, what is the contribution to the U.S.
economy from outdoor recreation on Forest Service lands?
Mr. French. Thanks for the question. Huge. I mean, like I
said before, it is the No. 1 economic driver from National
Forest System lands. We have more than 158 million visits that
come into the National Forest System, and it represents about
$13.7 billion in gross domestic product that is coming directly
from national forest recreation, and more than 160,000 jobs
that are directly related to that.
And beyond that, like I said in my earlier statement, often
the first connection that people make with their public lands
is through recreation, and that is something that we want to
foster and carry as we go forward.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And what is the dollar amount that the
Agency allocates to recreation?
Mr. French. I will get back to you on the exact amount, but
here is what I will tell you. It is probably one of the, not
smallest, but it is one of the smallest-funded programs we have
in comparison to the amount of GDP and visitors that are there.
And we will get back to you with the specifics.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Exactly, and I think that that is it,
that we need to recognize that this is an investment that has
an incredible return on investment, and that in order to
address the issues of making sure those public lands are well
kept, that this is indeed something that it makes sense to fund
so that they, the visitors, can feel great about that, and it
can have that return on investment that just keeps circulating.
And so much of this money stays in the local economy, which I
think is very important.
I think that the discussion about expanding access to
everybody, we want to make sure that all of our communities are
involved. I once pulled together a convening when I was on the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation about the fact that
Latinos don't utilize outdoor recreation enough. And one of the
members who was a poet said, ``Yes, you know, Latinos, we look
at those pictures, and there is the guy on the top of the
mountain, and we say where is his family, doesn't he have any
family or friends?''
[Laughter.]
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Because we believe in recreating
together, right, we all go out together. And we also know that,
like in places like New Mexico and across the Southwest, many
of the public lands were formerly actually owned by land
grants, were owned by people who were here before this was the
United States. So, I think that that is an important piece of
how we include them.
And I don't know if, Mr. Benitez, you are the right place,
or Mr. Reynolds and Mr. French, how you can describe how you
are going to look at the Good Neighbor Authority and these
other things to make sure those Native Americans, this was
their land, right? Later land grants, other people. How do we
make sure they feel welcome in a place that they have such long
connections to these lands?
Mr. French. Well, I will take a quick stab. I think you
just named one of the early lessons that I had in my 30-plus-
year career. We often designed and provided opportunities that
didn't reflect what groups were asking us to do, like bringing
an entire family out, and we are providing very small sites.
Our focus right now, as we deal with, we have to steward
these lands, we have been entrusted with these lands to manage
them through our trust responsibilities to tribes. And as you
pointed out, especially in northern New Mexico, our land
grants, our approach right now is to take a step back, listen,
and invite in. Ask, we talk about providing opportunities for
co-stewardship, opportunities for decision-making to be made in
a much more collaborative way to reflect the needs that,
honestly, we are learning from either the tribes, Indigenous
people, or in the case of New Mexico, land grant communities
that can tell us things that we are just now learning from.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. And I have run out of time. So, Mr.
Benitez and others on there, we would love to have a written
response to that, and we will consider it.
With that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Moylan for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and I do
appreciate the hard work, bipartisan effort, and bicameral
effort championed by our Chairman Westerman and also our
Ranking Member Grijalva for coming with this outstanding
measure, the EXPLORE Act, especially because for my district in
Guam, outdoor recreation and tourism is very critical to Guam's
economy. And helping make our public lands more accessible,
both for Americans and tourists, will go a long way towards
helping tourist-dependent economies recover since the pandemic,
especially.
Ms. Andrews, your statements were very interesting. I
appreciate that. As Director of Arkansas' Office of Outdoor
Recreation, you put a lot of effort into your statements, and
especially when you are talking about promoting tourism. And
one thing I would like to ask you to expand upon a little is,
could you speak out more about the importance in supporting
economies based heavily on tourism since this post-pandemic and
how this bill does that?
Ms. Andrews. Thank you for the question.
In Arkansas, tourism is our second driver of our Arkansas
economy. Tourism numbers and visitation to Arkansas is
incredibly important. One thing that we try to do well in the
state is collaboration together. We work with our community
partners, advocacy groups to work on bringing tourists to
Arkansas.
One of the best things that outdoor recreation does is
draws in visitors, and when visitors come to an area to
recreate outside, they are also spending time on Main Street,
they are eating in restaurants, they are visiting antique
shops, they are spending their money in local gateway towns,
and that contributes to a local economy. And this bill helps to
support local gateway regions and access resources to further
tourism in those areas.
Mr. Moylan. I appreciate that. Thanks for the further
explanation.
And Mr. Chairman, I also would like to say I am
particularly excited to see the passage of Title II of this
bill, which expands opportunities for veterans to access public
lands. With over 13,000 veterans served by Guam's CBOC, giving
these veterans easy access to recreational opportunities will
boon not just for our constituents, but for local parks across
Guam. With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, and I yield
back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you. The gentleman yields.
And Chairman, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, thank
you to the witnesses.
Ms. DiGiulian, I am glad that Mrs. Kiggans asked you about
the mental health aspect of outdoor recreation. Just last week,
I was home, and I think it was the first week we had been home
in 10 or 11 weeks, and I got to go out and sit on a deer stand.
I was only 12 feet in the air, attached to a tree. I wasn't
hanging 1,000 feet off the ground on a cliff, like you do, but
I also had the great fortune of forgetting to put my cell phone
in my pocket when I rushed out of the house that morning. So, I
had about 6 hours outdoors with no cell phone, no
interruptions. It is a great way to clear your mind.
And I was intrigued by your testimony when you talked about
the time to reflect, and how thankful you are for the
privileges that we have here in our country to recreate. And
from your testimony you said, ``My experiences climbing in
wilderness areas have taught me self-reliance, humility, and a
deep appreciation for the conservation of American wilderness
and public lands.'' We, the Committee, actually did a field
hearing in the shadows of El Capitan and Half Dome this past
summer. What an awesome place.
But I know further in your testimony you talk about some
proposed rules from the Forest Service and the Park Service to
disallow anchors in wilderness areas, which we have a
correction for that in the bill. This is a practice that has
been going on for 60 years since the Wilderness Act was passed.
How would it have affected your life, not just for outdoor
recreation, but as a person, unless you are like Alex Honnold
as a beginner, and can climb without anchors on El Capitan, how
would it have negatively impacted your life, had anchors never
been allowed in wilderness areas?
Ms. DiGiulian. Thank you, Congressman. A big part of my
journey as a climber is mitigating risk and climbing as safe as
I can. I don't free solo, and free soloing is climbing without
a rope. What I do is free climbing, and that is climbing with
gear and with fixed anchors, which are crucial to the
fundamental safety of every single route on El Capitan and the
vast majority of climbing lines across the country. So, it
would drastically affect the future generations of climbers.
And I started climbing as a kid from a city who had no idea
what climbing was, and climbing created the conduit into the
outdoors for me. And if this access was made not safe, I
wouldn't have been allowed to climb as a kid because my parents
wanted me to survive. So, it is really concerning for future
generations of climbers to not have the same access to historic
climbs that have been around for longer than 60 years. It would
really drastically affect the safety of climbing.
Mr. Westerman. I appreciate you being here and being the
voice of thousands of climbers like yourself, maybe not as
accomplished as you, but people who enjoy getting out and
climbing.
Ms. Andrews, it is always good to have another person from
the Natural State at a Natural Resources Committee hearing. You
talked about some of the things that are happening in Arkansas,
and the state park system in Arkansas is really a great state
park system. And I know some of those parks are actually on
Federal land. Can you talk about how better access to Federal
land, and you talked about collaboration with different groups.
As you look forward for Arkansas' outdoor recreation, how
important is it to be able to collaborate with Federal partners
and to be able to do more things like is being done at Mount
Magazine and Queen Wilhelmina State Parks that are on Federal
land?
Ms. Andrews. Thank you. We have seen unprecedented growth
in Arkansas and momentum. The last few years, we saw record
visitation to our state park system, which is arguably the best
state park system in the country. Record visitation also to our
National Park System. Hot Springs National Park is now the 38th
most visited park in a system of over 400 parks. During COVID,
those numbers skyrocketed to the highest we have seen in our
history, and the momentum continues to build.
So, it is imperative that we collaborate with our Federal
partners at the state to open up access, and it is critical
also to understand that access equals growth, growth of the
outdoor recreation economy, growth of a conservation mindset,
and growth of public health and wellness. And in our state
parks and in collaboration with our Federal partners in the
National Forest Service, we have a few major projects that are
happening, most notably Queen Wilhelmina State Park in the
Ouachita National Forest. We are working on some major mountain
biking infrastructure, and kicking off this project later this
year, and this project could not be possible without the
collaboration and work that is happening with our Federal
partners. It is imperative.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you. I have many more questions for
all of you that I will have to submit for the record, because I
am already over time.
But again, thank you for your work with us, Ms. Turner,
especially with the groups that you have pulled together and
the work that you have done.
And with that, I will yield back, reluctantly.
Mr. Tiffany. The Chairman reluctantly yields.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. I would like to take 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Turner, can you talk about the difference in the
permitting process currently? If the EXPLORE Act passes, first
of all, will it, and how will it make it less cumbersome and
time consuming?
Ms. Turner. Thank you for the question, and it will make it
less cumbersome and time consuming.
I think we focus a lot on the businesses and non-profits,
the education institutions on our time. A lot of these
organizations are small. They lack the resources to spend as
much time as they are spending on it. But it is also the time
that the agencies need to spend on it. We are really attuned to
how many hours are spent processing permits because of the
antiquated system.
And the updates that can be made that are simple, that sit
within the existing laws, I would like to focus on three things
that are really important. And you know this, as a former small
business operator.
But cross-jurisdictional permits, the SOAR Act fixes that.
Right now, if you are running a river trip as a river guide and
you are crossing over BLM Forest Service park land, which most
rivers do, they don't know the boundaries of our Federal
agencies, you need three different permits for that same trip.
So, you might hear back from the Forest Service or BLM, but you
may not, and I am not picking on Park Service, but you might
not hear back from the Park Service. That means you can't
operate your trip. You can't market it. People can't plan their
trips. How is a business able to survive with that level of
uncertainty?
I think the second thing that the SOAR Act does is public
data. Let's have information on where permits are available,
where they are not, and let's get responses from the Federal
Government. Even if it is a no, it is really important for
these operators to know that they can't get a permit at that
place, and they could go to someplace adjacent or nearby.
And I think the last thing that is really important is the
similar uses. Right now, it is practically impossible to get a
permit if you are switching from maybe kayaking to paddle
boarding on the same water with the same amount of people, and
that has the exact same impact on the resource.
So, we just need to update that system to get more people
outside in a safe way. And I think often guides and outfitters
present those first-time experiences for people to the
outdoors, and we want to make sure that they are as enjoyable
and as easy as possible.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, thank you for that.
Ms. DiGiulian, I want to piggy-back on the questions that
Chairman Westerman was asking. What is the understanding
amongst those of you that are rock climbers that came out from
the Federal Government that they are not going to allow these
fixed anchors anymore? What is your understanding of how this
decision was made?
Ms. DiGiulian. First of all, the reception of understanding
that there would be a new consideration of fixed anchors within
the EXPLORE Act, the Protecting America's Rock Climbing Act
would protect what historically has existed in climbing for
years prior.
And my understanding of the reason of questioning fixed
anchors is an impact on wilderness areas, and that is just not
the case, historically. Within climbing there have been climbs
that have been established and climbed at long before those
areas were even wilderness areas. And also the visibility of
fixed anchors, you could be standing in the meadow of El
Capitan looking up, and have no idea that the wall has fixed
anchors. They are completely unobtrusive to anyone. All they do
is enable safety.
Mr. Tiffany. If I could follow up, this is going to
increase risk for some, correct, if this goes in place, because
some may try to climb without the fixed anchors. Would that be
an accurate statement?
Ms. DiGiulian. If people try to climb without the fixed
anchors, they would be really risking their lives.
Mr. Tiffany. And those people that are climbing with fixed
anchors now, they may say, ``I can't do this because the risk
is too high,'' right?
Ms. DiGiulian. Absolutely.
Mr. Tiffany. So, gentlemen, why are you guys doing this?
You are going to discourage people from climbing. Some people
may take risks that they shouldn't. Why is the Federal
Government doing this?
Mr. French. Just to be really clear here, and I want to say
I greatly appreciate the views and the testimony that has been
provided here, our proposal we put out was required that we do
that by Congress. They said that we had to promulgate direction
on how to regulate climbing on national forests.
Mr. Tiffany. Which legislation authorized that, Mr. French?
Mr. French. I will follow up with you, I actually was told
it beforehand, but it was through one of the appropriation acts
that we were given direction that we had to promulgate
direction for climbing.
Mr. Tiffany. Would you get me that specific bill language?
Mr. French. I will probably get handed it here as we are
speaking.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, that would be really appreciated.
Mr. French. So, that is the first thing.
The second thing that I want to be really clear----
Mr. Tiffany. Here it comes.
Mr. French. It is the 2021 omnibus that contains the
language.
The second thing is on National Forest System lands there
is no restriction on the placement of fixed anchors for
climbing on 72 percent of the non-wilderness lands. In
wilderness the issue is, and we were specifically told to
address fixed anchors in wilderness, is that the Wilderness Act
defines that you have to prohibit what are called
installations. Installations are defined as anything made by
man left behind in wilderness for future use. This created a
real dilemma for us.
So, our regulations don't prohibit anchors. What they say
is climbing is an important part authorized by the Wilderness
Act for unconfined recreation, which is part of the Wilderness
Act. It is appropriate, and the use of anchors is an important
part of allowing that. What we have said is that, in order to
comply with the installations prohibition from the Wilderness
Act, is that we can do what is called a minimum requirements
analysis that allows for the placement of fixed anchors and new
routes. It allows for existing anchors to remain until such
analysis can be done, and it allows for any use of placing new
anchors for safety purposes in wilderness areas now.
And I recognize the confusion by some of that, and we want
to work with our climbing groups and others as we go forward in
this comment period.
Mr. Tiffany. So, what I am hearing is you are trying to fix
a screw-up by Congress.
I want to emphasize to our audience that is here today,
including the panelists, when you hear sometimes from some of
us, including myself, when we oppose designations of land going
into wilderness, this is the kind of stuff that happens, where
we actually end up harming people who want to, in this case it
isn't the oil industry or people logging, or anything like
that. It is people that want to recreate that end up being
harmed by some of the things that get done with these pieces of
legislation.
So, when you hear us be critical sometimes of land going
into the Wilderness Act, it is not that we don't want to see
protection, preservation, and all the rest, but I view climbing
and things like that as a management activity. I mean, it is
something where people can participate. So, when we are
skeptical sometimes of these designations, that is part of
where it comes from.
I will go back to Mr. French. So, we are talking about
having more opportunity, all the rest. Yet, we see in northern
Wisconsin, where I come from, that the Forest Service is
closing off access to more Federal forest lands. Isn't that
kind of, what is the word that I want, inconsistent with what
we are attempting to do here?
Mr. French. I would love to sit down and talk about those
specific instances that you see.
I know our biggest challenge with access is two things. We
have about 370,000 miles of roads. It represents the biggest
amount of our deferred maintenance. It is also the key thing
that people need for access. We have about $7.7 billion in
deferred maintenance on our roads, and that represents the
largest amount.
The second is often having the right-of-ways that we need
through private lands.
But Mr. Chairman, if there are specific instances I would
make myself and my staff available to understand. Because for
us it is a core value of our agency to ensure access, and I
would like to follow up with you on that.
Mr. Tiffany. Yes, we would like to hold you to that because
many of these roads really don't need maintenance. The
maintenance of building the berm has been the most money that
has been spent oftentimes that restricts that access.
I am going to close really quickly here. It was mentioned
earlier that we need to fund this in regards to the activities
that we are hoping to have happen, and I would say a bit of a
criticism by the Ranking Member of us on this side. I would
just say that we have passed the Interior appropriation in the
House of Representatives. It sits before the Senate right now.
The Senate can pass it any time and send it on to the
President.
With that, I have went far over my time, and I am going to
offer to those that are here an additional second round of
questions, if you would like that, if anyone has a second round
that they would like to do.
The Chairman is going to take me up on that offer, and just
let me know, any of the other Members, if you want to do that.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany. And instead of
submitting these questions for the record, I will just go ahead
and ask them while you are here and in person.
Ms. Turner, I mentioned earlier how much work ORR has done,
and how you have been a champion in the effort to bring
together the EXPLORE Act. Can you talk about the work that has
gone into this bill, and why it has so much support from so
many diverse facets from the outdoor recreation community?
Ms. Turner. Yes. Thank you for the question. Thank you for
your work, especially staff, Anelia and Brandon, who just get
so much credit for this, and I think some Senate staff that
might be here, as well.
This has been a labor of love for a really long time. And I
think the development came maybe a decade ago, when some of the
groups were coming together and saying here are some issues
that we think, you know, more tools in the toolbox for the
agencies, not fitting a round peg in a square hole, what if we
did this, started building momentum.
And what is so amazing about this package is the, I would
say, hundreds of organizations that have contributed to this in
a bipartisan, bicameral fashion, many who are here today,
others, like Outdoor Alliance, who spoke yesterday, the
companies and businesses who can see the real business growth
behind this package.
And there is really something in here for everyone. If you
are a long distance biker, there is the BOLT Act. If you camp,
there is shoulder season expansion so that we can camp now that
the weather isn't as predictable, we can camp farther into the
seasons. There are modernized campgrounds if you RV. RVers are
a huge part of the recreation economy growth, and a lot of
campgrounds just don't fit RVs, or there are not charging
opportunities for new RVs going electric. Safe places to
practice if you hunt, and the contribution that that has to the
excise tax in the North American conservation model. Better
water quality if you fish or boat.
I mean, truly, you pick your recreation activity.
Obviously, we have talked about climbing here today and
paddling, and I think that we have been living by the motto
that the groups that have come to the table can see the forest
through the trees here, and they can see that maybe not every
provision is for everyone, but the sum of the parts of this
create one of the most important recreation pieces of
legislation in a generation. So, thank you for your work.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
Chief Deputy French, last Congress, we passed the Veterans
in Parks Act. And again, it was a very bipartisan bill,
actually the Alexander Lofgren Veterans in Parks Act, named
after a former staffer of the Ranking Member, and it
permanently codified free recreation passes for military
service members, veterans, and Gold Star families. Title II of
the EXPLORE Act follows up that successful effort to address
barriers to access among our veterans.
Can you talk about the importance of making our lands
accessible for military service members and veterans, and how
the EXPLORE Act will make this a priority among Federal land
managers?
Mr. French. Yes. First of all, I think that was directed at
me, correct?
Mr. Westerman. Yes, it was.
Mr. French. We very much appreciate and support the goals
and intents of the way the EXPLORE Act is providing for not
just the access, but also, I think, providing a pathway for us
honoring veterans to be a part of careers that are a part of
conservation and recreation across our public lands.
For us, I think that it is incredibly important. Our view
is that we need to honor the experience and the service of our
veterans. And if there are ways within our public lands that we
can provide greater accessibility, whether it is through
barriers of fees or in terms of how we can create jobs that are
part of that, we are in support of that. And this bill does
that.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
Deputy Director Reynolds, as you know, outfitters and
guides are an important piece of the outdoor recreation
economy, and that is why the EXPLORE Act contains a title that
streamlines the permitting process for these small businesses.
I have recently learned that, despite the positive work we
are doing on this bill, that the Park Service has released a
prospectus for outfitters and guides on the Buffalo National
River that would phase out and ultimately ban them from driving
the private vehicles of visitors who float the river. This
would exacerbate overcrowding. It would raise the cost for the
businesses and decrease access, which is opposite of everything
we are trying to accomplish in this bill.
Can you give me a status update on this prospectus, and
some reassurances that the Park Service will consult with
current outfitters and guides on the Buffalo before issuing any
final decision?
Mr. Reynolds. Yes, we would love to sit down and make sure
that we are thinking things through straight with these good
partners on the river, Mr. Westerman. I will commit to
contacting the Regional Director here right away for that part
of the world to see where we are on that.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The Chairman yields, and I would now like to
recognize Ms. Leger Fernandez for a second round of
questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so very much. And once
again, every time I hear the questioning and the answers about
these bills, I get pretty darn excited, very pleased looking at
how do we coordinate to make it easier for all the different
pieces of recreation activity to happen seamlessly, especially
as you are heading down the river, right? Because sometimes you
are on tribal land if you are on this side of the river,
sometimes you are not, you are traveling through state land.
So, Ms. Turner, thank you for that. Full disclosure, my son
paid his way through college by guiding in the summer, so I
really like hearing those things.
I will point out with regards to the Chair's comment about
the appropriations bill that what we saw was a $721 million
decrease. And the things that we are trying to do here,
everything, all the marvelous things that we have heard about
today, it is hard to do when you have a cut. The appropriations
bill total was a 35 percent cut. No agency, no business, no
family can easily manage when you have a 35 percent cut from
one year to the other, $721 million in terms of the cut, I
believe, for the Forest Service itself. I think we really need
to look at making sure we fund this.
But I wanted to go back to the question. I didn't get to
Mr. Benitez and perhaps Ms. Turner on their thoughts about the
response to my earlier question about how do we make sure that
we are more inclusive in terms of inviting people in to utilize
the natural beauty that surrounds them, especially because we
have a lot of communities, minority communities, rural
communities who might not easily access those sites.
Ms. Turner. Thank you. I think this is really important. We
have a program, Together Outdoors, and Breen is here, who runs
that program. And really, creating a welcoming and inclusive
environment, especially for first-time users of the outdoors,
is so important. That can be at the park, it can be where they
rent their RV, it can be where they get their fishing license.
So, I think there is a lot of education and training component
that goes to that.
Also telling the stories of the places, the good, the bad,
what happened here, why is this place here, how has it been
traditionally been used, how can we further sustainable use?
I think this bill, in particular, and all of the pieces,
the EJ, permitting, we have talked about ORLP. But even in
access not just to places, but information, a lot of equality,
equity is about access to information. I love what this bill
does about, where are people using our public lands and what
are they doing there?
I have heard stories of people who have gone to the park
for the first time. I will pick on one in Utah because there is
no one here, but Arches. And they have waited in a 2-hour line,
and they have gotten to Delicate Arch, and there are thousands
of people. And that wasn't the experience they were expecting.
Conversely, people who have gone outside and there has been
no one there, and that is a whole other, maybe unexpected
experience. So, if we can have better public data across the
Federal agencies of what type of experience you are going to
have there--``There is going to be a lot of people,'' ``You
should get there early,'' ``Buy your Park Pass online''--that
is access to information.
And especially in the veterans and accessibility
provisions, let's talk about where outdoor recreation areas are
accessible to people with disabilities, and how we can better
that accessibility. We need that information to be public for
everyone, and I would love to see just as much of a focus on
access to information as access to physical locations, and I
think this bill does that.
Mr. Benitez. I just want to thank you for your question,
and reflect, somewhat tongue in cheek, when you were asking
about the Latino family looking at that lone climber on top and
asking frantically, ``Why are they so alone,'' that was indeed
my Abuelita, that was my grandmother when I first started
climbing, worried sick if I was wandering off on my own.
So, indeed, it is a cultural question. With respect to
that, TPL's view is that specifically tribes and Indian Nations
have been shut out of Federal land conservation programs for
far too long. I think tribal communities deserve the same ready
access to parks and outdoor experiences, and they often also
have additional needs to secure ceremonial and sacred outdoor
spaces.
Under the provisions within ORLP, tribes would indeed be
eligible for grants under this legislation. So, while you may
say that that seems like an easy thing, it has taken us this
far and this long to get that provision in.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you.
And Ms. DiGiulian, I know that we cannot get all of the
Abuelitas, all of the grandmothers on those climbing ropes, so
that was not in any way intended, I should have said the hiker,
not the climber.
But thank you very much, everybody, for the work you have
done working collaboratively, and including such a range of
bills. And this is the kind of legislation we just love seeing,
so it has been a delightful hearing.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. I want to thank all of
the witnesses for your testimony today, and the Members for
their questions. Thank you very much for being here.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you today, and we will ask that they respond to
those in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Subcommittee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by
5 p.m. on Tuesday, December 5, 2023. The hearing record will be
held open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:58 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Westerman

AMERICAN SPORTFISHING ASSOCIATION

Alexandria, Virginia

November 29, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: The EXPLORE Act

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

On behalf of the American Sportfishing Association (ASA), thank you
for introducing and holding a hearing on the Expanding Public Lands
Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act, or EXPLORE Act. As the trade
association for the recreational fishing industry, ASA provides the
industry a unified voice when emerging laws and policies could
significantly affect business or sportfishing itself. Our members
include manufacturers, retailers and allied organizations that comprise
the $148 billion recreational fishing economy. We urge the Committee to
pass the EXPLORE Act because it would help modernize and enhance
management of, and access to, our nation's public lands, benefiting
recreational fishing and other outdoor recreation activities.
The introduction of the EXPLORE Act is timely and comes on the
heels of the latest U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis report, which
showed that in 2022, the outdoor recreation economy generated $1.1
trillion in economic output, comprised 2.2% of U.S. GDP, and supported
5 million jobs--3.2% of all employees in the country. Outdoor
recreation has been proven to boost the health of the economy and
Americans, and access to public lands is crucial for millions of
anglers to enjoy the outdoors.
There is much to support in this broad-based legislation that seeks
to improve recreational opportunities across all federal land
management agencies. ASA particularly supports provisions to modernize
and improve accessible trails and campgrounds, improve visitation data
collection and reporting, slow the spread of aquatic invasive species,
and increase youth participation in outdoor recreation. Passage of the
EXPLORE Act will help ensure that the sportfishing industry, and the
recreation economy in general, continues to grow.
We are grateful for the ongoing work of the Committee to advance
legislation that will strengthen the management and conservation of the
nation's public lands and waters. We look forward to working with the
Committee on this and other important measures that benefit the
recreational fishing industry and America's anglers.

Sincerely,

Mike Leonard,
Vice President of Government Affairs

______

INTERNATIONAL MOUNTAIN BICYCLING ASSOCIATION

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse:

On behalf of the International Mountain Bicycling Association
(IMBA), which partners with over 200 local organizations and nearly
200,000 individual supporters, we appreciate the Subcommittee's
meaningful work with regards to the importance of outdoor recreation
and conservation. IMBA strongly supports the Expanding Public Lands
Outdoor Recreation Experiences (EXPLORE) Act. Specifically, Title I,
Subtitle B, Section 121, the Biking on Long-Distance Trails (BOLT) Act,
which will improve access to quality outdoor recreation trail
opportunities on public lands across America. In addition to the BOLT
Act, we support the organization of the Federal Interagency Council on
Outdoor Recreation; the focus on access to public lands with people
with disabilities including trail inventories, accessibility, and
assistive technology; the spotlight on veterans and the outdoors; the
extension of Every Kid Outdoors Act; and finally the Simplifying
Outdoor Access for Recreation specifically leveraging volunteer
engagement on public lands; as well as elements from Recreation Not Red
Tape.
The International Mountain Bicycling Association (IMBA) creates,
enhances, and protects great places to ride mountain bikes. IMBA is
focused on creating more trails close to where people live; improving
the quality of and equitable access to sustainable, purpose-built
mountain bike trails across the U.S.; and supporting trail communities
so everyone has access to high-quality, close-to-home rides as well as
iconic backcountry experiences. Since 1988, IMBA has been the worldwide
leader in mountain bike advocacy and the only organization focused
entirely on trails and access for all types of mountain bikers in all
parts of the U.S. and abroad. IMBA teaches and encourages low-impact
riding, grassroots advocacy, sustainable trail design, innovative land
management practices, and cooperation among trail user groups. IMBA
Local is a national network of local groups, individual riders, and
passionate volunteers working together for the benefit of the mountain
bike and multi-use trail communities nationwide.

The Biking on Long-Distance Trails (BOLT) Act is a top legislative
priority for our community as it continues the investment in outdoor
recreation by recognizing the importance of long distance trails to
create iconic backcountry discovery while supporting small rural
communities. The legislation will require the Secretary of Agriculture
and the Secretary of the Interior to:

Identify no less than 10 existing long-distance bike
trails on Federal lands in excess of 80 miles in distance;

Identify 10 areas where opportunity exists to develop or
complete long-distance bike trails on federal lands in
excess of 80 miles in distance;

Coordinate with stakeholders on feasibility of completing
long distance trails and the resources necessary for such
projects;

Publish maps, signage, and promotional materials
highlighting the positive aspects of the long-distance
trail network;

Issue a report, with input from stakeholders, outlining
the details of existing and proposed long-distance trails
and their promotion.

There are a number of trails that could benefit from this long-
distance trails recognition, such as the Ouachita National Recreation
Trail in Arkansas, the High Country Pathway in Michigan, Maah Daah Hey
trail in North Dakota, the Great Divide Mountain Bike Trail running
from the Canada to Mexico border, and the Bonneville Shoreline Trail in
Utah. The report will help highlight and reveal other worthy candidates
as well. Long-distance bike trails have brought incredible economic
benefits to rural and urban gateway communities across the country,
while also helping communities transition to a more sustainable and
reliable recreation economy, and the BOLT Act will help further bolster
that economy and health of these communities nationwide.

In addition to the BOLT Act, we believe the following components of
the bill are critical to the future of America's outdoor recreation
infrastructure.

The organization of the Federal Interagency Council on
Outdoor Recreation (FICOR). This is a critical aspect to
the success of access, economic impact, and resources for
the outdoors in America as it will bring together all the
agencies to coordinate and evolve towards a more efficient
system. We look forward to future partnerships with FICOR.

Supporting Gateway Communities and Addressing Park
Overcrowding. It is inherently important to work with
communities adjacent to our public lands and to find
solutions that benefit everyone. The goal is for people to
have a fantastic experience on our public lands and these
communities are an integral part of that enjoyment.

Broadband Connectivity on Federal Recreational Lands and
Waters. As our society becomes increasingly connected, as
should our public lands. Critical safety situations,
accessibility to camp sites, more simple bookings, lead to
a safer, more enjoyable experiences.

Access for People with Disabilities. Perhaps one of the
most critical components of this legislation is ensuring
accessibility to our public lands for all people. IMBA has
been working with the land agencies designing and building
trails for adaptive riders for years. We are thrilled to
see this issue become a priority.

Military and Veterans in Parks. It is critical that the
people who have served our country are welcome on our
public lands with programs designed to further expand
opportunities for recreation.

Modernizing Recreation Permitting. As users continue to
look for deeper, more equitable experiences on our public
lands, the permitting process can be a barrier to access.
We are pleased the committee has addressed this issue to
make permitting more streamlined.

Maintenance of Public Land. Volunteerism is the foundation
of our public lands system and the International Mountain
Bicycling Association, from its inception, has been at the
forefront of building and maintaining trails by partnering
with federal land management agencies. We are thrilled to
see this updated to better leverage volunteer engagement,
to streamline the process for volunteers, to promote
volunteer opportunities, and finally to allow volunteers to
participate without liability insurance.

Recreation Not Red Tape. As supporters of this policy we
understand how important these provisions are, including
the Good Neighbor Authority allowing Tribes, counties, and
states to maintain infrastructure on public land. We would
like to see the same type of policy for non-profit
organizations as well.

Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership. We strongly support
this program that will improve access to outdoor recreation
for underserved communities. We would ask the committee to
add language from America's Outdoor Recreation Act that
would allow the Secretary to waive any matching funds
requirement if an entity has no reasonable means for
matching said funds. This allows these funds to be
available to smaller organizations and marginalized
communities that often have an outsized impact in their
communities.

According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the outdoor
recreation economy crested over $1 trillion and accounted for $563.17
billion in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), which is an increase of $238
billion over 2021. Headwater Economics projects that these numbers
present a significantly higher value than some of the traditional
economic drivers such as motor vehicle manufacturing; oil, gas, and
coal; air transportation; and the performing arts.
The recent pandemic makes clear that access to public lands is
essential for the health and well-being of all Americans. This
legislation is an important step forward in utilizing existing natural
recreation resources for a greater purpose and value to the public. The
EXPLORE Act is a commonsense, bipartisan way to enable and promote the
benefits of physical health, mental health, and wellness through
concerted access on public lands.
IMBA appreciates the Committee's role in advancing outdoor
recreation across the United States and its important work on the
EXPLORE Act. We stand ready to assist the Committee to ensure passage
of this important bill into law and find any additional opportunities
to increase outdoor recreation to benefit our members and Americans
nationwide.

Sincerely,

Todd Keller,
Director of Government Affairs
______

Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC)

Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA)

Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA)

Arlington, Virginia

November 29, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: The EXPLORE Act

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

On behalf of the Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC),\1\ the
Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA),\2\ and the Recreational
Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) \3\--collectively known as the
Associations--we applaud your leadership for introducing the EXPLORE
Act. This comprehensive legislation will help create additional
opportunities for motorized access to federal recreational lands,
improve recreation infrastructure, support local communities, and
bolster our nation's economy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Motorcycle Industry Council (MIC) is a not-for-profit,
national trade association representing several hundred manufacturers,
distributors, dealers and retailers of motorcycles, scooters,
motorcycle parts, accessories and related goods, and allied trades.
\2\ The Specialty Vehicle Institute of America (SVIA) is the
national not-for-profit trade association representing manufacturers,
dealers, and distributors of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) in the United
States. SVIA's primary goal is to promote safe and responsible use of
ATVs.
\3\ The Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle Association (ROHVA) is a
national, not-for-profit trade association formed to promote the safe
and responsible use of recreational off-highway vehicles (ROVs--
sometimes referred to as side-by-sides or UTVs) manufactured or
distributed in North America. ROHVA is also accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) to serve as the Standards
Developing Organization for ROVs. More information on the standard can
be found at https://rohva.org/ansi-standard/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The introduction of the EXPLORE Act is timely and comes on the
heels of the latest U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis report, which
showed that in 2022, the outdoor recreation economy generated $1.1
trillion in economic output, comprised 2.2% of U.S. GDP, and supported
5 million jobs--3.2% of all employees in the country. Outdoor
recreation has been proven to boost the health of the economy and
Americans, and access to public lands and trails is crucial for
millions of ATV, dirt bike, and side-by-side riders and drivers to
enjoy the outdoors.
There is much to support in this broad-based legislation that seeks
to improve recreational opportunities across all federal land
management agencies. Specifically, the Associations support provisions
intended to identify, improve, and sustainably increase recreational
opportunities on public lands. These provisions include a better
understanding of recreational visitation patterns, increasing/improving
broadband connectivity at developed recreation sites, improving parking
and camping near recreational trails and areas, modernizing and
improving accessible trails, and increasing youth participation in
outdoor recreation.
The Associations also support the establishment of a Federal
Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation (FICOR), which will help
federal land management agencies work together to address maintenance
backlogs, infrastructure work delays, and other issues, leading to
improved and expanded recreational access for millions of Americans.
Further, provisions that require the Secretaries of Agriculture and
Interior to ``. . . seek to create additional opportunities, as
appropriate, for motorized and nonmotorized access and opportunities on
Federal recreational lands and waters administered by the Chief of the
Forest Service or the Director of the Bureau of Land Management,''
provide clear Congressional direction that recreation will continue to
be a foundational use of Forest Service and BLM lands as provided for
in the Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act and the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act.
Finally, we would like to highlight our support for the inclusion
of the Military and Veterans in Parks Act (MVP Act), which promotes and
enhances outdoor recreation opportunities for veterans and active
service members. The MVP Act would help veterans' physical and mental
health, especially those with accessibility issues, by expanding and
improving recreational and trail opportunities on federal lands. Not
only would the MVP Act allow veterans safe and accessible use of public
lands, but it would also broaden employment opportunities for veterans,
many of whom have experience and interests that align well with natural
and cultural resource lands management.
Passage of the EXPLORE Act will help ensure that our nearly $50
billion powersports industry, and the recreation economy generally,
continues to grow and serve our ever-expanding constituencies. We
appreciate your efforts and look forward to working with you and your
staff throughout the legislative process.

Sincerely,

Scott P. Schloegel,
Senior Vice President, Government Relations

______

OUTDOOR INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION

December 1, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

We are writing to express our strong support for the Expanding
Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences (EXPLORE) Act, which was
introduced in the House this week. This legislation provides meaningful
funding to build outdoor recreation opportunities across the country by
expanding the time federal lands are open to the public, investing in
specific recreation infrastructure like biking trails and trailhead
facilities, and utilizing real-time data to extend the outdoor
recreation season. Investments like these will have a real impact on
the ability of all Americans to spend time outside and enjoy the
physical and mental health benefits of outdoor recreation. We thank you
for your leadership on behalf of the outdoors and the outdoor
recreation economy for the introduction of this bill.
Outdoor recreation is a cornerstone of American life and a pillar
of our economy, contributing more than $1.1 trillion to our economy and
supporting 5 million jobs. Increased support for outdoor recreation
through federal investments in recreation infrastructure and public
parks--like those proposed in your legislation--are critical to the
continued success of our businesses and the outdoor industry.
Millions of Americans turned to the outdoors, including more women,
more urban-dwellers, and more ethnically diverse individuals to find
refuge during these difficult times. Yet, more than 100 million
Americans still do not live within walking or biking distance of a
park. Now more than ever, people are experiencing the physical and
mental health benefits of getting outside, and Congress can take action
to support this newfound shift to the outdoors by supporting this act.
Outdoor Industry Association represents hundreds of outdoor
businesses across the country, and our members proudly support the
provisions outlined in the EXPLORE Act, which come from numerous past
recreation bills. These include, but are not limited to, the
Simplifying Outdoor Access for Recreation (SOAR) Act and Recreation Not
Red Tape Act (RNR), which would further increase access to the outdoors
by simplifying the permitting process for public lands and cutting
regulatory red tape that creates barriers to recreation; the Outdoors
for All Act, which would benefit underserved communities by creating
inclusive outdoor recreation programs that bring economic and health
benefits to low-income neighborhoods; and the Gateway Community and
Recreation Enhancement Act, which would provide technical assistance
and development opportunities to the communities that are the gateways
to our cherished public lands.
By increasing Americans' access to outdoor spaces and recreation,
these bills will provide meaningful economic opportunities to countless
communities and local outdoor industry businesses. Following several
years of COVID-19 related lockdowns and economic stress, these
proposals would help strengthen the outdoor industry while improving
the mental, physical, and economic well-being of everyone, regardless
of zip code, background, or income.
We thank you for your continued dedication to the outdoors, and we
look forward to working with you to ensure Congress passes this bill
and President Biden signs it into law.

Thank you,

Kent Ebersole,
President

______

PeopleForBikes

Boulder, Colorado

November 29, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

On behalf of PeopleForBikes, I wanted to express our strong support
for the EXPLORE Act. Bicycling continues to be an important part of the
outdoor experience and the outdoor recreation economy. PeopleForBikes'
overall mission is to make America the best place in the world to ride
a bike by advancing good policy, safe products, improved
infrastructure, wider participation and rider education. The EXPLORE
Act will help advance that mission by increasing access to bicycling,
especially on our public lands. I would strongly encourage the House
Natural Resources Committee and the House of Representatives to pass
this legislation.
The PeopleForBikes Coalition is the sole trade association for U.S.
manufacturers, suppliers and distributors of bicycle products,
including electric bicycles. Our 335 members represent companies that
produce goods in every segment of the bicycle market, from high-end
competition bicycles to affordable kids' bikes. Our members produce the
full range of components, parts and accessories used for bicycling, as
well as electric bicycles.
Like so many major legislative packages impacting the outdoors, the
EXPLORE Act is bipartisan and has strong support from industry, non-
profit organizations, and stakeholders across the outdoor recreation
ecosystem. This legislation brings together all corners of outdoor
recreation and the bicycle industry is proud to support this bill,
especially since it includes provisions to identify potential long
distance bike trails, updates the existing complex permitting process
on public lands that will benefit guided trips for cyclists, builds
adaptive trails for veterans and the broader disability community, and
prioritizes funding for local outdoor recreation projects within
underserved communities.
We greatly appreciate your leadership on this legislation and your
inclusion of important provisions that expand access to bicycling. We
look forward to working with you and your staff to ensure this
legislation moves through the legislative process and is signed into
law.

Sincerely,

Matt Moore,
Policy Counsel

______

SPECIALTY EQUIPMENT MARKET ASSOCIATION

Diamond Bar, California

November 29, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: The EXPLORE Act

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

The Specialty Equipment Market Association (SEMA) writes to thank
you for your leadership on the Expanding Public Lands Outdoor
Recreation Experiences (EXPLORE) Act. This historic legislation will
help meet the growing demand for access to the outdoors by improving
access and experience for more Americans to recreate on public lands.
SEMA is a non-profit trade association that represents over 7,000
mostly small businesses around the country that manufacture,
distribute, and retail specialty parts and accessories for motor
vehicles. The specialty automotive aftermarket industry supports over
1.3 million jobs across the U.S. and contributes over $336 billion to
the American economy each year through the production and sale of
performance, functional, restoration and styling-enhancement products
for use on passenger cars, trucks, SUVs, and special interest collector
vehicles.
Protecting and expanding motorized access on public lands is
important to tens of thousands of motorized recreationists, the local
economy, and all of the men and women who manufacture, sell, and
install parts needed to upgrade vehicles to go off-road. Off-roading is
not only a passion for millions of Americans, but it is an economic
driver that is critical to the U.S. economy, that contributes to the
$1.1 trillion annually to the economy and employs 5 million people.
SEMA supports advancing this comprehensive bill that seeks to
improve recreational opportunities on federal lands, including for the
motorized recreation community. SEMA strongly supports provisions
intended to help federal land management agencies to increase motorized
and non-motorized access to public lands as well as directing the U.S.
Bureau of Land Management and the U.S. Forest Service to periodically
update maps to help ensure responsible motorized recreation.
We appreciate your efforts and look forward to working with the
committee to pass the EXPLORE Act.

Sincerely,

Mike Spagnola,
President & CEO

______

THE WILDERNESS SOCIETY

November 30, 2023

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Federal Lands Subcommittee:

On behalf of our more than one million members and supporters, The
Wilderness Society (TWS) writes to express its views on the Expanding
Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act, AKA the ``EXPLORE
Act,'' scheduled to be heard by the Subcommittee on November 30, 2023.
We respectfully request that this letter be included in the hearing
record.

The EXPLORE Act is a comprehensive package of legislation bills on
a wide range of subjects. The Wilderness Society supports the bill
overall and strongly supports certain sections of the legislation. We
will identify those sections below. At the same time, we have concerns
about some components of the bill and several recommendations for
improvement. We will lay out our concerns and recommendations for
improvement in the order in which they appear in the bill.

TWS strongly supports the following portions of the EXPLORE Act:

Title II Access America--TWS supports efforts to increase
access to federal lands and waters for people with
disabilities and military veterans. We also strongly
support efforts to increase youth recreation visits to
Federal lands, and welcome the Committee's efforts to
extend the Every Kid Outdoors program.

Title III Simplifying Outdoor Access for Recreation--Title
III has many valuable elements that would increase
opportunities to experience federal lands and waters. A key
component of this title is the SOAR Act, which TWS has
supported for many years. Passage of the SOAR Act would
dramatically improve guided recreation opportunities on
federal lands and waters. We thank the Committee for
incorporating the bill into the EXPLORE Act with only minor
amendment.

COMMENTS ON SPECIFIC SECTIONS

Section 113 Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor Recreation

Section 113 establishes the Federal Interagency Council on Outdoor
Recreation (FICOR) as a permanent, Congressionally-chartered council of
the Executive Branch. We think this an important step for improving
coordination between the federal land and water management agencies.
We commend the sponsors for basing the EXPLORE Act's FICOR language
on the America's Outdoor Recreation Act, S. 873, the Senate's version
of the recreation package. This is a significant improvement over the
language in H.R. 3107, the Improving Outdoor Recreation Coordination
Act.
The EXPLORE Act improves upon the Senate bill when it defines
``Federal recreation lands and waters.'' Instead of relying solely on
the definition of Federal recreation lands and waters in the Federal
Lands Recreation Enhancement Act, 16 U.S.C. Sec. 1601 et seq (FLREA),
the EXPLORE Act expands this definition to include the lands and waters
managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the
Army Corps of Engineers. These two agencies are not covered by FLREA.
However, it is important to include them here.
Unfortunately, the EXPLORE Act does not take the additional step of
including the lands and waters managed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs
in the definition of Federal recreation lands and waters. We regard
this as a significant oversight since BIA would be a FICOR member under
the EXPLORE Act and has responsibility for Tribal Parks across the
country. We can think of no reason why NOAA and the Army Corps should
be included, and BIA should not be included. We urge the Committee to
correct this oversight.
We commend the sponsors of the EXPLORE Act for authorizing the four
relevant Cabinet Secretaries to rotate the leadership of the Council in
the manner in which they believe it will work best. This will help to
ensure that all four departments have an opportunity to lead the
Council and participate fully in the Council's affairs.
Section 122 Protecting America's Rock Climbing

The Wilderness Society supports the inclusion of section 122,
derived from the Protecting America's Rock Climbing Act (PARC Act, H.R.
1380) in the EXPLORE Act. Section 122 will provide increased clarity on
the management of fixed climbing anchors in designated Wilderness. We
note that the PARC Act was revised through an Amendment in the Nature
of a Substitute (ANS) when it was marked up by this Committee on June
21, 2023. The ANS made the PARC Act nearly identical to the climbing
section of the America's Outdoor Recreation Act, S. 873 (AORA). This
was a significant improvement to the bill.

However, a few variances remain between section 122 and the
climbing section of AORA. We believe one of these variances is
significant. Section 122(e) of the EXPLORE Act omits language that
appears in the parallel subsection of AORA. We think the omitted
language is important and we urge the House to insert it into the
EXPLORE Act at markup. To do so, we recommend that the House revise
subsection 122(e) of the EXPLORE Act to read as follows (insertion
shown in red):

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe inserted language preserves essential discretion for the
land management agencies to determine when the continued use of
specific climbing routes is appropriate. This decision-making lies
squarely within the management functions of the agencies. Without this
language, subsection (e) could be read to require the agencies to allow
the continued use of every route in existence on the date of enactment.
We believe such a requirement would be too broad. For that reason, we
urge House members to support an amendment to insert this language into
the EXPLORE Act.
Section 123 Range Access

TWS has concerns about section 123 of the EXPLORE Act as written.
We believe the requirement to construct a shooting range on every
National Forest and Bureau of Land Management district is arbitrary and
fails to consider the level of local demand. We also believe that
agencies should be able to collect fees for the use of shooting ranges.
We recommend the following changes to address these concerns:

Modify section 123 to direct the agencies to assess the
need for shooting ranges on a specific unit. Impose a
mandate only where a clear need exists.

Eliminate the restriction in section 123(b)(3)(B)(iv) that
limits the ability of the agency to charge fees for the
shooting range. Allow the agencies to charge expanded
amenity recreation fees under FLREA.

Section 127 Motorized and Nonmotorized Access

Section 127 has some positive elements but is also ambiguous in
some respects. We recommend replacing the text of section 127 to
resolve these ambiguities. Our replacement text appears below.

We oppose the insertion of the savings clause in section 127(e).
Our concern is that this subsection could undermine the travel
management plans of the agencies and result in motorized use in
nonmotorized areas. It could also give agencies a loophole to avoid
completing travel management plans in the future. We recommend that
subsection (e) be deleted.
We recommend replacing section 127 with the following text:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Section 131 Gateway Communities

Section 131 imposes a significant unfunded mandate on the federal
land management agencies. Subsection (a) directs the agencies to
``collaborate with State and local governments, Indian Tribes, housing
authorities, applicable trade associations, nonprofit organizations,
and other relevant stakeholders to identify needs and economic impacts
in gateway communities . . .'' Section 131(a)(1). The agencies are
instructed to carry out this work ``using existing funds available to
the Secretaries.''
The task of collaborating with all these agencies is a major
undertaking that will require significant agency resources. Congress
should not require the agencies to take on this work with existing
funds available. Doing so will force the agencies to neglect their
other assigned responsibilities in order to comply with these mandates.
If Congress intends to impose new mandates on the agencies, it has a
responsibility to provide the additional funding necessary to carry out
those mandates.
Section 132 Improved Recreation Visitation Data

TWS supports the goals of section 132 but believes it is problematic in
two ways.

a. Single Visitation Data Reporting System

First, subsection (a) requires the agencies to establish a single
visitation data reporting system that provides an estimate of the
number of visitors broken down by recreational activity. Developing a
unified visitation data reporting system would be a significant
improvement over the current piecemeal system. However, we urge the
committee to be realistic about the challenges of producing unified
data across multiple federal land management agencies. This task will
be difficult for several reasons.
1.  Of the five agencies covered by this bill (BLM, BOR, NPS, USFWS,
USFS) only two have entrance gates at which visitors can be
counted as they arrive (NPS and USFWS). Two of the five
agencies (BLM and USFWS) have completely porous boundaries
that make it very difficult to count people upon their
arrival.

2.  Although some NPS and USFWS units have entrance gates at which
the agencies are able to count visitors, this data paints
an incomplete picture of visitation at Park Service units
and Wildlife Refuges. The reason for this because even
units with gates have other entry points through which
people can gain access without being counted. In addition,
some NPS and USFWS have no entrance gates. As a result,
visitation data for NPS and USFWS units is, inherently, an
underestimation of visitation.

3.  Because their borders are porous, BLM and USFS must use other
methods for measuring visitation. Some of the alternative
methods currently being used involve labor intensive field
surveys that can only be conducted once every five years.
This makes the task of producing unified visitation data on
an annual basis more difficult.

The differences in data collection methodologies and collection
frequency will make it challenging for the agencies to produce unified
annual visitation data. Some evolution in the agencies' data collection
strategies may be required. For these reasons, we urge the committee to
give the agencies plenty of time to comply with this mandate.
b. Real Time Data Pilot Program

Section 132(b) requires the Secretaries to create a data pilot
program that predicts visitation in real time and make that data
available to the public through multiple media platforms. The bill
instructs the agencies to carry out this work ``using existing funds
available to the Secretaries.''
This task is a major undertaking that will require the integration
of data sets from multiple sources. This will be a challenging
technological development process. Congress should not require the
agencies to take on this work with existing funds available. Doing so
will adversely affect the agency's other assigned responsibilities.
Section 153 Partnership Agreements to Modernize Campgrounds

Section 153 requires the land management agencies to enter into an
arbitrarily set minimum number of agreements within three years to
modernize campgrounds and other facilities on federal lands and waters.
However, section 153 does not authorize the agencies to set minimum
standards for contract acceptability. Consequently, the requirement to
enter into a minimum number of agreements could force them to accept
bad agreements. We recommend that the committee revise section 153 to
explicitly authorize the agencies to set minimum standards for contract
acceptability and eliminate the minimum number of agreements in section
153(c).
Section 156 Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership Program

Access to high-quality parks is limited for many people in the
United States including 28 million children who do not have any such
parks within a half-mile radius of their homes. This deprivation is
especially severe in low-income and communities of color.
Section 156 aims to address this issue by expanding the eligibility
for the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership (ORLP) and codifying the
ORLP program to make it permanent. ORLP is funded through the Land and
Water Conservation Fund and supports the creation and improvement of
outdoor recreation infrastructure in eligible areas of a population of
25,000 or more, with priority given to low-income communities. This
section has earned bipartisan support because it seeks to address
outdoor recreation deficits, promote job training, public-private
partnerships, and ensure equitable access to the benefits of local
parks.
Although TWS supports section 156, we note that the EXPLORE Act
omits an essential element of the original Outdoors for All Act that
would ensure greater access to the benefits of the OLRP program.
Section 3(b) of the original bill (H.R. 1065) and section 406(b)(2)(B)
of AORA (S. 873) would allow the Secretary to waive the match
requirement for ORLP grants under certain circumstances.
It reads:

[    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

We recommend that this waiver authority be reinserted into the
EXPLORE Act. Without this authority, the Secretary will not be able to
harness the true potential of the ORLP program.

Similarly, we recommend that section 156(b)(2)(B) of the EXPLORE
Act be amended to allow grantees to use up to 10% of their grant
receipts for administrative expenses. Currently, this subsection limits
grantees to 7% for administrative expenses.

Conclusion

Thank you for your time and consideration of our views and the
views of our millions of members and supporters.

Sincerely,

Paul Sanford,
Director of Policy Analysis

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Tiffany

AMERICAN MOUNTAIN GUIDES ASSOCIATION

Boulder, Colorado

December 6, 2023

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: ``Expanding Public Lands Outdoor Recreation Experiences Act''

Dear Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

The American Mountain Guides Association (AMGA) respectfully
submits this testimony for inclusion in the public record regarding the
House Natural Resources Committee, Subcommittee on Federal Lands,
Legislative Hearing on the EXPLORE Act, held on November 30, 2023. The
EXPLORE Act includes improved versions of several longtime priorities
of AMGA such as H.R. 1527, the Simplifying Outdoor Access for
Recreation Act (SOAR Act), and H.R. 1380, the Protecting America's Rock
Climbing Act (PARC Act). The American Mountain Guides Association
supports both the SOAR Act and the PARC Act for the reasons stated
herein.
About American Mountain Guides Association
The American Mountain Guides Association (AMGA) is a 501(c)(3)
educational non-profit organization that provides training and
certification for climbing instructors, mountain guides, and
backcountry skiing guides throughout the United States. Founded in
1979, the AMGA has trained over 13,000 climbing and skiing guides who
provide outdoor experiences for the public on federal lands. As the
American representative to the International Federation of Mountain
Guide Associations, the AMGA institutes international standards for the
mountain guiding profession in the United States and serves as an
educational body for land management agencies, outdoor businesses,
clubs, and other recreation stakeholders. Of additional relevance to
today's hearing, our membership includes outfitters and guides who have
been operating on federal lands since the inception of the modern
commercial recreation permitting system. We have extensive experience
with federal land management systems, climbing management including
fixed anchors, and recreation special use permitting. We welcome the
opportunity to provide testimony on the SOAR Act and PARC Act.
AMGA Support for the SOAR Act
The American Mountain Guides Association appreciates the
Subcommittee's recognition of the need to improve access to federal
lands and we commend Chair Tom Tiffany, Ranking Member Joe Neguse,
Vice-Chair John Curtis and the Federal Lands Subcommittee for taking
steps to advance legislation that will enhance opportunities for
Americans from all walks of life to access and enjoy federal lands. In
particular, we believe there is a significant opportunity to increase
access to recreational opportunities on federal lands by modernizing
the outfitter and guide permitting systems of the federal land
agencies. These systems are antiquated and inefficient, and they impose
unnecessary and costly administrative burdens on land management
agencies and guides alike. These issues prevent outfitting and guiding
businesses from growing to their full potential and limit opportunities
for the public to benefit from the assistance of an outfitter, guide,
outdoor education center, outdoor adaptive program, veteran's outdoor
program, or organized outdoor club.

The SOAR Act as written in the EXPLORE Act will clarify existing
authorities and establish new authorities that will make special
recreation permits easier for outfitters and guides to obtain and
manage, and easier for the agencies to administer. In the following
section, we outline several provisions in the bill that are
particularly notable.

In Section 312(e), Special Recreation Permits for An Organized
Group Activity or Event, the bill establishes a new type of simplified
permit that can be issued quickly and easily when a guided outing will
have no more than nominal effects on federal recreational lands and
waters, resources, and programs. This common-sense approach will
increase opportunities for the public to participate in guided
recreational activities when those activities will not adversely impact
the landscape and agency resources.

In Section 313(a), Permit Flexibility, the bill directs the
agencies to allow a new recreational activity to occur under an
existing permit, without doing additional analysis, when the new
activity is substantially similar to the activity that is already
permitted.

In Section 313(c), Surrender of Unused Visitor-Use Days, the bill
establishes a program to allow a permit holder to return unused
visitor-use days to the agency to be made available to other existing
or potential permittees. Returned visitor-use days may be utilized by
other permit holders and the unguided public. This section will promote
economy of use by maximizing the utilization of all available visitor-
use days.

In Section 315, Service First Initiative; Permits for
Multijurisdictional Trips, the agencies are authorized to offer a
single joint special recreation permit for guided trips that cross
agency boundaries. Outdoor trips typically follow natural features such
as rivers, canyons, and high mountain ridges for ease of travel and
maximum recreational value. Oftentimes, agency boundaries are not
perfectly aligned with these landscape features and in some cases a
group may cross an agency boundary (or multiple agency boundaries) in
the course of a single trip. Under the current system, this requires a
permit from each agency. It is time consuming and costly for guides to
apply for and maintain multiple permits with different agencies. It is
also inefficient for the agencies to issue multiple permits to the same
outfitter for a single activity.

Section 315 of the bill will address these complexities by allowing
the agencies to issue a single joint permit to minimize cost and
administration when a guided trip crosses agency boundaries.

In Section 316, Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
Transitional Special Recreation Permits for Outfitting and Guiding, the
bill directs the agencies to develop and implement a 2-year
transitional permit that can convert to a 5-year or 10-year permit
after four years of satisfactory performance. The creation of a 2-year
permit, and the ability for it to convert to a longer term, will bring
significant new efficiencies in the form of less frequent permit
processing. For example, under current law, a holder of a Forest
Service temporary permit must re-apply for the permit every 180 days.

In Section 318(c), Additional Capacity, the Forest Service is
authorized to assign additional visitor-use days to a recreation
service provider at any time, provided capacity is available. This will
enable recreation service providers to meet the growing demand for
recreational experiences and contribute to the growth of the local
economies, many of which are in rural areas adjacent to federal lands.

In Section 319, Liability, the bill authorizes the agencies to
allow special recreation permit holders to use liability waivers to the
extent they are authorized by applicable state law. Presently, there is
inconsistency among land management agencies, and even within
individual agencies, on the use of liability release forms. The Bureau
of Land Management generally allows them, the U.S. Forest Service
allows them in some locations but not others, and the National Park
Service does not allow them at all. The bill would resolve these
inconsistencies and establish the principle that State law controls the
validity of liability waivers.

In Section 319(b), Indemnification by Government Entities, the bill
directs the agencies to waive the existing indemnification requirement
for state-based institutions that are prohibited by state or local law
from providing indemnification to the United States provided they carry
the minimum required amount of liability insurance. Under current law,
state-based institutions such as colleges, universities, and
municipalities may be unable to hold special recreation permits due to
their inability to fulfill the indemnification requirement. Section
319(b) of the bill would remedy this situation and enable college
outdoor recreation programs and municipal recreation districts, many of
which offer low-cost outdoor courses and trips, to provide outdoor
programs on federal lands.

In Section 320, Cost Recovery Reform, the bill addresses a proposal
released by the Forest Service on March 9, 2023 that would eliminate an
existing fee exemption for the first 50 hours of agency time spent
processing an application for a special recreation permit. If the
Forest Service proposal is approved, special recreation permits will
become significantly more costly. The additional cost will be a major
barrier for small businesses and organizations, especially those who
serve under-represented populations. Section 320 of the EXPLORE Act
would direct the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management to
establish an hourly threshold under which application processing is
exempt from fees. This will allow small businesses and non-profit
organizations to continue providing high-quality outdoor experiences
for the public at a reasonable price.
The opportunities for improvement that are contained in the SOAR
Act, as written in Title III of the EXPLORE Act, are truly bipartisan
in nature. This is demonstrated by the wide range of Democrats,
Republicans, and outdoor industry stakeholders who support the bill. As
further evidence of bipartisan support, the SOAR Act was reported out
of the House Natural Resources Committee with unanimous consent on July
29, 2020 and again on October 13, 2021. The broad array of support is
not by accident. The SOAR Act has been developed over a period of 10
years with extensive input from the outdoor recreation community and in
consultation with conservation groups and land management agencies. The
bill has been carefully written and revised to accommodate the
interests of diverse parties while promulgating change that is much
needed and long overdue. With the SOAR Act, Congress has an opportunity
to enact strong, bipartisan legislation that will truly enhance the
recreational benefits of federal lands and empower the American people
to enjoy them.
AMGA Support for the PARC Act
The American Mountain Guides Association also supports the
Protecting America's Rock Climbing Act because it will preserve access
to guided climbing opportunities in America's wilderness areas. Many
climbs in wilderness areas have occasional fixed anchors--such as a
nylon sling wrapped around a tree, a metal piton placed in a crack, or
a small bolt affixed to the rock--to allow a climbing party to safely
ascend and descend a rock face or a mountain. Guides are highly reliant
upon these fixed anchors to provide an enjoyable and safety-oriented
experience for their clients. Without fixed anchors in place, many of
the ``trade routes'' that guides have been using for decades to operate
their businesses would become unreasonably dangerous, or altogether
impossible. These trade routes exist in iconic wilderness climbing
areas such as Yosemite National Park, CA; Joshua Tree National Park,
CA; the Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest, UT; North Cascades
National Park, WA; Shoshone National Forest, WY; and many others.
Two weeks ago, the U.S. Forest Service and the National Park
Service proposed a new interpretation of the Wilderness Act that would
prohibit fixed anchors in wilderness. This new interpretation goes
against nearly 60 years of precedent in which these federal land
agencies have allowed climbing and the occasional use of fixed anchors
to explore public lands and wilderness areas. The new Forest Service
and National Park Service proposals are problematic for a number of
reasons.
First, the federal land agency proposals would create significant
safety issues by forcing local land managers to consider climbing fixed
anchors as prohibited and implement a costly and time-consuming
administrative exception process every time a climbing anchor needs to
be maintained. The exception process, called a Minimum Requirements
Analysis or ``MRA,'' can take months to complete. With this approach,
the agencies fail to recognize that climbing guides need to maintain
fixed anchors on an immediate basis to ensure the safety of their
clients. A climbing guide can't wait for a months-long approval process
to be completed when an anchor must be maintained in real time for
their climbing team to safely ascend or descend a climb. For example, a
common form of fixed anchor is a nylon sling tied around the base of a
tree. Over time, these slings become deteriorated due to sun, wind,
heat, and cold exposure. If a guide reaches an anchor and finds a
deteriorated nylon sling that is unable to safely secure the climbing
team, it is imperative that the guide be able to repair or replace the
sling on the spot. For decades upon decades, guides have taken
professional responsibility for the safety of their clients in vertical
climbing terrain, which includes the fundamental need to make sure the
climbing team's anchors are secure. The new proposals by the Forest
Service and the National Park Service place an unnecessary
administrative obstacle in front of the routine and standard practice
of replacing fixed anchors that become weathered in unforgiving
environments. The PARC Act is critical legislation that will protect
the ability of guides to provide for the safety of the climbing public
when fixed anchors are required for ascent and descent.
Second, the federal agency proposals threaten appropriate historic
climbing routes that have already been allowed and managed by federal
land agencies. For example, many wilderness climbing routes on El
Capitan in Yosemite National Park rely on a de minimus number of fixed
anchors to protect blank sections of rock where removable climbing gear
is not available. These fixed anchors are thousands of feet up the
wall, occupy a space the size of a matchbox car, and are visible only
to the climbers using them. The situation is the same in other
Wilderness areas such as those in North Cascades National Park, the
Wind River Range, or the Sierra Nevada Range. In fact, approximately
90% of the established climbing routes in America's wilderness areas
are now threatened by the agency proposals despite their negligible
social, environmental, and visual impact. To be clear: America's
climbing history and mountain culture is at risk. At a minimum, the
federal land agency proposals need to be revised to exempt existing
climbing routes that have been previously allowed and have been managed
as appropriate wilderness recreation opportunities.
Third, the proposals do not align with current land agency policies
and management practices. In 2013, the National Park Service issued
Director's Order 41 (DO41), which provided specific management
direction for climbing in wilderness. DO41 establishes the principle
that fixed anchors should be rare in wilderness, it prohibits any type
of bolt-intensive climbs, and it requires prior authorization for the
placement of new fixed anchors in wilderness. On the topic of fixed
anchor maintenance, DO41 states that maintenance of fixed anchors
``may'' require prior authorization--a reasonable and practical
approach that generally allows for critical maintenance to be performed
on site without prior authorization, but which provides the agency with
discretion to require prior authorization in specific, unique
circumstances.
DO41 clearly allows for the occasional use and maintenance of fixed
anchors in wilderness and requires either programmatic or site-specific
authorization for the placement of new fixed anchors. The policy made
it clear that fixed anchors were allowed, yet regulated, and the
climbing community accepted it. These guidelines demonstrate that land
managers already have a template to manage climbing effectively and
protect the climbing resource, including wilderness character, while
providing valuable visitor experiences and supporting local economies.
The new proposal by the National Park Service is vastly at odds with
DO41 and would undo decades of collaborative effort between climbers
and the agency.
The National Park Service and U.S. Forest Service currently--and
successfully--implement numerous Wilderness Management Plans at park
units and national forests that specifically allow for the conditional
placement and replacement of fixed anchors in wilderness. Reversing
these existing plans with new impractical and costly proposals would
create safety concerns, erase historic climbing achievements, and block
future generations from safely experiencing the world's greatest
climbing venues.

The EXPLORE Act, via the PARC Act, will bring consistency and
predictability to climbing management by providing the land management
agencies with clear direction from Congress, especially regarding
climbing management within wilderness areas. It is a simple and elegant
solution that will:

1.  Require the Secretaries of Interior and Agriculture to issue
national guidance on management of climbing within
wilderness areas;

2.  Clarify that climbing and the use of fixed anchors are allowable
uses within wilderness areas;

3.  Preserve the existing authority of land management agencies to
regulate climbing to ensure it protects wilderness
characteristics, natural resources, and cultural values;
and,

4.  Provide for public participation in decisions affecting climbing
in wilderness areas.

If guides are no longer able to freely use and maintain existing
wilderness fixed anchors, and occasionally place a new fixed anchor
with prior authorization, the American public would be deprived of the
opportunity to experience the unique character of wilderness climbing.
Guiding businesses would also face severe economic impacts, which are
not to be understated. Many climbing guide services are small
businesses that employ local workers in rural communities adjacent to
federal lands. If a guide service is forced to cease or limit its
operations in wilderness, it could cause irreparable harm to the
business, the workers, and the economy of the local community.
For the aforementioned reasons, the American Mountain Guides
Association strongly supports the EXPLORE Act--and the SOAR Act and
PARC Act included therein--that would modernize the guide and outfitter
permitting process and allow for the use, placement, and maintenance of
climbing fixed anchors in wilderness areas. Thank you for the
opportunity to share our perspective. We look forward to working with
Congress to implement the improvements and critical measures contained
in the EXPLORE Act.

Sincerely,

Matt Wade,
Executive Director
______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Grijalva

Prepared Statement of the Hon. Raul M. Grijalva, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Arizona
on the EXPLORE Act

Mr. Chairman, thank you for the time and your partnership on this
important legislation.
I'm pleased to be here, discussing a renewed, bipartisan effort to
continue the conversation around outdoor recreation on our public
lands.
The American people's love of our public lands and spending time
outdoors is growing every year. Recreation has been a boon for local
economies and job creation.
But our public land management agencies also must have the tools,
resources, and staff they need to keep up.
The EXPLORE Act is a much-needed starting point for making sure we
have improved, more equitable access for recreational pursuits.
This legislation holds the potential to be a significant bipartisan
win. I am pleased that key provisions sponsored by House Democrats are
in this package, including Congresswoman Barragan's legislation, The
Outdoors for All Act.
Recreation and being outdoors is important for both our mental and
physical health. This isn't something that should be reserved for just
a select few.
Everyone should have easy access to the outdoors and the benefits
they provide.
We must ensure that urbanized and densely populated communities,
which have historically been left out of the recreation conversation,
are a part of this legislation.
That's why I'm excited that the EXPLORE Act permanently authorizes
the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership program so that urban and
low-income communities can continue to access federal support for
outdoor recreation opportunities.
The outdoors are for all.
I want to make clear that this legislation is a work in progress.
This hearing today is an important step in that process.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and working with
my Republican colleagues to consider any changes that are recommended
by our partners.
We will need to continue this discussion beyond today's hearing
with federal land management agencies, outdoor recreation industry
interests, conservation organizations, and other stakeholders about the
impacts of outdoor recreation in federal lands; including how to best
protect and preserve public lands.
To close, I would also like to emphasize that as we move forward
with this legislation, we must prioritize conservation, access, and
restoration to uplift the protected places that are the backbone of the
outdoor recreation economy.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and I yield back.

______

NATIONAL PARKS CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION

Washington, DC

November 29, 2023

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: NPCA position on the EXPLORE Act

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

Since 1919, National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) has been
the leading voice of the American people in protecting and enhancing
our National Park System. On behalf of our 1.6 million members and
supporters nationwide, I want to share our remaining concerns and areas
of support for the proposed EXPLORE Act.
NPCA appreciates the intent of the EXPLORE Act as national parks
reach the height of their popularity with over 300 million visits. NPCA
hopes the Committee will work with us to make changes to improve the
bill for park staff and visitors.
The last few years have shown just how important getting into the
outdoors is to the American public and the Explore Act contains
numerous provisions that forward this priority. NPCA supports efforts
to make our national parks and other public lands accessible to those
with disabilities, including for our military and veterans. Title II--
Access America directs the federal land management agencies, including
the National Park Service, to develop adaptive trails and adaptive
recreation opportunities for those with physical disabilities. We
support these efforts to catalog and create adaptive trails and
recreation opportunities and ensure those opportunities are promoted
for people to enjoy. We strongly encourage Congress to provide
increased funding through annual appropriations to ensure the agencies
succeed in these efforts.
In addition to the Title II, there are specific sections that NPCA
is pleased to see included in the EXPLORE Act. Sec. 113 increases
coordination across multiple Federal agencies as our public lands
experience record breaking visitation. Sec. 156 supports the Outdoor
Recreation Legacy Partnership, a national grant program that develops
recreational infrastructure in communities that have been traditionally
under-resourced. Sections 231 and 232 increase access to outdoor
experiences by supporting Every Kid Outdoors Act and encouraging
strategic efforts to increase youth visitation on public lands.
Sections 321 and 322 would make entrance, recreation, and America the
Beautiful passes available for purchase online.
However, there are also sections of this wide-reaching legislation
that require further clarification and modification to ensure the best
possible outcome for America's public lands and national parks. NPCA is
opposed to Sec. 126, which would fundamentally alter wildlife
management in the National Park System. Decisions on culling on
National Park Service (NPS) lands should be rooted in science and
utilized as a crucial wildlife management tool to ensure biodiversity
in a park is maintained. Culling efforts within the legislated boundary
of a national park is led by the government, or its authorized agent,
to meet clear conservation goals. This effort is contrary to the NPS
mission and standards for culling by essentially creating incentives
for trophy hunting in parks where hunting is prohibited. This text
would not add value to the science-driven, professional approach the
National Park Service utilizes in wildlife management.
Visitation within certain iconic units of the National Park System
continues to be at, or near, record highs. This sustained increase in
visitors presents opportunities for new visitors to enjoy and learn
from America's natural and cultural treasures. However, overcrowding
also presents new challenges for land managers as they work to
guarantee a positive visitor experience that protects these special
places. Sections 131 and 132 attempt to resolve some of these issues
through the collection and dissemination of visitation data.
Unfortunately, these sections present an unfunded mandate to land
management agencies, who will be unable to successfully implement this
strategy without significant federal funding. As Sec. 141 of this
legislation illustrates, further infrastructure investments would be
needed on our public lands to guarantee the necessary internet access
required for real-time data collection. NPCA is not convinced that
federal land management agencies have the corresponding staff who can
analyze and ensure integrity of the collected data. Since the data is
intended for public use, Congress should ensure its accuracy and
efficacy, even if that data is collected by a private sector partner.
Some of these strategies have already been undertaken by private
companies, and Congress should ensure that the intent of this text
isn't unintentionally duplicating private sector efforts. Finally,
these sections lack a definition of ``suitable'' locations for
developing, expanding, or enhancing recreation use. We need to ensure
these sites are sufficient to support estimated visitor increases
without degrading visitor experiences or damaging natural and cultural
resources such as riparian areas, sensitive species, wildlife habitat
and migration areas, and Indigenous sites and sacred cultural areas.
While NCPA supports efforts to address the employee housing
shortages in and near the national parks, we are concerned about
language in Sec. 151 that allows the general public to be housed on
national park land beyond those that work closely with the park such as
concessioners, cooperating association employees and other partners.
The NPS provides housing to employees when conditions of employment
warrant it or due to a lack of availability elsewhere. The lack of
affordable housing across the country is becoming a crisis for national
park staff. National park managers throughout the country are
struggling to provide adequate and affordable housing for their
employees.
NPCA supports creative ideas to address these housing needs for
national parks employees and partners. The EXPLORE Act expands the
Secretary of the Interior's authority to enter into partnerships with
other federal agencies, states, local governments, tribal governments,
housing entities, and other public and private organizations to
develop, construct, rehabilitate or manage housing affordable housing
for federal employees, their families and the public. This expanded
authority allows the housing to be located both on and off public lands
and NPCA supports the extension of the current authority to allow for
these partnerships. We do not believe the general public should live in
national park housing--Congress must ensure park employees can perform
their duties by maintaining a supply of housing for them.
A 21st century Park Service requires not only bold thinking, but
investments in the staff and technology that are the foundational tools
necessary to uphold the NPS mandate as outlined in the Organic Act.
NPCA looks forward to working with Congress and this Committee as this
legislation moves forward.
If you have any questions or need additional information, please
contact NPCA's Visitor Experience Program Manager Tucker Johnson
(
[emailprotected]
).
Thank you for considering our views.

Sincerely,

Christina Hazard,
Legislative Director, Government Affairs

______

OUTDOOR ALLIANCE

November 29, 2023

Hon. Tom Tiffany, Chairman
Hon. Joe Neguse, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Federal Lands
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Re: EXPLORE Act legislative hearing

Dear Chairman Tiffany and Ranking Member Neguse:

On behalf of the human-powered outdoor recreation community, thank
you for the Subcommittee's diligent work towards the bipartisan
development of the Expanding Public Lands Outdoor Recreation
Experiences (EXPLORE) Act and for holding the Subcommittee's November
30 hearing. We are enthusiastic about the Subcommittee's efforts and
look forward to continuing to work with you to refine the EXPLORE Act.
Protecting and enhancing high-quality outdoor recreation
experiences on public lands and waters requires two things:
conservation for the lands and waters on which these experiences
depend, and sound management for outdoor recreation. The EXPLORE Act
proposes important steps to better manage public lands and waters for
recreation and improve opportunities for sustainable and equitable
recreation access. The opportunity to enjoy public lands and waters
improves peoples' lives, enhances their connection to the natural
world, and also supports the outdoor recreation economy, which,
according to the most recent numbers from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, supported more than 1 trillion dollars in gross economic
output and nearly 5 million jobs.
Outdoor Alliance is a coalition of ten member-based organizations
representing the human powered outdoor recreation community. The
coalition includes Access Fund, American Canoe Association, American
Whitewater, International Mountain Bicycling Association, Winter
Wildlands Alliance, The Mountaineers, the American Alpine Club, the
Mazamas, Colorado Mountain Club, and Surfrider Foundation and
represents the interests of the millions of Americans who climb,
paddle, mountain bike, backcountry ski and snowshoe, and enjoy coastal
recreation on our nation's public lands, waters, and snowscapes.

Our specific comments follow. We request the Subcommittee's
particular attention to necessary changes to the following sections:

Sec. 112, Identifying opportunities for outdoor recreation
(p. 2 below);

Sec. 123, Range access (p. 5 below);

Sec. 127, Motorized and nonmotorized access (p. 6 below).

Title I, Outdoor Recreation and Infrastructure
Subtitle A--Outdoor Recreation Policy

Outdoor Alliance strongly supports the EXPLORE Act's congressional
declaration of policy, legislative support for FICOR, and recreation
budget crosscut. We would like to work with the Subcommittee, however,
to further refine Sec. 112, Identifying opportunities for recreation,
which can be improved to reduce burden on the land management agencies
and ensure that agencies are able to employ the results of the
contemplated inventory to support high-quality recreation experiences.

In general, we support the reorientation of Sec. 112 to support the
sound management of high-quality recreation resources on public lands
and waters. To do this, we request the following changes:

In Sec. 112(b)(1)(B), rather than publishing the inventory
and assessment for public comment, public comment should be
the basis for the assessment process. The outdoor
recreation community will nearly always be in the best
position to provide the information that will form the
basis for the assessment and inventory, and encouraging
robust public outreach from agencies will be the best way
to ensure a sound assessment.

Reduce the requirements on agencies in
Sec. Sec. 112(b)(3). Sec. 112(b)(3)(A)-(D) will be
particularly onerous on agencies, and we are particularly
concerned that, while costs and conflicts will be
relatively easy for agencies to document, demand, projected
demand, and benefits will be much more difficult to
determine. This may create an inadvertent incentive for
agencies to curtail recreation access. Sec. Sec. (E)-(G)
will be more valuable for agencies to consider, and we
support their retention.

Amend Sec. 112(c)(1) to avoid directing land managers to
judge areas as ``underutilized'' and ``encourage'' use. The
opportunity to recreate in a high-quality landscape free
from crowds is itself a very important recreation value. In
general, ``underutilized'' is not a useful rubric for
considering the management of areas where the opportunity
for quiet or solitude may be an important value.
Additionally, land management agencies are likely not well
equipped to ``encourage recreation use'' given the
multitude of factors--from the quality of a given resource
for a particular pursuit, to the popularity of particular
locations on social media--that strongly affect use
patterns. Land managers should focus on supporting the
stewardship of high-quality recreation opportunities.

A proposed redline to Sec. 112 is attached as Appendix 1.
Subtitle B--Public Recreation on Federal Recreational Lands and Waters

Outdoor Alliance strongly supports Subtitle B's provisions to
safeguard Wilderness climbing opportunities and promote mountain biking
as a sustainable outdoor recreation opportunity. We also have concerns
and suggested changes to sections addressing shooting range access and
travel management planning, which we have noted below.
Outdoor Alliance strongly supports Sec. 121, Biking on Long
Distance Trails, which would promote mountain biking as a sustainable
recreation activity on federal lands by identifying opportunities for
long-distance bike trails. This section would diversify outdoor
infrastructure by expanding long-distance bike trails across America's
federal public lands. By providing opportunities for trail users,
Congress can create pathways to positive physical and mental health,
and this legislation supports these goals. Sec. 121 will direct federal
land managers within the Department of Interior and USDA Forest Service
to 1) identify no fewer than 10 existing long-distance bike trails not
shorter than 80 miles; 2) identify not fewer than 10 opportunities to
develop or complete long-distance trails not less than 80 miles; 3)
create maps, signage, and promotional materials for long-distance
trails; and 4) issue a progress report no later than 2 years after
enactment. We appreciate Sec. 121's attention to these special
opportunities and resources.
Outdoor Alliance strongly supports Sec. 122, Protecting America's
Rock Climbing Act, which would safeguard Wilderness climbing
opportunities by directing the establishment of national-level guidance
for the placement and maintenance of fixed climbing anchors in
Wilderness areas. Wilderness areas are integral to America's climbing
history, and climbers were among the original supporters of the
Wilderness Act. Many of America's most iconic climbing areas, including
Yosemite's El Capitan and the Diamond in Rocky Mountain National Park,
lie within federal Wilderness areas, and climbers benefit greatly from
the Wilderness character found in these areas. Fixed anchors are
essential tools in a climber's safety system. These include bolts,
slings, pitons, and other tools long used by climbers to safely and
sustainably ascend and descend technical terrain. Fixed anchors are
found in Wilderness areas throughout the country, and many pre-date the
Wilderness Act. Despite climbing's longtime status as an established
use in Wilderness areas, there has never been a consistent federal
policy for managing fixed anchors within Wilderness across agencies.
Section 122 is especially critical in light of recent actions by
the U.S. Forest Service and the National Park Service. Earlier this
month, these agencies issued draft climbing management guidance
adopting a new interpretation of the Wilderness Act that considers
fixed anchors as prohibited ``installations.'' \1\ The draft guidance
creates significant uncertainty around the legality of existing fixed
anchors, as well as climbers' ability to safely maintain and develop
new and existing routes. Sec. 122 would support the outdoor recreation
community's work to improve the draft guidance by restating Congress's
intent that climbing--including the judicious use of fixed anchors--is
an allowable use within Wilderness areas. This section will provide
certainty that climbers can continue to enjoy sustainable access to
some of the world's most treasured climbing areas without amending the
Wilderness Act or changing long established Wilderness management.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, FSM 2355
Climbing Opportunities #ORMS-3524, available at https://
cara.fs2c.usda.gov/Public/CommentInput?project=ORMS-3524; U.S.
Department of Interior, National Park Service, Evaluation and
Authorization Procedures for Fixed Anchors and Fixed Equipment in
National Park Service Wilderness Areas, available at https://
parkplanning.nps.gov/document.cfm?documentID=132387.

Outdoor Alliance is concerned by several aspects of Sec. 123, Range
Access. Our organizations generally support thoughtfully-sited
designated shooting ranges on public land, as unmanaged and unregulated
target shooting on public lands is a safety and resource protection
hazard in many locations across the United States. Designated areas for
this activity would improve public safety and reduce impacts to public
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
lands. We respectfully recommend the follow edits to this section:

First, we are concerned that Section 2(c)(2) could prevent
closing areas of Federal land to shooting unless a target
shooting range is made available. This creates a potential
public safety hazard, especially given the Forest Service
and BLM's limited ability to quickly designate target
shooting ranges due to capacity constraints. Such closures
have been necessary to protect National Forest lands and
ensure public safety, particularly in high-use recreation
areas in close proximity to urban areas. We request that
the text be amended to allow for closures for public safety
or resource protection in addition to ``emergency
situations.''

Second, we believe that the presence of a minimum of one
range per National Forest or BLM unit is arbitrary, and the
legislation should, rather, encourage agencies to evaluate
the need for additional developed shooting areas.

We would strongly support the addition of provisions to
require planning for shooting area cleanup, including lead
removal. Given these likely costs, we strongly support the
elimination of the exemptions for these areas from
collecting fees under the Federal Lands Recreation
Enhancement Act, both as a matter of ensuring resources for
management and as a matter of equitability with other
public land users.

Outdoor Alliance appreciates Sec. 125, Federal Interior Land
Media's intent to update the permitting process for commercial filming
to account for modern technology and modern formats for distributing
media that blur the distinction between commercial and noncommercial
activities. We support adding an additional requirement that commercial
film crews acquire an online, no-cost permit that would provide an
opportunity to educate production crews about best practices for
filming on federal lands and establish a point of responsibility
between film crews and federal agencies. This would provide an
important opportunity to help minimize impacts on recreational,
cultural, and ecological resources.
Outdoor Alliance requests changes to Sec. 127, Motorized and Non-
Motorized Access. We are very much in support of making appropriate
travel management planning for motorized vehicle use on federal land a
priority, including the subsequent development of practical motor
vehicle and over-snow vehicle use maps for the benefit of the
recreating public. Meaningful travel management--the determination of
an appropriate and sustainable network of roads, trails, and areas for
motor vehicle use on public lands in all seasons--has been a goal of
federal land management agencies since at least the early 1970s.
Motorized travel is an important and legitimate use on public lands,
both for public access and for recreation. But as motorized
recreational use has increased over the years--and as the technological
capability of off-road and over-snow vehicles has improved--so too have
impacts increased to natural resources, wildlife, and other, non-
motorized uses of the same public lands. The need for effective
management based on appropriate planning has never been more urgent
than it is today.

In order to accurately reflect the existing travel management
planning process for both the BLM and Forest Service, we respectfully
recommend incorporating the following edits to Sec. 127:

Appropriately reference the end-product of BLM travel
management planning by referring to BLM plans as a ``ground
transportation linear feature dataset'' and reference the
processes that create this dataset: ``travel management
plans'' and ``winter travel management plans''.

Change ``seek to create additional opportunities'' to
``seek to improve opportunities'' in Sec. 127(d). Creating
new infrastructure is not always the path towards better
recreation access, especially when the BLM and Forest
Service already struggle to maintain their existing road
and trail networks. By directing the Secretaries to seek to
improve opportunities rather than simply to seek to create
additional opportunities, the EXPLORE Act opens the door to
pursuing a broader array of options for improving outdoor
recreation, such as maintaining existing trail networks or
building new trail segments that create (much-desired) loop
opportunities.

Remove the savings clause at Sec. 127(e). Existing agency
regulations already specify that motorized and non-
motorized uses are allowed even when agencies have not yet
completed motor vehicle use maps, over-snow vehicle use
maps, or ground transportation linear feature datasets.

A proposed redline to Sec.  127is attached as Appendix 2.
Subtitle C--Supporting Gateway Communities and Addressing Park
Overcrowding

Outdoor Alliance supports Subtitle C, which provides support to
gateway communities and improves how agencies record and monitor
recreation visitation data.

Section 131, Gateway Communities, will help gateway communities
capitalize on their proximity to recreation amenities in building local
economies. The significance of outdoor recreation-related tourism in
gateway communities has grown in recent years, and as more communities
adapt to high levels of visitation and invest in their outdoor
economies, additional support and collaboration from federal land
managers can help address housing costs, infrastructure needs,
workforce development, and other issues that can accompany recreation-
related economic growth. To accomplish this goal, Sec. 131 requires
federal agencies to work with state, local, Tribal, and nonprofit
partners to create a needs assessment of gateway communities, and the
bill would provide new pathways for resource sharing between the
federal government and local communities.
We also appreciate Sec. 132, which improves how federal agencies
communicate with the public regarding visitation to public lands.
Current agency reporting makes it difficult for the public--and often
land managers themselves--to understand the true location, extent,
seasonality, and timing of recreational use across public lands.
Innovative approaches like the proposed Real-time Data Pilot Program
will help agencies adapt their recreation management to better account
for where and when significant recreational use is occurring, including
by identifying lesser-known recreation sites. This goal of improving
recreation use data is further supported by Sec. 133, which would
require certain land management units to establish protocols to model
recreation use patterns.
Subtitle D--Broadband Connectivity on Federal Recreational Lands and
Waters

Outdoor Alliance generally supports Subtitle D, which would
facilitate the expansion of broadband and cellular service at National
Parks and in certain developed recreation sites. However, given the
broad range of deferred maintenance and other infrastructure needs--
including improved internet connectivity for rural gateway
communities--we prefer that the resources envisioned by this subtitle
be directed as strategically as possible and in a way that does not
interfere with existing undeveloped and backcountry recreation
opportunities. To this end, we appreciate the provisions of Sec. 141
prioritizing broadband expansion for more developed sites within
National Parks and prioritizing cellular service in areas needed by the
public to access emergency services. We also appreciate Sec. 141's
protections for viewsheds, natural and cultural resources, and the
National Park visitor experience.
Subtitle E--Public-Private Parks Partnerships

Outdoor Alliance supports portions of Subtitle E, particularly
Sec. 156, which would codify the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership
(ORLP), a grant program that improves access to outdoor recreation
opportunities in underserved communities. We also have concerns with
several sections of this subtitle, which we have noted below.
Section 151, Lodging Options Developed for Government Employees,
seeks to address the issue of housing shortages in and around National
Parks and National Forests. Housing costs in public lands gateway
communities have skyrocketed in recent years, and a lack of affordable
housing has become a major hurdle for government agencies seeking to
build the workforce needed to sustainably manage public lands. Outdoor
Alliance supports efforts to address housing shortages for government
employees; however, we recommend strengthening Sec. 151 by further
prioritizing housing for federal employees and by providing additional
transparency for members of the public. Regarding Sec. 151(a), which
addresses the National Park Service, we recommend strengthening the
proposed language at Sec. 101334(c)(4) to give preference to federal
employees to the maximum extent possible, particularly for housing that
is located on federal land. Regarding Sec. 151(c), which addresses the
U.S. Forest Service, we recommend the agency be required to make a list
of its administrative sites available to members of the public and
provide for public comment prior to leasing a site for development
under this section. Finally, while we are not opposed to providing
housing for federal employees on public lands, we strongly prefer that
gateway communities be encouraged to plan for sustainable growth within
existing private lands.
Outdoor Alliance is similarly concerned by Sec. 153, which would
establish a pilot program enabling federal land managers to enter into
agreements with state, local, and Tribal governments, as well as
nonprofit organizations and private entities, to restore and maintain
certain recreational facilities such as campgrounds, resorts, cabins,
and visitor centers on federal lands. In general, our community
strongly prefers that land management agencies be adequately funded to
maintain recreational facilities and is concerned by efforts to de
facto privatize these resources. Additionally, we are concerned by the
potential of these efforts to displace public lands visitors who prefer
a less developed experience, as well as the potential for these changes
to increase costs and undercut efforts to make public lands accessible
to everyone. We believe it would also be prudent for land managers to
be instructed to consider the effect on adjacent resources (including
areas popular or potentially popular for dispersed camping) as users
who do not prefer, or cannot afford, these developed options are
displaced. We request that the scale of this proposal be reduced to one
unit of the National Forest System and one unit of BLM land.
Outdoor Alliance supports Sec. 154, Parking Opportunities for
Federal Recreational Lands and Waters, which would provide federal land
managers with new authorities to increase parking areas on federal
lands, where appropriate. As outdoor recreation participation grows,
parking at some recreation areas has become increasingly limited, often
creating a public safety hazard for recreationists as well as for
members of the general public. We especially appreciate that Sec. 154
provides land managers with the authority to provide for alternative
transportation systems, which can help alleviate the need for
additional parking.
Outdoor Alliance strongly supports Sec. 156, which would codify and
make permanent the Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership, a grant
program to improve access to outdoor recreation opportunities in
underserved communities. Outdoor recreation is the most common way in
which Americans come to know their public lands and waters and develop
a stewardship ethic. Recreation activities help provide a connection to
place; personal and health benefits; community connection; and vibrant
economies. Too many Americans, however, lack ready access to these
opportunities. ORLP helps make recreation and conservation funding
available to the communities that need it most. We strongly support
making this program permanent. We also strongly recommend adding
language included in Sec. 406(b)(2)(B) of America's Outdoor Recreation
Act of 2023 (S. 873) allowing the Secretary to waive the matching funds
requirement if an eligible entity has no reasonable means for meeting
the matching funds requirement and the public benefit of a project
outweighs the public interest in the matching requirement. This
provision is necessary to ensure that ORLP funds are available to
smaller organizations and marginalized communities that often do not
have access to the resources necessary to raise matching funds. In many
cases, these are the exact communities that ORLP was designed to
benefit, and adding this provision will help to ensure that these funds
are spent where they are most needed.
Title II, Access America

Outdoor Alliance strongly supports Title II, which would expand
outdoor recreation opportunities for military service members,
veterans, people with disabilities, and young people. Spending time in
the outdoors has been proven to provide a wide variety of physical and
mental health benefits, and this title would make these benefits more
readily available to segments of the population where they are vitally
needed.
Subtitle A--Access for People With Disabilities

Subtitle A would expand access to outdoor recreation on public
lands for people with disabilities by evaluating the accessibility of
existing recreation infrastructure, by directing land managers to
develop new accessible recreation opportunities, and by making
assistive technology more readily available on federal public lands.
Outdoor Alliance especially appreciates that Sec. 215 includes biking,
rock climbing, and snow sports within the list of accessible recreation
opportunities. As adaptive technology continues to improve,
recreationists with disabilities will have increased ability to pursue
these activities on federal lands. We also recommend that Sec. 212
clarify the extent of the comprehensive trails inventory envisioned by
Sec. 212(a)(1). As worded, this section suggests that land managers may
be required to inventory every trail on public lands for
accessibility--a potentially unachievable task without significant
dedicated funding.
Subtitle B--Military and Veterans in Parks

Subtitle B would expand outdoor access for military service members
and veterans by expanding resources for outdoor education, facilitating
new outdoor recreation programs, promoting outdoor career opportunities
for veterans, and more. Research shows that outdoor recreation can help
alleviate mental health issues common to veterans including post-
traumatic stress disorder.\2\ Outdoor Alliance strongly supports this
subtitle, which would make these benefits more easily attainable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, Mark Wheeler, Nicholas R. Cooper, et al, Outdoor
recreational activity experiences improve psychological wellbeing of
military veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder: Positive
findings from a pilot study and a randomised controlled trial, 15(11)
PLoS One (2020); Joanna Ellen Bettmann, Ileana Anderson, Joe Makouske,
and Adam Hanley, Mental Health Outcomes of Peer-led Therapeutic
Adventure for Military Veterans, 45(3) Journal of Experiential
Education (2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subtitle C--Youth Access

Subtitle C would increase youth participation in outdoor activities
by directing land managers to create a national strategy for youth
recreation, and by extending the existing Every Kid Outdoors program.
The Every Kid Outdoors Program encourages fourth graders to experience
America's public lands and waters by providing free access to thousands
of sites throughout the U.S., including National Parks. This program
helps to give kids the opportunity to experience outdoor recreation
early in life, which can have lifelong health benefits and helps
inspire the next generation of caretakers for America's public lands.
The John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act,
which codified this program in 2019, included a sunset provision that
would cause the program to expire in 2026. Sec. 232 would extend this
important program for an additional seven years.
Title III, Simplifying Outdoor Access for Recreation

Outdoor Alliance strongly supports Title III, Simplifying Outdoor
Access for Recreation, which would facilitate meaningful outdoor
experiences by improving the recreational permitting systems for
outfitters and guides. For many people, guided outdoor experiences
provide a first exposure to more adventurous forms of outdoor
recreation and to the natural world. These opportunities are essential
for allowing new participants to experience outdoor recreation
activities in a safe environment that allows for skill building and
helps participants become more conscientious visitors to sensitive
landscapes.

The ability for facilitated access providers to offer these
experiences is dependent on a challenging and dated system for special
use permitting for public lands activities. Title III will improve the
recreational permitting systems so more people can experience public
lands through volunteer-based clubs or with an outfitter, guide,
nonprofit outdoor leadership organization, or university outdoor
program. We are particularly supportive of provisions in the Title III
that would:

Direct the Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior to
identify opportunities to improve the special recreation
permitting process (Sec. 312);

Allow outfitters' unused surplus service days to be made
available to other potential permittees (Sec. 313);

Allow outfitters and guides to engage in activities that
are substantially similar to the activities specified in
their permit (Sec. 313);

Make information about the availability of the special
recreation permits available online (Sec. 314);

Allow agencies to provide permits for multi-jurisdictional
trips under a single joint permit (Sec. 315);

Encourage agencies to allow purchasers to buy a federal
and state recreation pass in a single transaction
(Sec. 321);

Make the America the Beautiful Pass and other federal
recreation passes available for purchase online (Sec. 322);

Extend the duration of the recreation season to cover a
broader period of the year where recreational activities
are occurring (Sec. 331);

Encourage federal agencies to enhance recreation
opportunities through private-sector volunteer programs
(Sec. 341);

Require an interagency report on special recreation
permits in underserved communities (Sec. 353).

Together, these changes would simplify and modernize recreation
permitting to make guided outdoor experiences more easily accessible to
the American public.
Finally, we respectfully recommend that Sec. 352 Permit Relief for
Picnic Areas specify what exactly is intended by serving fewer than 40
clients. Without clarification, Sec. 352 could be interpreted to allow
an outfitter, guide, or youth group to bring 40 clients per day to a
picnic area. This could result in significant user conflict and
unacceptable adverse resource effects. We recommend that the permit
waiver be limited to a level of use that is unlikely to have
significant impacts, such as capping the waiver so that it allows an
outdoor leader to serve 40 clients per year (40 service days) at any
given picnic area.

Thank you for considering our community's input and thank you for
your diligent work to enhance sustainable outdoor recreation access on
America's public lands and waters. We look forward to continuing to
work with you to advance strong bipartisan outdoor recreation
legislation in the 118th Congress.

Best regards,

Louis Geltman,
Vice President for Policy and Government Relations

*****

APPENDIX 1

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

APPENDIX 2

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
