- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE BUREAU OF OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT, THE BUREAU OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT, AND THE OFFICE OF NATURAL RESOURCES REVENUE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S FY 2025
BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE BUREAU OF
OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT,
THE BUREAU OF SAFETY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT,
AND THE OFFICE OF NATURAL
RESOURCES REVENUE

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Thursday, May 23, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-125

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-753 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

PETE STAUBER, MN, Chairman
WESLEY P. HUNT, TX, Vice Chair
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, NY, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Jared Huffman, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Kevin Mullin, CA
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Seth Magaziner, RI
Daniel Webster, FL                   Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Debbie Dingell, MI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Susie Lee, NV
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Vacancy
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Vacancy
Mike Collins, GA
John Duarte, CA
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, May 23, 2024...........................     1

Statement of Members:

Stauber, Hon. Pete, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Minnesota.........................................     1

Kamlager-Dove, Hon. Sydney, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:

Klein, Liz, Director, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management,
Washington, DC.............................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     6
Questions submitted for the record.......................    10

Sligh, Kevin, Director, Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement, Washington, DC................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    13
Questions submitted for the record.......................    18

Cantor, Howard, Director, Office of Natural Resources
Revenue, Denver, Colorado..................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Questions submitted for the record.......................    22

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Graves

``Big Oil's Record Profits''.............................    39

Submissions for the Record by Representative Huffman

IMF Working Paper, ``Global Fossil Fuel Subsidies Remain
Large: An Update Based on Country-Level Estimates......    33

Final Vote Results for Roll Call 385, ``Build Back Better
Act''..................................................    34

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING THE
PRESIDENT'S FY 2025 BUDGET
REQUEST FOR THE BUREAU OF OCEAN
ENERGY MANAGEMENT, THE BUREAU OF
SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
ENFORCEMENT, AND THE OFFICE OF
NATURAL RESOURCES REVENUE

----------

Thursday, May 23, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Pete Stauber
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Stauber, Gosar, Graves, Westerman;
Huffman, and Kamlager-Dove.
Also present: Representative Carl.

Mr. Stauber. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Alabama,
Mr. Carl, be allowed to participate in today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I am now going to recognize myself for an opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETE STAUBER, A REPRESENTA-
TIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MINNESOTA

Mr. Stauber. This morning, the Energy and Mineral Resources
Subcommittee will review the Fiscal Year 2025 budget request
for three agencies at the Department of the Interior charged
with development of offshore resources in Federal waters,
safety of offshore operations, and collection and management of
Federal energy revenues.
As we approach the twilight of this Administration, many of
us eagerly anticipate an end to the regulatory onslaught that
has smothered economic activity offshore with layers of
bureaucratic red tape and new fees. The Biden administration's
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management has deliberately ignored
statutory mandates for 4 consecutive years, proving themselves
ineffective stewards of our offshore resources.
Despite these failures and transgressions, BOEM is
requesting more funding in Fiscal Year 2025. BOEM stands nearly
2 years late in rolling out a new, 5-year plan for offshore and
oil and gas development, an unprecedented delay in the
program's 44-year history.
Today, we will hear promises from the Administration that,
despite delays, this plan will soon take effect. They might
downplay their control over a disappointing, inadequate three
lease sale schedule. I expect Director Klein will claim these
sales were merely steps to ensure the Bureau could hold future
sales for wind leasing, offering minimal hope BOEM will hold
them if the wind leasing demand is diminished in the future.
It would be profoundly naive for any American or member of
this Committee to accept at face value assurances on offshore
and oil and gas from Liz Klein and the Department of the
Interior, especially after their clear reluctance to publish
the plan they now vow to implement.
In preparation for 2025, BOEM must focus on the singular
Lease Sale 262, ensuring this sale offers premier acreage in
the Gulf of Mexico. Known for yielding the world's cleanest oil
in terms of emission, keeping energy costs affordable, and
bolstering American energy independence, we cannot let the
Department of the Interior sacrifice the livelihoods and
security of Americans on the altar of hollow commitments to
environmental activists who care very little about our current
or future energy needs.
Taking notice of BOEM's track record of canceling offshore
sales, Congress had to mandate our nation's last three lease
sales: 258, 259, and 261 in Alaska and the Gulf. These sales
alone have generated over $645 million in bids, and promise
billions in royalties from 4 million OCS acres. They also
contributed to conservation and preservation efforts through
the Land and Water Conservation Fund, LWCF, state and local
allocations via GOMESA, and the Historic Preservation Fund.
Canceling lease sales represents a blatant dereliction of
duty, a profound disrespect to our nation's resource
management, and a deliberate betrayal of the American people's
trust, undermining the very foundation of our energy security.
If the Department of the Interior truly prioritized
environmental concerns, they would champion the expansion of
oil and gas leasing in the Gulf of Mexico. More leasing means
more funding for LWCF, GOMESA, and historic preservation,
translating into more jobs, better benefits, enhanced community
funding, and cleaner, more affordable energy.
The Office of Natural Resources Revenue, ONRR, which
reminds the public to pronounce its acronym like the word
``honor,'' also has betrayed Americans' trust. Rather than
fulfilling its fiduciary role, managing billions of dollars in
annual revenues generated mostly through energy and mineral
leases, ONRR has arbitrarily denied overpayment refund requests
and ignored conflicts of interest. When industry contacts ONRR
for regulatory guidance, the agency's response can be
summarized as, ``Rules for thee, but not for me.''
Worse yet, evidence suggests that ONRR staff ignored legal
advice from the agency's own attorneys and attempted to delete
communications to keep them from being included in any
administrative record. Bad actors at ONRR must be held
accountable to ensure energy and mineral revenues are properly
managed, and all stakeholders are treated fairly.

I now recognize the Ranking Member for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SYDNEY KAMLAGER-DOVE, A REP-
RESENTATIVE  IN  CONGRESS   FROM  THE  STATE  OF
CALIFORNIA

Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to
Director Klein, Director Sligh, and Director Cantor, for taking
time to be with us here today.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, the Bureau of Safety
and Environmental Enforcement, and the Office of Natural
Resources Revenue are agencies critical to helping our country
achieve our climate and clean energy goals, and support
communities through the energy transition: efforts threatened
by Republicans' proposed budget cuts.
The BOEM plays a vital role in facilitating the development
of offshore and wind energy, which has the potential to create
tens of thousands of jobs and significantly reduce our reliance
on fossil fuels. During this Administration, BOEM has approved
the country's first eight commercial-scale wind projects, with
a combined potential of over 10 gigawatts and enough clean
energy to power nearly 4 million homes. The first commercial-
scale offshore wind projects are already producing clean,
renewable energy in the Northeast.
BOEM has also announced a forward-looking leasing plan for
offshore wind energy through 2028. Standing up for the offshore
wind industry is absolutely necessary if we are to stave off
the worst impacts of climate change. But we must do so
responsibly, in a way that balances the priorities of
communities, impacted tribes, other ocean users like the
turtles, and the environment.
BOEM also oversees oil and gas leasing, and last year
finalized the next 5-year plan, which includes the fewest lease
sales in history. The agency has also recently finalized
rulemakings to better hold offshore oil and gas companies
accountable for cleaning up their messes.
We have heard a lot of gripes from the industry over the
past year-and-a-half about the Administration's actions to
limit leasing and their accountability measures. But I will
remind my colleagues that we recently uncovered allegations
from the FTC that Big Oil has been colluding with OPEC to keep
prices high for American consumers and artificially raise
profits at the same time that they are already producing fossil
fuels in record amounts. Talk about trust and honor. We have
always known that further propping up the Big Oil industry is
not in the best interest of the American people. Now it is
simply becoming irrefutable.
I look forward to hearing more from BOEM's efforts to
address the climate impacts of offshore oil and gas drilling,
and how the agency is working to mitigate risks to communities
most impacted by offshore fossil fuel development.
BSEE was formed in the aftermath of the Deepwater Horizon
tragedy, and is charged with ensuring that offshore energy
industries operate safely and responsibly. While we all may
have different views on the future of the oil and gas industry,
it is essential that current operations are conducted as safely
as possible to minimize risk to workers and neighbors. The
safety of our communities must be prioritized, especially the
Black, Brown, Indigenous, and low-income communities that are
disproportionately burdened with pollution.
Last, but certainly not least, the Office of Natural
Resources, Revenue or ONRR, is responsible for collecting and
distributing energy and mineral resources revenue. ONRR manages
one of the largest, non-tax revenues in the Federal Government.
It distributes funds to states, tribes, and important Federal
programs like the Land and Water Conservation Fund and National
Historic Preservation Fund.
Over the years, the Government Accountability Office and
Office of the Inspector General have highlighted risks with
ONRR and the agency's ability to ensure Americans are receiving
everything they are due, and the agency is working towards
implementing the recommendations from these non-partisan
entities.
For those across the aisle concerned with ONRR's processes,
I will remind my colleagues that one side of this debate, a
Federal agency works to ensure a fair return for the American
people, and the other side, the extractive industries, have
profit in mind, do not mind polluting, and have recently been
charged with colluding with OPEC.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. Stauber. I thank Representative Kamlager-Dove for her
opening statement. We will now move to introduce our witnesses.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of the 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement at
that time.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
Our first witness is Ms. Liz Klein. She is the Director of
the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management in the Department of the
Interior, and she is stationed right here in Washington, DC.
Ms. Klein, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LIZ KLEIN, DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF OCEAN
ENERGY MANAGEMENT, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. Klein. Thank you, Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member
Kamlager-Dove, and members of the Subcommittee. I am pleased to
appear before you today to discuss the mission and proposed
budget of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, or BOEM. My
name is Liz Klein, and I am the Director of BOEM at the
Department of the Interior.
BOEM is taking a leading role in transitioning the United
States to a clean energy future, one that will advance
renewable energy, create good-paying jobs, and ensure economic
opportunities are accessible to all communities while managing
the development of oil and gas resources on the Outer
Continental Shelf, or OCS, in an environmentally and
economically responsible manner.
The Fiscal Year 2025 budget proposal includes $52 million
for BOEM's Renewable Energy Program to further advance the
development of renewable energy projects in Federal waters.
The Biden-Harris administration has set ambitious goals to
harness the significant offshore wind resources in the United
States and combat the existential threat of climate change,
including the goals of deploying 30 gigawatts of offshore wind
energy capacity by 2030 and 15 gigawatts of floating offshore
wind energy capacity by 2035. BOEM is making considerable
progress towards achieving those objectives. We are taking a
thoughtful, all-of-government approach on issues like efficient
permitting and tribal engagement to build a robust offshore
wind industry that benefits communities and co-exists with
other ocean uses.
Our efforts are working. Under this Administration, BOEM
has approved eight commercial offshore wind projects, up from
zero when President Biden took office. These projects have the
potential to generate over 10 gigawatts of clean energy, enough
to power nearly 4 million homes.
Additional projects are undergoing review and benefiting
from the hard work this Administration has done to streamline
reviews and maximize interagency collaboration. Two projects,
Vineyard Wind and South Fork, are already in operation and
sending power to the grid. A new construction season is
underway, and will continue through this summer.
This Administration is also supporting additional future
projects through a steady pipeline of lease sales. Since
January 2021, BOEM has held four offshore wind lease auctions:
one offshore New York/New Jersey, one offshore the Carolinas,
and the first-ever sales offshore California and in the Gulf of
Mexico. Together these auctions generated over $5 billion in
high bids.
Looking towards the future, last month Secretary Haaland
announced a new 5-year offshore wind lease schedule, which
includes up to 12 potential offshore wind energy lease sales
through 2029. We anticipate holding lease sales offshore the
central Atlantic, Oregon, in the Gulf of Maine, and in the Gulf
of Mexico later this year, and the schedule outlines our
priority focus areas in the years to come.
To continue this momentum, the offshore wind energy
industry will also need a well-trained workforce and a diverse,
comprehensive supply chain throughout the various stages of
facility planning, construction, and operation. BOEM is doing
our part to support these efforts.
Thanks to strong state and industry partnerships, multiple
domestic supply chain projects are already underway, including
a first-of-its-kind wind energy port in New Jersey, the first
sub-sea cable manufacturing facility in South Carolina, and a
Jones Act-compliant offshore wind installation vessel being
constructed in Texas that is using more than 14,000 tons of
domestic steel sourced mostly from Alabama, West Virginia, and
North Carolina.
The Fiscal Year 2025 budget also includes $67 million for
BOEM's conventional energy program. As conventional energy
sources continue to play an important role in our economy, the
OCS Lands Act requires BOEM to prepare an oil and gas leasing
program that includes a proposed 5-year schedule of oil and gas
lease sales.
In December 2023, Secretary Haaland approved the final
2024-2029 National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing Program. The program
schedules three oil and gas lease sales in the Gulf of Mexico
Program Area, one each in 2025, 2027 and 2029. The proposed
schedule will meet national energy needs for the next 5 years
and balance the potential for environmental damage, the
discovery of oil and gas, adverse impacts on the coastal zone,
and the transition to cleaner energy sources.
As of May 1, 2024, BOEM is managing 2,410 active oil and
gas leases on over 13 million acres of the OCS. Approximately
78 percent of these leases are not yet in production.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to testify. BOEM's
proposed Fiscal Year 2025 budget reflects the Administration's
continued commitment to ensuring a clean and low-cost energy
future, one that is sustainable and beneficial to all
Americans. Our work has the potential to shape future
generations for the better. My team and I look forward to
working with the Subcommittee on these important issues moving
forward, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Klein follows:]

Prepared Statement of Elizabeth Klein, Director, Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez and members of the
Subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the
mission and proposed budget of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
(BOEM, Bureau). My name is Liz Klein, and I am the Director of BOEM at
the Department of the Interior (Department).

Introduction

BOEM is taking a leading role in transitioning the U.S. to a clean
energy future--one that will advance renewable energy, create good-
paying jobs, and ensure economic opportunities are accessible to all
communities, including underserved communities--while managing the
development of oil and gas resources on the Outer Continental Shelf
(OCS) in an environmentally and economically responsible manner.
BOEM is working with Tribal Nations, other Federal agencies, state
and local governments, potentially impacted communities, ocean users,
and other key stakeholders to ensure that offshore energy development
is done responsibly and informed by the best available science and
Indigenous knowledge. These partnerships are invaluable assets in our
mission to create a cleaner, more sustainable energy future for our
nation.

FY 2025 Budget Request

The FY 2025 President's Budget requests $242 million in total
budget authority ($183 million in net current discretionary
appropriations and $59 million in offsetting collections) to support
the Bureau's commitment to overseeing the nation's offshore energy,
mineral, and geological resources through proper environmental and
economic stewardship.

BOEM's FY 2025 budget request advances the Administration's
priorities in the following areas:

Facilitating the transition to a clean energy economy;

Supporting underserved and disproportionately affected
communities; and

Strengthening Tribal sovereignty and self-determination.

These strategic investments support the American people and aim to
establish a foundation for sustained growth and prosperity for future
generations.

Facilitating the Transition to a Clean Energy Economy

The FY 2025 Budget includes $52 million for BOEM's Renewable Energy
Program to further advance the development of renewable energy projects
in Federal waters.
The Biden-Harris Administration has set ambitious goals to harness
the significant offshore wind resources in the U.S. and combat the
existential threat of climate change: the deployment of 30 gigawatts of
offshore wind energy capacity by 2030 and 15 gigawatts of floating
offshore wind energy capacity by 2035. BOEM is making considerable
progress towards achieving these objectives.
Throughout the offshore wind planning process, BOEM works with
Tribes, other government agencies, ocean users, academia, and
stakeholders to identify areas on the U.S. OCS that appear most
suitable for commercial offshore wind development, while having the
fewest apparent environmental and user conflicts.
We are taking a thoughtful, all-of-government approach on issues
like efficient permitting and Tribal engagement to build a robust
offshore wind industry that benefits communities and co-exists with
other ocean uses. This includes working collaboratively with our
government partners and others to ensure that any future offshore
energy development is done safely and responsibly and relies on the
best available science and Indigenous knowledge. For example, BOEM is
collaborating with NOAA's National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science to
engage our vast, diverse set of stakeholders and employ a comprehensive
spatial model that analyzes entire marine ecosystems to identify the
most suitable areas for wind energy development.
The Department recently announced that BOEM and the Bureau of
Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) have finalized updated
regulations for renewable energy development on the OCS (Renewable
Energy Modernization Rule). The final rule will promote offshore wind
deployment while reducing costs for developers by increasing certainty,
modernizing regulations, streamlining overly complex processes and
removing unnecessary ones, clarifying ambiguous regulatory provisions,
and enhancing compliance requirements.
BOEM has done extensive work to improve our processes for reviewing
offshore wind projects. In order to increase transparency and
consistency, we released guidance in August 2023 to outline BOEM's
criteria for when to initiate the environmental review of offshore wind
project plans. The guidance establishes a pre-application process to
improve engagement with cooperating agencies and federally recognized
Tribes. This guidance was developed with input from our government
partners, the regulated community, and interested stakeholders.
Our efforts are working. Under this Administration, the Bureau has
approved eight commercial offshore wind projects--up from zero when
President Biden took office. These projects have the potential to
generate over 10 GW of clean energy, enough to power nearly 4 million
homes. Additional projects are undergoing review and benefiting from
the hard work this Administration has done to streamline reviews and
maximize interagency collaboration; we currently have five more project
plans under environmental review, and we expect additional plans in the
coming year.
Two projects, Vineyard Wind and South Fork, are already in
operation and sending power to the grid. A new construction season is
underway and will continue through the summer, during which more
offshore wind projects will come online.
This Administration is also supporting additional future projects
through a steady pipeline of lease sales. Since January 2021, BOEM has
held four offshore wind lease auctions: a record-breaking lease sale
offshore New York--New Jersey, offshore the Carolinas, and the first-
ever sales offshore California and in the Gulf of Mexico. Together,
these auctions generated over $5 billion in high bids.
Looking towards the future, last month Secretary Haaland announced
a new five-year offshore wind lease schedule, which includes up to 12
potential offshore wind energy lease sales through 2029. We anticipate
holding lease sales offshore the Central Atlantic, Oregon, and in the
Gulf of Maine and the Gulf of Mexico later this year, and the schedule
outlines our priority focus areas in the years to come.
In response to the rapid growth in demand for offshore wind along
the Atlantic coast and the associated need to bring additional focus
and presence to BOEM's work on this priority issue, BOEM proposes to
establish an Atlantic Regional Office by realigning its existing
Atlantic-related energy and minerals functions and reassigning staff
from headquarters and other BOEM regional offices. Creation of the
Office will address the increase in requests for engagement with local
communities along the Atlantic by providing additional opportunities
for access to and collaboration with BOEM. Supporting Administration
renewable energy goals requires dedicated, regionally focused
management and staff that can develop integrated strategies for dealing
with issues throughout the Atlantic region, build lasting relationships
with regional partners, and provide senior-level access to States,
Tribes, communities, and stakeholders.
To continue this momentum, the offshore wind energy industry will
also need a well-trained workforce and a diverse, comprehensive supply
chain throughout the various stages of facility planning, construction,
and operation.
BOEM is doing our part in this effort and has taken steps to
encourage union-built projects and support the development of a
domestic supply chain. BOEM is finding opportunities to incentivize the
domestic sourcing of major components, such as blades, turbines, and
foundations; develop a highly skilled and well-trained domestic
workforce; and develop lease stipulations that strongly encourage
Project Labor Agreements (PLAs) for project construction. PLAs help
ensure a safe and well-trained workforce for the construction and
operations of offshore facilities.
The Carolina Long Bay, California, and Gulf of Mexico lease sales
included a 20 percent credit for bidders that agreed to contribute to
programs or initiatives that support offshore wind workforce training
programs or development of a U.S. offshore wind domestic supply chain.
These bidding credits generated approximately $160 million in future
investments for these critical programs and initiatives.
Thanks to strong state and industry partnerships, multiple domestic
supply chain projects are already underway, including: a first-of-its-
kind wind energy port in New Jersey; the first subsea cable
manufacturing facility in South Carolina; and a Jones Act-compliant
offshore wind installation vessel being constructed in Texas that is
using more than 14,000 tons of domestic steel, sourced mostly from
Alabama, West Virginia, and North Carolina. On September 21, 2023, nine
East Coast States and four Federal agencies signed the Federal-State
Memorandum of Agreement on East Coast Offshore Wind Supply Chain
Collaboration, to strengthen regional collaboration on offshore wind
supply chain development.
Combined with state initiatives, these efforts promote investment
in the domestic supply chain and delivery of benefits and opportunities
to underserved, disadvantaged, and overburdened communities. These
efforts will also catalyze the offshore wind industry domestically and
create certainty for stakeholders, industry, and ocean users alike.
As a champion of the Biden-Harris Administration's all-of-
government approach, BOEM will continue to partner with the multiple
levels of government, Tribal Nations, and governors of U.S. Territories
to expand responsible offshore wind energy development.

Conventional Energy

The FY 2025 Budget also includes $67 million for BOEM's
Conventional Energy Program. BOEM's obligations include administering
existing leases, permitting geological and geophysical surveys,
reviewing exploration and development plans, evaluating resources, and
developing and implementing a National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing Program.
In meeting these obligations, BOEM supports energy security,
environmental protection, and economic development through providing
fair market value for the American taxpayer, mitigating adverse
environmental impacts, and maintaining adequate financial assurance by
leaseholders. As of May 1, 2024, BOEM is managing 2,410 active oil and
gas leases on over 13 million acres of the OCS. Approximately 78
percent of these leases are not yet in production.
As conventional energy sources continue to play an important role
in our economy, the OCS Lands Act requires BOEM to prepare and
periodically revise an oil and gas leasing program that includes a
proposed schedule of oil and gas lease sales for the five-year period
following approval or reapproval of the program.
In December 2023, Secretary Haaland approved the final 2024-2029
National OCS Oil and Gas Leasing Program. The Program schedules three
oil and gas lease sales in the Gulf of Mexico Program Area; one each in
2025, 2027, and 2029. The proposed lease sale schedule will meet
national energy needs for the next five years and balance the potential
for environmental damage, the discovery of oil and gas, and adverse
impacts on the coastal zone. The FY 2025 Budget request will ensure the
continued effective implementation of the 2024-2029 National OCS Oil
and Gas Leasing Program and BOEM's continued ability to provide
accurate and accessible geologic and geophysical data in support of
U.S. offshore energy development, economic security, and environmental
interests.
In addition, in April 2024, the Department announced the final Risk
Management and Financial Assurance for OCS Lease and Grant Obligations
rule to protect taxpayers from covering costs that should be borne by
the oil and gas industry when offshore platforms require
decommissioning. This rule, which updated 20-year-old regulations,
substantially strengthens financial assurance requirements for the
offshore oil and gas industry operating on the OCS.

Resiliency and Restoration

The FY 2025 Budget includes $15 million to continue advancing
marine mineral activities that contribute toward the Administration's
goal of increasing climate change resilience through the application of
science to make informed decisions, incorporation of nature-based
solutions and other adaptation strategies, and continued development of
strong partnerships to ensure our Nation's coasts are sustainably
managed, protected, and preserved for current and future generations.
Pursuant to the OCS Lands Act, BOEM is the Federal authority
overseeing the use of marine minerals across the billions of acres that
make up the OCS. The Bureau may convey, on a noncompetitive basis, the
rights to OCS sand and other sediment to Federal, state, and local
government agencies for use in shore protection, beach and wetlands
restoration projects, or other construction projects funded or
authorized by the Federal government.
BOEM's Marine Minerals Program ensures environmentally responsible
stewardship and conscientious management of the Nation's OCS solid
mineral resources to support resilient coasts, natural disaster
preparedness, climate change adaptation, and critical infrastructure
development and protection.
In addition, BOEM recognizes that OCS critical minerals may in the
future be vital to the advancement of clean energy technology, as well
as the Nation's security and economy. BOEM continues to gather
information about critical minerals that may be located on the OCS and
collect baseline data on the ecological communities and conditions
associated with potential critical mineral deposits.
In support of these efforts, BOEM will continue developing and
enhancing its National Offshore Sand Inventory, Marine Minerals
Information Management System, and National Offshore Critical Minerals
Inventory.

Environmental Program

The FY 2025 Budget includes $87 million for BOEM's environmental
program. The program provides a foundation to ensure programmatic
decision-making is guided by the best available environmental research
and data to inform the public, stakeholders, diverse ocean users, and
external decision-makers about the potential impacts of OCS energy and
mineral activities. This work enables BOEM to identify risks and
mitigation strategies to assist with conservation and protection of
environmental and cultural resources.
For 50 years, the Bureau's Environmental Studies Program (ESP) has
funded research on the potential environmental impacts of activities
the Bureau authorizes. Because of the quality, scale, and duration of
studies performed under its auspices, the ESP is a leading contributor
to the growing body of scientific knowledge about the Nation's marine
and coastal environments, leveraging partnerships with academic
institutions and other Federal agencies to produce top-tier scientific
work.
BOEM uses the ESP and other research to evaluate the environmental
impacts of energy, mineral, and geological development and to develop
measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate, and monitor those impacts for
incorporation in leases, plans, and permits. These measures are the
fabric for regulatory compliance work by BOEM as well as BSEE, and they
are developed through National Environmental Policy Act documents and
analyses required under other statutes.
BOEM's environmental program also hosts the Center for Marine
Acoustics (CMA), a one-of-its kind center of expertise in government
focused on ocean noise and impacts to marine life. Launched in 2020,
the CMA provides expertise and leadership to drive best practices,
expand research on underwater sound, seek policy improvements, and
improve messaging related to ocean noise issues.

Enhancing Tribal Engagement

BOEM is committed to upholding its Tribal trust responsibilities
and fostering working relationships based on trust and meaningful
consultation. BOEM engages with Tribal Nations at all phases of the
renewable energy leasing process to incorporate Indigenous knowledge
and Tribal perspectives. This feedback is critical to help inform our
decisions.
BOEM wants Tribal communities, ocean users, and stakeholders to
have the information they need and an equitable and accessible seat at
the table. BOEM's FY 2025 budget request of $2.6 million supports the
hiring of additional personnel to enhance and increase BOEM's ability
to maintain open and transparent communication and increase engagement
opportunities with Tribal governments and organizations, Alaska Natives
and Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act Corporations, Native Hawaiian
Organizations, and other Indigenous communities. BOEM's budget request
would also support the development of a Center for Tribal Engagement,
which would provide funding and additional capacity-building to support
Tribal members in more active participation in consultation,
coordination, data collection, assessment, and monitoring for renewable
activities.
BOEM's approach aims to ensure meaningful involvement through
trust, respect, and shared responsibility as part of a deliberative
process for effective collaboration and informed decision-making.

Conclusion

Thank you once again for the opportunity to testify. BOEM's
proposed FY 2025 budget reflects the Administration's continued
commitment to ensuring a clean and low-cost energy future, one that is
sustainable and beneficial to all Americans. Our work has the potential
to shape future generations for the better, and my team and I look
forward to working with the Subcommittee on these important issues
moving forward. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Ms. Liz Klein, Director, Bureau
of Ocean Energy Management, U.S. Department of the Interior

Ms. Klein did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act was signed
into law (P.L. 117-58) on November 15, 2021. Section 340307 amends the
Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to authorize the Secretary of the
Interior to grant a lease, easement, or right-of-way on the Outer
Continental Shelf for activities that ``provide for, support, or are
directly related to the injection of a carbon dioxide stream into sub-
seabed geologic formations for the purpose of long-term carbon
sequestration.'' The Act requires the Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement jointly with the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management to promulgate regulations within one year of the law's
enactment. Given the evolving landscape of carbon capture and
sequestration (CCS) and its importance for carbon management, enhanced
oil recovery, and other evolving uses; I'd like to understand BOEM's
current stance and plans regarding CCS on the Outer Continental Shelf
(OCS).

1a) Can you provide an update on where BOEM and BSEE are in
drafting and publishing the necessary regulations for CCS?
Specifically, when can we expect these proposed regulations to be
available for public comment?

1b) Will companies holding existing OCS oil and gas leases be
permitted to convert these leases into CCS leases, or will they need to
acquire new leases specifically for CCS activities? If conversion is
not allowed, what is the rationale behind this decision?

1c) Can companies currently seek new leases specifically for CCS
under 43 USC 1337(p)? If so, what is the current process for obtaining
such a lease? If not, is it because BOEM is awaiting the finalization
of the new regulations?

West Coast Decommissioning/Chumash Sanctuary

Question 2. On behalf of a broad community consortium, the Northern
Chumash Tribal Council submitted their sanctuary nomination in July
2015. NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries issued a Notice of
Intent to begin the designation process for the proposed sanctuary in
November 2021.

Now that NOAA has formally proposed the Chumash National Marine
Sanctuary, it doesn't allow for an exception for decommissioning. BOEM
and BSEE are currently in the process of working towards the
decommissioning of the platforms within the proposed sanctuary. If the
proposed sanctuary is finalized without a decommissioning exception,
how will that impact BOEM and BSEE's mission to have these platforms
decommissioned?

Financial Assurance

Question 3. The BOEM Financial Assurance Rule is now finalized.
BOEM has discretion under that rule on when and whether to call on any
bonds granted in its favor.

1a) Does BOEM intend to call on those bonds in all instances when a
current lessee/owner fails to perform (e.g., even where there are
predecessors)? If not, why not?

1b) Will BOEM make the proceeds of those bonds available to
predecessors who are called upon to perform? If not, why not?

Question 4. During his administration, President Obama designated
the Bears Ears National Monument in December 2016, recklessly
restricting 1.35 million acres, and expanded the Hawaiian Marine
National Monument, a 600,000 square acre designation, in the waning
months of his term in August 2016, making it the largest protected area
on Earth at the time.

4a) As we thankfully approach the end of President Biden's term,
what funding in the BOEM budget is allocated for preparing reviews;
analyses, or required documents to withdraw lands and waters under
OCSLA, the Antiquities Act, or other statutes?

4b) Have you participated in, or are you aware of any plans within
the Department of the Interior to carry out such withdrawals in the
near future? If so, under which program would these actions be carried
out, and which line item from FY24 or FY25 funding would be utilized to
prepare for such actions?
______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Director Klein. Our next witness is
Mr. Kevin Sligh. He is the Director of the Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement in the Department of the Interior,
and he is stationed right here in Washington, DC.
Mr. Sligh, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN SLIGH, DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF SAFETY
AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Sligh. Good morning, all. Chairman Stauber, Acting
Ranking Member Kamlager-Dove, and members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear today to discuss the
President's Fiscal Year 2025 budget request for the Bureau of
Safety and Environmental Enforcement, or BSEE for short. I am
Kevin Sligh, the Director of BSEE, and it is my distinct honor
to be with you here today.
BSEE's mission is to promote safety, protect the
environment, and conserve offshore resources as we regulate and
monitor all offshore energy operations, ensuring safe and
responsible energy development from exploration through the
facility, installation, production, and ultimately
decommissioning on the Outer Continental shelf, or OCS.
BSEE's Fiscal Year 2025 budget request is for $252.6
million in total funding. This includes $170.4 million in
current appropriations and $82 million in offsetting
collections from rental receipts, cost recoveries, and
inspection fees.
BSEE's Fiscal Year 2025 OCS priorities include
strengthening oversight, regulatory and research capabilities,
building and sustaining a high-performing workforce, enhancing
BSEE's tribal engagement program, decommissioning orphaned
infrastructure, facilitating carbon sequestration, and
supporting the development of a safe, robust, and sustainable
domestic renewable energy industry.
BSEE's budget request fully supports the Biden-Harris
administration's priorities to oversee safe and responsible
energy production, help address the climate crisis, and deploy
30 gigawatts of offshore wind by 2030 and 15 gigawatts of
floating wind by 2035. BSEE is requesting an increase in
funding to help create good-paying jobs and restore ecosystems
by actively addressing the challenges associated with timely
decommissioning, and with particular focus on orphan wells and
infrastructure.
This funding will help to properly plug and abandon orphan
wells on the OCS and properly decommission associated orphan
pipelines and structures. Plugging these wells is critical to
helping reduce pollution risk and eliminate safety hazards.
These orphan wells create risks and could cause oil spills that
could occur after weather-related events, and would have
significant impacts on marine and coastal environments in
Federal and state waters.
BSEE will also continue to focus on strengthening our
decommissioning oversight capabilities to meet end-of-life
cycle demands. Leaseholders enter a contractual obligation that
includes decommissioning requirements that must be met to
protect both the environment and the American taxpayer, and
BSEE will continue to enforce these obligations. As a result of
our commitment, BSEE is driving the advancement of safety
performance in the offshore wind industry.
The Fiscal Year 2025 budget request would enable BSEE to
conduct timely and rigorous reviews of industry plans, carry
out a robust compliance assurance program, and focus on
renewable energy data analysis.
While offshore renewable energy represents a relatively new
area of work for BSEE, we continue to remain focused on
ensuring oil and gas development and production is safe and
environmentally sustainable.
BSEE's request also includes an additional $1.5 million to
support the management of carbon sequestration on the OCS in
conjunction with BOEM, and we are currently working with BOEM
to finalize a proposed rule for carbon sequestration, which we
expect to publish later this year.
BSEE is proud to serve the American public, and conducts
proactive and regular engagement with energy and marine
minerals stakeholders at the Federal, state, tribal, and local
agency levels, NGOs, and their national counterparts and the
public. We aim to expand our government-to-government
interaction with Tribal Nations. The Fiscal Year 2025 budget
includes an $800,000 request for BSEE's tribal engagement
program to ensure timely and meaningful coordination and
consultation with tribes.
And as BSEE moves towards the expansion of the offshore
renewable energy industry while continuing to oversee safe and
responsible offshore oil and gas production, we consistently
aim with the future in mind. Updating our processes and framing
our work with a particular emphasis on preparedness enables
BSEE to focus on reducing risk to the people and the
environment, and support responsible and efficient energy
production.
If I may, I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight the dedication of our BSEE workforce as we embark on
preparing for the future of offshore energy development and
production for the American public. BSEE's 2023-2026 strategic
plan has four goals driving our mission: people, protection,
reliability, and sustainability. Without the first goal,
people, we will never be able to accomplish the other three.
I want to express my sincere appreciation for your
continued support of BSEE's workforce and our mission to
promote safe and environmentally sustainable offshore energy
operations. Congressional support of our budget would allow
BSEE to build on the advancements we have made, and to expand
our capabilities to provide even more effective off-site OCS
operations.
Thank you, Chairman Stauber and Acting Ranking Member
Kamlager-Dove, for inviting me here today. I will be happy to
answer any questions that the Subcommittee may have for me.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Sligh follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kevin Sligh, Director, Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I am pleased to join you today to discuss the President's
FY 2025 Budget Request for the Bureau of Safety and Environmental
Enforcement (BSEE, Bureau), a bureau of the Department of the Interior
(DOI, Department).

FY 2025 Budget Request

BSEE's FY 2025 Budget Request is $252.6 million in total funding,
including $170.4 million in current appropriations and $82.2 million in
offsetting collections from rental receipts, cost recoveries, and
inspection fees.
BSEE's FY 2025 Budget Request fully supports President Biden's
priority for tackling the climate crisis and increasing renewable
energy production safely and responsibly, with the goal of deploying 30
gigawatts (GW) of offshore wind capacity by 2030 and 15 GW of floating
offshore wind capacity by 2035. The FY 2025 Budget Request supports
BSEE's continued work in its renewable and conventional energy
programs, focusing on safe and responsible offshore energy development,
pushing the industry forward towards a more robust and meaningful
safety culture, and enhancing regulations to protect environmental,
cultural, and biological resources on the Outer Continental Shelf
(OCS). BSEE's FY 2025 Budget Request continues to focus attention on
priority areas and builds on BSEE's current work that reflects its
commitment to transparent and data-driven operations. This budget will
promote safe and environmentally responsible programs, including
decommissioning orphaned wells and infrastructure, preparing for the
expansion of offshore wind energy generation, developing a carbon
sequestration program, and bolstering BSEE's Tribal Liaison Program.
The FY 2025 Budget Request will enable BSEE to continue
strengthening oversight, regulatory, and research capabilities on the
OCS by building and sustaining staff capabilities. BSEE will direct
resources to the recruitment, training, and support of expert
engineers, geoscientists, and inspectors; oil spill planning,
prevention, and response specialists; and employees in other
disciplines to support the implementation of BSEE's regulatory
oversight responsibilities and evolving offshore energy landscape. BSEE
will continue outreach and dialogue with experts from academia,
industry, nongovernmental organizations, and other governmental
agencies to enhance the knowledge base of technical personnel related
to innovative technologies, regulatory gaps, real-time monitoring
capabilities, and risk-based decision making for safety and
environmental enforcement.
The energy resources and activities under BSEE's jurisdiction are
vast, as the OCS is an important source of energy for the U.S., with
significant oil and gas production and a growing offshore wind
industry. The Nation's first eight commercial-scale offshore wind
projects on the OCS were recently approved, and BSEE is reviewing an
additional 18 projects over 15 leases.
From January through October 2023, OCS oil and gas leases offshore
Alaska, California, and in the Gulf of Mexico produced approximately
566 million barrels of oil and 628 billion cubic feet of natural gas.
This production accounted for approximately 15 percent of domestic oil
production and 2 percent of domestic natural gas produced in the same
period. Ninety-nine percent of offshore oil and gas production occurred
in the Gulf of Mexico. Deepwater wells (those in greater than or equal
to 1,000 feet water depth) accounted for 91 percent of all barrels of
oil equivalent produced on the OCS.

Decommissioning

Shallow water areas of the Gulf of Mexico, first drilled in 1947,
are undergoing significant well and infrastructure decommissioning that
BSEE believes will continue to accelerate, leading to an increase in
regulatory oversight and workload. Similarly, in the Pacific Region,
eight of the 23 platforms no longer produce oil and gas and are located
on terminated leases that will not resume production. BSEE expects to
receive decommissioning applications for these eight platforms and
associated pipelines and infrastructure in the near term.
While decommissioning on the OCS is the obligation of the oil and
gas industry, BSEE must ensure that wells and infrastructure used in
exploration, development, and production activities undertaken pursuant
to the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA) are decommissioned
properly and in a timely manner to remove unnecessary hazards to
safety, navigation, and the environment.
When a company responsible for decommissioning is bankrupt, or
predecessor companies with a regulatory obligation no longer exist or
are financially unable to fund their decommissioning obligation, the
federal government may need to decommission this orphaned
infrastructure using American taxpayer dollars. The Biden-Harris
Administration is committed to addressing these orphaned oil and gas
wells and infrastructure that pose serious safety hazards and cause
ongoing air, water, and other environmental damage across the country.
In the last year, BSEE enhanced its enforcement and civil penalty
policies to address industry's performance and delinquent
decommissioning obligations on terminated leases and rights-of-way.
BSEE is evaluating additional enforcement strategies to encourage
timely decommissioning.
BSEE will continue to address the immediate and urgent need to
properly plug and abandon orphaned wells on the OCS and remove orphaned
pipelines and other infrastructure from the seabed. Requested funding
would augment forfeited financial assurances the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management (BOEM) receives from operators, proceeds from bankruptcy
proceedings, and potential funds from the federal orphaned wells
program established by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL) to
address the most immediate and urgent needs to reduce the risk of
safety incidents and pollution.

Offshore Wind and Renewable Energy

In addition to regulating oil and gas operations on the OCS, BSEE
continues to support the development of a safe, robust, and
environmentally responsible offshore renewable energy industry in the
United States. The first two OCS offshore wind projects are now
generating power, and as the industry rapidly grows, BSEE will continue
to engage with offshore wind developers to identify and promote best
practices for ensuring worker safety and environmental protection.
Engagement with industry, federal partners, including BOEM and the U.S.
Coast Guard, Tribal Nations, and stakeholders continues to inform the
development of renewable energy program functions.
DOI is reviewing its siting and permitting processes on public
lands and in offshore waters to identify steps that can be taken to
increase renewable energy production, with the goal of deploying 30 GW
of offshore wind capacity by 2030 and creating good-paying jobs that
support working American families. As of November 2023, the Department
has issued 27 offshore wind commercial leases in the Atlantic, five
offshore wind commercial leases off the Pacific coast, and one lease in
the Gulf of Mexico. In 2023, the first two offshore wind projects began
construction, and on November 29, 2023, South Fork Wind became the
first OCS wind project to deliver electricity to the grid; on January
3, 2024, Vineyard Wind became the second. By the end of 2024, we expect
that construction and installation will commence on four additional
projects. An additional 18 wind energy projects are currently under
review. Based on this activity and industry estimates, BSEE anticipates
receiving over 40,000 engineering reports for review by the end of FY
2025, including facility design reports, fabrication and installation
reports, and certified verification agent reports. BSEE's FY 2025
Budget Request would enable hiring to complete timely and rigorous
industry plan reviews, establish a robust compliance assurance program,
and conduct renewable energy research.

Carbon Sequestration

In FY 2025, BSEE is requesting $1.5 million to hire additional
staff to establish a Carbon Sequestration Program authorized under BIL.
The FY 2025 Budget Request would allow BSEE to actively pursue
solutions to address the unique challenges presented by sub-seabed CO2
storage. A multi-disciplinary team funded through the request would
focus on identifying relevant industry standards and enforcement
requirements, determining applied research needs and requirements,
creating baseline risk assessment criteria for carbon storage projects,
reviewing flow modeling, assessing conservation considerations, and
instituting performance and safety standards.
BSEE and BOEM have been developing offshore carbon sequestration
regulations that are comprehensive and rely on the best available
science for oversight of carbon sequestration activities on the OCS. We
are reviewing numerous industry standards and existing regulatory
frameworks, and engaging with experts, both domestically and
internationally. BSEE is engaging other federal agencies with
associated expertise, including the Department of Energy, and
evaluating the federal government's existing geological sequestration
programs and frameworks, and mapping the applicability to the OCS
environment. This ongoing work will facilitate the Department's ability
to make sure sequestration operations will be safe and environmentally
sustainable.

Inspections and Permitting

Each year BSEE's 120+ inspectors conduct over 20,000 inspections at
more than 1,750 facilities on the OCS. BSEE's oil and gas inspection
strategy relies on a tiered approach to ensure the Bureau meets its
statutory requirements, fulfills regional and national priorities, and
uses its workforce effectively to inspect each offshore oil and gas
facility at least once a year. In FY 2025, BSEE will continue to
execute its Risk-Based Inspection (RBI) Program, which allows for
targeted inspections of higher-risk operations and facilities. RBIs use
data that was analyzed in previous years to identify safety and
environmental concerns and issues.
BSEE's implementation of its inspection strategy helps the Bureau
effectively carry out core functions by promoting the use of sufficient
controls to mitigate risk and support continuous improvement.
Among the Bureau's priorities are ensuring the public receives fair
market value for developed resources and that fees and cost recovery
are fair and reasonable. In coordination with the Office of Natural
Resources Revenue, BSEE's offshore inspectors ensure that production
volumes are accurately measured and reported for the assessment of
royalties owed to the American people. In FY 2025, BSEE is proposing to
allow the Bureau to charge a per-visit production facility inspection
fee, as is done for offshore drilling rigs, rather than the current
once-per-year fee that has been in place since FY 2012, as well as to
adjust existing inspection fees for inflation. This would allow BSEE to
recover a greater share of the actual costs incurred in overseeing
these operations and reduce the direct cost to taxpayers, while
providing an incentive for operators to improve safety performance and
reducing the need for follow-up inspections. The Bureau will continue
to review inspection and other cost recovery fees to determine if
further adjustments are needed to reduce or eliminate the potential for
subsidies.
BSEE is also regularly reviewing permitting processes to support
timely processing and appropriate consideration of the risks and phases
of development on the OCS. Conducting robust stakeholder technical and
procedural workshops along with other engagement efforts is critical to
the success of BSEE's modernization and reform efforts. BSEE will
continue to hold stakeholder engagement meetings, including meetings
with industry association groups, to provide updates on permitting
procedures and BSEE's ``e-permitting'' modules.

Cybersecurity

In FY 2025, BSEE will actively work to establish a BSEE offshore
operational technology (OT) cybersecurity safety threat detection and
mitigation program. BSEE is closely collaborating with federal
partners, including the Department of Homeland Security's Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the
Department of Energy to ensure comprehensive coordination and address
cybersecurity concerns on the OCS.
Relationships with federal partners, including the intelligence
community, and industry decision makers are key to ensuring that, as
the program develops, the Bureau is equipped to inform and address OT
cybersecurity risks on the OCS. BSEE will continue to explore program
enhancements and engagement strategies to improve and integrate a
cybersecurity posture within all OCS activities.
To assist with the federal government's efforts to address OT
cybersecurity risk on the OCS, BSEE has initiated efforts to develop a
cybersecurity risk profile for offshore energy operators. BSEE began by
determining the vulnerabilities within OT systems utilized by a cross-
section of these operators. Field assessments will identify strengths
and weaknesses within client OT networks and provide BSEE and its
federal partners with a snapshot of offshore operator OT
vulnerabilities. This, in turn, will contribute to the development of
an overall cybersecurity risk profile.

Strengthening our Regulatory Program

BSEE continues to perform its statutory responsibilities by
developing and conducting a robust regulatory program. In recent years,
BSEE has published the High-Pressure High-Temperature and Subpart B
Revisions proposed rule, the Blowout Preventer Systems and Well Control
Revisions final rule, the joint BOEM/BSEE Renewable Energy
Modernization final rule, and the Decommissioning Activities and
Obligations final rule. BSEE is currently working on several other
regulatory priorities including the Oil-Spill Response Requirements for
Facilities Located Seaward of the Coast Line proposed rule, the
Revisions to Subpart J--Pipelines and Pipeline Rights-of-Way proposed
rule, the BSEE Renewable Energy Safety proposed rule, and the joint
BSEE/BOEM Carbon Sequestration proposed rule.

Strengthening our Commitment to Safety and the Environment

BSEE works closely with operators as they shift from designing to
implementing their Safety and Environmental Management Systems (SEMS)
processes that promote a performance-based safety approach and culture.
Through this approach, BSEE leverages the capabilities and expertise of
government, industry, and independent third parties to continually
improve safety and environmental outcomes.
BSEE's SafeOCS Program collects and analyzes near-miss, safety, and
failure data for well-control equipment and other safety and pollution
prevention equipment. The goal of the program is to identify proactive
steps to mitigate risks and ensure offshore operations are safe,
reliable, and environmentally responsible. BSEE will continue to obtain
statistical advice on the evaluation of daily notifications of safety
events through its partnership with the Department of Transportation's
Bureau of Transportation Statistics.
The BSEE!Safe program uses text messaging to send offshore workers
links to published Safety Alerts, which inform the offshore oil and gas
industry of the circumstances surrounding an incident or near miss and
provide recommendations to help prevent the recurrence of such
incidents. BSEE!Safe is part of the Bureau's strategy to supplement
regulation with innovative programs, expanding the available toolbox of
methods for driving safety performance and environmental stewardship
improvements, and is the first instance in which a safety regulator has
communicated directly with the industry workforce to ensure the
distribution of critical safety information. As of April 2024, more
than 7,900 subscribers have signed up for the service, and BSEE is
expanding the service to include safety information for offshore wind
energy workers as well.
BSEE is also prioritizing the Safety Performance Enhanced by
Analytical Review (SPEAR) Program, with the goal of enabling innovative
data analytic tools and strategic Bureau-wide processes. SPEAR enables
BSEE subject matter experts to thoroughly analyze data to identify
current and emerging safety and environmental hazards from OCS energy
operations. The SPEAR Program: (1) explores the potential use of
advanced data analytic tools to support the Bureau's processes; and (2)
establishes a world-class approach to analyzing and communicating data
and information throughout the Bureau and to external stakeholders as
needs arise. In FY 2025, BSEE will develop new use cases to evaluate
and develop data for other useful applications.
BSEE provides technical training to Bureau field personnel,
inspectors, scientists, and engineers to ensure staff have the tools
and knowledge needed to accomplish the Bureau's mission safely and
effectively. BSEE's training programs provide staff with the most up-
to-date, relevant training available that addresses the technological
advances the Bureau's workforce will encounter in the field. The
Bureau's National Offshore Training Center (NOTC) provides cutting-
edge, comprehensive, multi-tiered training and professional development
opportunities for BSEE's inspectors, engineers, and scientists to
ensure safe and environmentally-sound offshore energy operations. In FY
2025, BSEE plans to continue implementing a multi-phased approach to
assess the current program, identify training gaps, develop and
implement curriculum, develop and implement an accreditation plan, and
perform annual curriculum reviews. Training enhancement will include
incorporating training on renewable energy topics into the NOTC
curriculum. These investments will help demonstrate the Bureau's
commitment to building a ``best in class'' technical training program
and will allow BSEE to better capture and track the costs associated
with the program.

Collaboration

The Bureau values its close cooperative relationships with federal
and state partners with jurisdictional interest on the OCS and is
working to strengthen resources through intra- and interagency
cooperation. In FY 2024 and FY 2025, the Bureau is planning to complete
several state-level agreements regarding oil spill preparedness
coordination. Also, BSEE has been involved in discussions on continuous
safety improvement and safety culture policy with federal partners,
such as the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration and
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. BSEE continues to engage in
opportunities to leverage resources and share information across U.S.
government agencies.
BSEE will continue to enhance international collaboration in FY
2025. BSEE engages regularly with international counterparts to promote
the safe and environmentally responsible development of offshore energy
resources globally. BSEE has established itself as a leader in
international cooperation, actively participating in multilateral
forums such as the International Regulators' Forum, the Arctic Offshore
Regulators Forum, and the International Offshore Petroleum Environment
Regulators group, and Arctic Council bodies such as the Emergency
Prevention, Preparedness and Response Working Group. BSEE's
preparedness activities at the international scale span work in both
temperate and Arctic waters. The Bureau uses its international
leadership role to better understand the viabilities of traditional oil
spill cleanup strategies in different environments.

Oil Spill Prevention

BSEE continues to implement a comprehensive, cost-effective, long-
term research program dedicated to improving response countermeasures
for oil spills offshore, including in Arctic environments. The research
program is based upon a strategic plan that recognizes the evolving
risks in offshore exploration and production and BSEE's mission of
protecting the environment. BSEE focuses its oil spill response
research on advancing state-of-the art methods and technologies for oil
spill detection.
A crucial and unique asset that aids BSEE's ability to conduct this
work is Ohmsett, the National Oil Spill Response Research and Renewable
Energy Test Facility in Leonardo, New Jersey. Ohmsett hosts a large,
outdoor, aboveground concrete test tank that is 667 feet long, 65 feet
wide, and filled to a depth of eight feet with 2.6 million gallons of
saltwater. Ohmsett allows government and private industry oil spill
response personnel to hone techniques and test full-scale equipment in
realistic sea environments. Ohmsett plays an important role in
protecting the Nation's oceans by supporting development of the most
effective response technologies as well as preparing responders by
creating the most realistic training environment available.

Tribal Coordination

BSEE regulates activities that may have direct or indirect impacts
to the integrity of the shoreline and its ecology, offshore habitat,
marine mammals, other critical species, natural view-scape, and
submerged historical or archaeological sites. BSEE strives to ensure
that its processes surrounding activities that may have effects on
Indigenous communities are communicated openly, transparently, and
thoroughly. BSEE hosts consultations with Tribal Nations for three
primary reasons: to honor our nation-to-nation relationship; to hear
directly from Tribal leaders as we address economic, environmental
justice, and climate crises, all of which disproportionately impact
Native Americans and Alaska Natives; and to commit ourselves to a
process that addresses Tribal needs and ensures we respect and
understand the input we receive.
To support this commitment to Tribal coordination and consultation,
BSEE is requesting $800,000 to strengthen its existing National Tribal
Engagement Program to include additional dedicated, full-time Tribal
liaison positions. With this additional funding, the National Tribal
Engagement Program will be better able to provide meaningful and timely
coordination and consultation with Tribes.

Conclusion

I would like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the continued support for safe and environmentally sustainable
offshore energy development and production. The FY 2025 Budget Request
will support BSEE's efforts to ensure responsible offshore energy and
mineral resource development, build on BSEE's advancements, and expand
its ability to provide effective oversight of the OCS through the
initiatives outlined above.
I thank the Chairman and Ranking Member for inviting me here today
and would be happy to answer the Subcommittee's questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Kevin Sligh, Director, Bureau
of Safety and Environmental Enforcement, U.S. Department of the
Interior

Mr. Sligh did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act was signed
into law (P.L. 117-58) on November 15, 2021. Section 340307 amends the
Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to authorize the Secretary of the
Interior to grant a lease, easement, or right-of-way on the Outer
Continental Shelf for activities that ``provide for, support, or are
directly related to the injection of a carbon dioxide stream into sub-
seabed geologic formations for the purpose of long-term carbon
sequestration.'' The Act requires the Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement jointly with the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management to promulgate regulations within one year of the law's
enactment. Given the evolving landscape of carbon capture and
sequestration (CCS) and its importance for carbon management, enhanced
oil recovery, and other evolving uses; I'd like to understand BOEM's
current stance and plans regarding CCS on the Outer Continental Shelf
(OCS).

1a) Can you provide an update on where BOEM and BSEE are in
drafting and publishing the necessary regulations for CCS?
Specifically, when can we expect these proposed regulations to be
available for public comment?

1b) Is there any provision that allows companies with existing OCS
oil and gas leases to perform CCS activities before the new regulations
are finalized and published?

West Coast Decommissioning/Chumash Sanctuary

Question 2. On behalf of a broad community consortium, the Northern
Chumash Tribal Council submitted their sanctuary nomination in July
2015. NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries issued a Notice of
Intent to begin the designation process for the proposed sanctuary in
November 2021.

Now that NOAA has formally proposed the Chumash National Marine
Sanctuary, it doesn't allow for an exception for decommissioning. BOEM
and BSEE are currently in the process of working towards the
decommissioning of the platforms within the proposed sanctuary. If the
proposed sanctuary is finalized without a decommissioning exception,
how will that impact BOEM and BSEE's mission to have these platforms
decommissioned?

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Director Sligh. Our next witness is
Mr. Howard Cantor. He is the Director of the Office of Natural
Resources Revenue in the Department of the Interior, and he is
stationed in Denver, Colorado.
Mr. Cantor, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF HOWARD CANTOR, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF
NATURAL RESOURCES REVENUE, DENVER, COLORADO

Mr. Cantor. Thank you. Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member
Kamlager-Dove, and members of the Subcommittee. I am Howard
Cantor, the Director of the Office of Natural Resources
Revenue. I am pleased to join you today to discuss the
President's Fiscal Year 2025 budget request for the Office of
Natural Resources Revenue, also known as ONRR, an office under
the Assistant Secretary for Policy Management and Budget within
the Department of the Interior.
ONRR collects, accounts for, and verifies natural resource
and energy revenues due to states, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, and the U.S. Treasury. In Fiscal Year 2023 alone, ONRR
disbursed $18.24 billion in revenue from energy production on
Federal and Indian lands and offshore areas, including $4.72
billion to 33 states.
Given the large size of the revenue stream handled and
dispersed, ONRR strives for transparent and efficient
operations in collecting every dollar due to ensure that the
American taxpayer and Indian tribes receive full payment of the
revenues they are owed for the development of their resources.
ONRR works to collect every dollar due while maintaining a
collaborative working relationship with industry.
Every American benefits from the revenues generated from
mineral resources, either directly, through payments to
American Indian tribes and individual Indian mineral owners, or
indirectly, through payments to the Historic Preservation Fund,
the Reclamation Fund, the Land and Water Conservation Fund,
states, and the General Fund of the U.S. Treasury.
The Fiscal Year 2025 budget for ONRR supports its mission
to collect, disperse, and verify Federal and Indian energy and
other natural resources revenues on behalf of all Americans.
The budget request includes funding for the assumption of
mineral revenue management responsibilities of the Osage
Nation. Taking over these responsibilities represents a
significant effort, due to the unique framework of mineral
revenue within the Osage Nation.
The request also includes $7 million to restore audit and
compliance activities reduced by the Fiscal Year 2024 enacted
budget, enabling ONRR to perform additional data mining
activities, compliance reviews, and audits.
ONRR's Fiscal Year 2025 budget request also demonstrates
fiscal responsibility, as the requested amount for ongoing
information technology modernization work is reduced by $10
million.
I want to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the continued support for responsible, secure, and accurate
collection of mineral revenue from Federal and Indian lands and
Federal waters.
The Fiscal Year 2025 request will support ONRR's efforts to
modernize systems, become more efficient, and ensure the
American taxpayer and Indian tribes receive full payment of the
revenues that they are owed for the development of their
resources.
I thank the Chairman and Ranking Member for inviting me
here today, and I would happily answer the Subcommittee's
questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Cantor follows:]

Prepared Statement of Howard Cantor, Director, Office of Natural
Resources Revenue, U.S. Department of the Interior

Chairman Stauber, Ranking Member Ocasio-Cortez, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I am pleased to join you today to discuss the President's
Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 budget request for the Office of Natural
Resources Revenue (ONRR), an office under the Assistant Secretary for
Policy Management and Budget within the Department of the Interior
(Department).

Background

For the benefit of all Americans, ONRR collects, accounts for, and
verifies natural resource and energy revenues due to states, American
Indians, Alaska Natives, and the U.S. Treasury. In FY 2023 alone, ONRR
disbursed $18.24 billion in revenue from energy production on federal
and Tribal lands and offshore areas, including $4.72 billion to 33
states. Given the large size of the revenue stream handled and
disbursed, ONRR strives for transparent and efficient operations,
collecting every dollar due and ensuring that the American taxpayer and
Indian Tribes receive full payment of the revenues that they are owed
for the development of their resources. ONRR maintains a collaborative
working relationship with industry through reporter training, providing
speakers for industry-led conferences, and informal interactions in an
effort to gain compliance with the laws and regulations before any
formal actions need to be taken.
Every American benefits from the revenues generated from mineral
resources, either directly through payments to American Indian Tribes
and Individual Indian Mineral Owners or indirectly through payments to
the Historic Preservation Fund, the Reclamation Fund, states, and the
General Fund of the U.S. Treasury. ONRR also contributes to the Land
and Water Conservation Fund (LWCF), with appropriations made permanent
in August 2020 as part of the Great American Outdoors Act (GAOA), and
tracks and reports the energy funds available for calculation of the
amounts attributable to the National Parks and Public Land Legacy
Restoration Fund created under the GAOA.
The Federal government has collected revenues from mineral
production on federal onshore lands since 1920, on American Indian
lands since 1925, and on federal offshore areas since 1953. In 1982,
the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act called upon the
Department to establish a comprehensive, consolidated system for the
collection, accounting, and disbursement of these revenues. From FY
1982 through FY 2023, Interior has provided over $371 billion to
federal, state, and American Indian recipients through this program.
Approximately 56 percent of all annual collections have gone to the
General Fund of the U.S. Treasury, 23 percent to special purpose funds,
16 percent to states, and 5 percent to the American Indian community.

Fiscal Year (FY) 2025 Request

The FY 2025 budget request for ONRR is $175,987,000 to support
ONRR's mission to ``collect, disburse, and verify federal and Indian
energy and other natural resource revenues on behalf of all Americans''
through the work of our various program areas:

Revenue, Reporting, and Compliance Management: These
activities ensure revenues from federal and American Indian
leases are efficiently, effectively, and accurately
collected, accounted for, invested, and disbursed in a
timely manner. This program's activities also include
support of the Bureau of Indian Affairs Indian Energy
Service Center, as well as efforts to ensure timely,
complete, and accurate reporting while providing reasonable
assurance of company compliance.

Audit Management: These activities focus on accurate
reporting and payment of the nation's federal and American
Indian mineral revenues. Federal and American Indian audit
and compliance activities represent a critical part of the
operational strategy to ensure companies comply with
applicable laws, regulations, and lease terms. This
program's activities also include administering cooperative
agreements with states and American Indian Tribes, tribal
consultations, and investigating and responding to the
inquiries of individual Indian mineral interest owners.

Research, Enforcement, Guidance, and Appeals: These
activities develop and implement consistent and
comprehensive compliance planning, as well as market and
geospatial analysis, valuation guidance and determinations,
production meter verification, rulemaking, responding to
appeals of ONRR actions, bankruptcies, litigation support,
and enforcement.

The FY 2025 budget request is $8.05 million above the FY 2024
enacted level attributed to the following:

$4.1 million and 25 full time equivalent (FTE) for ONRR to
assume the mineral revenue management responsibilities for
the Osage Nation.

$7.0 million to restore Audit and Compliance activities.

$5.5 million to fund a fixed cost increase for FY 2024 and
$1.5 million for FY 2025 fixed cost increases.

A reduction of $10 million in ONRR's ongoing information
technology modernization efforts.

Osage Trust Accounting Implementation

In 2014, ONRR was first tasked with providing minerals revenue
management functions for the Osage Tribe so that the Department could
comply with a settlement agreement with the Tribe. However, a court
delayed, and then the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) withdrew a final
rule intended to shift the Department's Osage minerals revenue
management responsibilities from BIA to ONRR. BIA published a new
proposed rule in January 2023 and is working to publish the final rule
in FY 2024. ONRR requests an additional +$4.1 million and +25 FTE in FY
2025 as part of a multi-phase and multi-year implementation effort to
ensure essential collection, disbursement, and compliance functions for
Osage mineral revenues. ONRR's assumption of the full oil and gas
revenue and production reporting and verification program on Osage
lands represents a significant increase in ONRR's workload across its
mission activities. Once fully implemented, ONRR expects that taking on
Osage properties will increase its Indian-related workload by
approximately 50 percent. There are currently 2,900 active leases and
14,500 producing wells on Osage lands, which will increase the number
of Indian leases and wells in ONRR's systems by 46 percent and 62
percent, respectively. Additionally, ONRR expects to provide guidance
and training to 230 new production and royalty reporters, a 43 percent
increase in the number of Indian reporters. The Osage-related workload
is likely to continue increasing, as an additional 4,760 wells are
expected to be drilled by 2037 on Osage lands.
With its current Osage funding, ONRR is performing limited
compliance activities as permitted by existing regulations. ONRR
proposes a phased approach to funding and fully carrying out its
functions for the Osage Tribe once the final rule is effective. The
additional funds requested in FY 2025 will help ensure ONRR conducts
essential collection and disbursement activities for Osage mineral
revenues. In addition to continuing current limited compliance
activities, this would allow ONRR to perform required functions in FY
2025.
Transitioning these activities to ONRR will require a significant
time investment as ONRR works with Osage stakeholders to shift them to
ONRR's forms and processes. ONRR's production and royalty forms will be
completely new to Osage reporters, and ONRR plans to provide reporter
training sessions to assist them. Even so, ONRR expects it will need to
respond to questions and investigate and assist in resolving reporting
errors. Also, BIA's current processes do not involve enforcement, so
ONRR expects to inform and educate affected payors and lessees about
ONRR's enforcement processes.

Audit and Compliance Activities

Funding reductions enacted in the FY 2024 appropriation are
impacting ONRR's Audit and Compliance activities. ONRR disbursed over
$18 billion in FY 2023, so even relatively small percentage reductions
to collections can equate to large dollar amounts, which can adversely
impact the financial well-being of tribal members and allottees, as
well as states' abilities to fund vital programs. Restoration of the
$7.0M reduction ONRR received in FY 2024 would enable ONRR to perform
additional data mining activities, compliance reviews, and audits,
thereby increasing ONRR's ability to ensure accurate reporting and
payment of royalties due.

IT Modernization

ONRR has made significant progress implementing its IT
Modernization program and has determined the funding received for these
efforts can be reduced by $10.0 million beginning in FY 2025 without
significantly impacting the project schedule. ONRR's IT Modernization
effort supports EO 14028, Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity, by
continuing on the path to replace its aging Minerals Revenue Management
Support System (MRMSS) with modernized systems. This work will ensure
the stability and security of systems that disbursed over $18 billion
in FY 2023 and enhance efficiency and mission delivery.

Baseline Capacity

The FY 2025 budget includes important investments in programs
needed to help strengthen America and be more competitive as the world
continues to change. These investments include funding needed to
maintain a robust and talented workforce and the must-pay requirements
needed to continue to fulfill ONRR's mission. The budget includes +$5.5
million for ONRR, which reflects the incremental amount needed to cover
the fixed costs associated with mission operations in FY 2024. This
request, in combination with the FY 2025 fixed cost amounts, will allow
the program to meet must-pay requirements without impacting program
activities.

Conclusion

I would like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the continued support for responsible, secure, and accurate
collection of mineral revenue from federal and Indian lands and federal
waters. The FY 2025 request will support ONRR's efforts to modernize
systems, become more transparent, and add capacity to ensure the
American taxpayer and Indian Tribes receive full payment of the
revenues they are owed for the development of their resources.
I thank the Chairman and Ranking Member for inviting me here today,
and I would be happy to answer the Subcommittee's questions.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Howard Cantor, Director,
Office of Natural Resources Revenue, U.S. Department of the Interior

Mr. Cantor did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act was signed
into law (P.L. 117-58) on November 15, 2021. Section 340307 amends the
Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to authorize the Secretary of the
Interior to grant a lease, easement, or right-of-way on the Outer
Continental Shelf for activities that ``provide for, support, or are
directly related to the injection of a carbon dioxide stream into sub-
seabed geologic formations for the purpose oflong-term carbon
sequestration.'' The Act requires the Bureau of Safety and
Environmental Enforcement jointly with the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management to promulgate regulations within one year of the law's
enactment.

1a) Does ONRR anticipate revenues and if so how much from CCS
leasing or how would revenues be calculated in case of conversion
mechanism?

______

Mr. Stauber. Thank you, Mr. Cantor. I thank all the
witnesses for their testimony. The Chair will now recognize
Members for 5 minutes of questioning, and I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
Director Klein, I would like to start by focusing on BOEM's
implementation and interpretation of the Inflation Reduction
Act Section 5265, which couples oil and gas leasing to wind
leasing. You are aware of the 60 million acre requirement,
correct?
Ms. Klein. Correct.
Mr. Stauber. Do you interpret this as Congress wanting you
to offer robust acreage for oil and gas leasing, or do you see
it as oil and gas will only get the 60 million acres if the
wind industry decides so?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question.
In setting out the schedule of lease sales for oil and gas,
and the process that we undertake to determine where those
lease sales should take place, there is an environmental review
process that takes place, which has been launched. We just put
out our area identification that notes the place where we are
focusing our environmental analysis in the Gulf of Mexico. And
as has been the usual process for the history of the program,
we provide additional information as we get closer to the lease
sale stage about which areas will be offered. We are aware of
the 60 million-acre requirement.
Mr. Stauber. OK. So, Director Klein, hypothetically, if the
offshore wind industry came to you and said, ``We have enough
acreage for offshore wind development, no need to hold a lease
sale this year,'' would you still hold an offshore wind lease
sale or an oil and gas lease sale?
Ms. Klein. Thanks for the question. On the offshore wind
space, what we have tried to do is set out a schedule of
offshore wind lease sales to continue the robust development of
an offshore wind industry here in the United States, so that we
can transition to cleaner energy sources.
Mr. Stauber. Well, Director Klein, respectfully, with the
precedent you have set, not a lot of people here believe you
are acting in good faith.
This Administration has neglected its duty to support oil
and gas leasing, so we are incredibly worried you will continue
this trend and fail to carry out the measly three lease sales
that you have put in the current 5-year plan. Based on the
readings of the Department's plans, it appears that your
offshore wind schedule has 12 sales scheduled over the next 5
years, a 400 percent increase in renewables over oil and gas.
Is that correct?
Ms. Klein. I don't know that I can do the math that quickly
in my head, but we have scheduled 12 potential lease sales for
offshore wind over the next 5 years, reflecting what we believe
to be the tremendous opportunity for offshore wind.
Mr. Stauber. Director Klein, it is correct. So, how much of
the revenue raised from these 12 lease sales will contribute to
coastal communities, and will a single dollar from these lease
sales go back to these communities?
Ms. Klein. In developing this program, we have focused on,
or I should say, in supporting the development of offshore wind
in this country, the Biden-Harris administration has put a
tremendous amount of effort on----
Mr. Stauber. Director Klein, with all due respect, that is
not what I asked. I said, ``Will the money go back to these
coastal communities?''
Ms. Klein. There is a tremendous amount of economic
development and opportunity happening in coastal communities
right now. I cited some of that in my opening testimony.
Mr. Stauber. No, I am talking about the revenue that will
be generated. Will that go back to the coastal communities?
Ms. Klein. Where revenue goes from offshore wind is a
matter of statutory authority. Right now, there is no statute
that exists that directs revenues from offshore wind to
anywhere else but the Treasury.
Mr. Stauber. And Director, that is what we are getting at.
There is no mechanism approved by Congress to return these
revenues to the coastal communities. They won't be compensated
for this development for offshore wind. Instead, these
communities will have to pay more to cover their energy costs
while not receiving conservation funding.
Do you know how BOEM could fix that? You could support
offshore oil and gas leasing. By law, your dollars would flow
back to coastal communities through revenue sharing and
conservation funding, and Americans across the country would
see lower energy costs. I think that is a simple fix.
Director Cantor, how much GOMESA revenue has offshore oil
and gas contributed in the last 5 years?
Mr. Cantor. Thank you for the question, Chairman. For
GOMESA, let's see. I don't have the total for the last 5 years.
Mr. Stauber. Hundreds of millions?
Mr. Cantor. Hundreds of millions. Yes, sir.
Mr. Stauber. And how about LWCF or Historic Preservation
Fund in the last 5 years?
Mr. Cantor. The LWCF is capped at $125 million per year.
Mr. Stauber. OK. And then how much from offshore wind?
Mr. Cantor. Can you repeat the question, Chairman?
Mr. Stauber. How much has offshore wind generated for you?
Mr. Cantor. Over the last 5 years we have had----
Mr. Stauber. Just for coastal communities. How much has
come back to coastal communities?
Mr. Cantor. There has been about $5.7 billion, most of that
due to a bonus in 2022 for the New York Bight wind sale. But in
terms of how much goes back to coastal communities, that----
Mr. Stauber. My time has expired here, but I will say it
goes back to the Treasury. So, nothing goes back directly to
the communities from offshore wind at this moment.
I will now turn it over to Representative Kamlager-Dove for
5 minutes of questioning. Thank you.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I too am
interested in folks not operating in good faith, and the money,
and lower energy costs.
Director Klein, last month the FTC issued a complaint about
Pioneer Resources, with evidence that their CEO, Scott
Sheffield, colluded with OPEC to illegally manipulate the
market to drive up gas prices. The complaint was big news in
part because it had solid evidence that the high gas prices my
colleagues on the other side have been talking about were not,
in fact, the result of insufficient oil production here in the
United States or Biden's so-called war on American energy, as
our colleagues across the aisle often claim. Instead, gas
prices may have been inflated because of illegal manipulation
of oil markets.
The amount of money Sheffield squeezed out of working
families, according to his own estimates, conservatively, was
between $2.7 and $4 billion in 2023 alone. After Mr. Sheffield
started manipulating the markets, his compensation went from
$19 million a year to $67 million a year. That was his big
reward for gouging the American people.
The FTC complaint presents evidence that Pioneer was not
just colluding with Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Russia, but with
other oil companies in the United States, too. Even more
evidence of collusion between nine different oil companies in
the United States, including Pioneer, was detailed in a
separate class action lawsuit from April of this year.
Director Klein, does Pioneer Resources have any offshore
leases?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question. I believe that
Pioneer does not. They mostly focus on the onshore space.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK, thank you.
Ms. Klein. That is my understanding.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Now, Hess Corporation was part of the
lawsuit, too. Does Hess Corporation have any offshore leases?
Ms. Klein. I believe that Hess does, yes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK. And what about Occidental Petroleum?
Ms. Klein. I also think they have offshore leases, yes.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Yes. So, if Occidental, Hess, or any
other oil and gas company with an offshore lease were found
guilty of colluding with OPEC and engaging in illegal, anti-
competitive practices, or price fixing, would they still be
eligible to get a lease in the future?
Ms. Klein. No. If a company is found guilty of something
like collusion, we have regulations in place that make them
ineligible to hold a lease in the future.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. OK, thank the Lord. Because I would hope
that, if a company was using taxpayer lands or waters to scam
the American people into paying astronomical gas prices so the
company could pad their profits, increase dividends, and stock
buybacks, which is exactly what Pioneer did, that BOEM should
be able to put a stop to it. It should be an easy call to
disqualify, suspend, or debar them from being able to do any
further business with the Federal Government, including being
able to extract more oil and gas from public lands.
And I would hope that my colleagues from across the aisle
would join me in this pursuit to ensure that is the case,
because Committee Democrats are requesting a formal
investigation into this matter, and I hope we can take this up
in a bipartisan way.
BOEM also manages offshore renewable energy development,
which will play a vital role in curbing the climate crisis.
And, of course, there are challenges to standing up a new
industry, but there are also far-reaching benefits.
Director Klein, can you briefly go over some highlights of
the job and economic benefits of the offshore wind energy for
coastal communities and throughout the United States?
And if you heard anything that you disagree with earlier,
could you please respond to those issues?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question. I have been in this
role a little bit over a year, and I have been really
energized, sorry for the pun, by my travels all around the
country. I have been visiting and hearing from all sorts of
communities, workers, folks associated with the growth of
offshore wind. There are really billions of dollars of
investments that are flowing all across the country.
I was able to travel to Portsmouth, Virginia, for instance,
and celebrated milestones of a project, Offshore Virginia, with
the Governor, the Lieutenant Governor, and the Attorney
General.
I have been to Brownsville, Texas to look at the
construction of the first Jones Act-compliant offshore wind
vessel that is, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, sourced
with steel from the United States, and has a number of American
workers working hard to launch that boat.
We celebrated the South Fork project, its first delivery of
energy to the grid up in Long Island, and heard from union
workers and folks who are really proud of the work that they
have done there to support a clean energy future. That project
has export cable that was manufactured in South Carolina, a
substation from Texas, so the opportunity for economic growth
all around the country, it is a long list, and we are really
excited about it at BOEM.
Ms. Kamlager-Dove. Thank you.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. We will now go to
Representative Graves from Louisiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. Thank you all for being here.
Ms. Klein, how long does it take to go from a lease sale to
actual production in the OCS?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question. The timeline can
vary.
Mr. Graves. Just give me a ballpark, please.
Ms. Klein. It can take anywhere from 5 to 10 years. It
really depends on the operator, and how swiftly they move to
production plans.
Mr. Graves. It generally takes a lot closer to 10 years
than 5.
Mr. Cantor, when ONRR releases something saying that GOMESA
revenue sharing hit the cap ``due to record high oil and gas
production under this Administration,'' if it takes 10 years to
go to production, from lease sale to production, is that really
an honest statement, suggesting to the American people that
production is at high levels because of this Administration?
Mr. Cantor. Thank you for the question, Congressman. If the
timeline is as you have stated, then the timeline is as you
have stated.
Mr. Graves. So, the answer would----
Mr. Cantor. I don't really have a comment on that question.
Mr. Graves. The answer would be no.
Ms. Klein, let's say that President Smith comes in next,
and President Jones comes in after that, and subsequent to this
Administration. Since you are not doing any lease sales, is it
going to be their fault that we don't have appropriate supply
of liquid fuels, of oil and gas?
Ms. Klein. In setting the three lease sales over the next 5
years for oil and gas, the Secretary determined that those
sales would best meet our energy needs. There is obviously
production continuing right now, record levels of production.
That will continue----
Mr. Graves. Ms. Klein, you are not answering my question.
Is it going to be their fault that we don't have sufficient
supplies?
This is the lowest, the lowest lease sale production since
we have had an OCS program ever, ever, 1/100 of what was leased
under President Jimmy Carter, 1/360 under what was leased under
President Ronald Reagan. This is awful. You are completely
screwing the next administration and the one after from this
completely failed energy plan.
Let me ask you a few questions, and any of you in the panel
are welcome to answer this. When you did the Rice's whale sue-
and-settle, is that going to result in lower production costs
or higher production costs in the OCS?
Ms. Klein. I don't know what you are referring to by sue-
and-settle, but if you are referring to the voluntary
measures----
Mr. Graves. The Rice's whale restrictions, is that going to
cost more to produce or less to produce?
Ms. Klein. Currently, there are voluntary measures that we
have offered to oil and gas.
Mr. Graves. That is a yes or no. Please don't burn my time.
It is a yes-or-no question.
Is it going to cost more to produce or less to produce?
Ms. Klein. It is not going to have any----
Mr. Graves. It is not going to cost less. Do you want to
just say that? That is fine.
No. 2, financial assurance. The financial assurance rule,
is that going to result in higher cost to produce or lower cost
to produce?
Ms. Klein. We believe----
Mr. Graves. The additional $9.2 billion in bonding will
cost more.
The methane rule, is that going to cost more to produce or
less to produce?
[No response.]
Mr. Graves. That is going to cost more to produce. I will
help you all out here.
The pipeline feed that this Committee proposed, what was
it, $500 a mile or what, I don't even remember what it was, but
the pipeline fee for offshore energy products, and it was like
a fee for below 1,000 feet and above 1,000 feet, or something
like that. Those additional fees similarly would be passed on
to consumers, and then higher royalty rates, which means that
you are paying more to the government to produce.
All of these things cumulatively cost a higher cost for
production, and that is all passed on to consumers. So, my
friends are sitting here talking about higher prices. Look, we
saw this under the Obama administration. Oil and gas prices are
higher under these flawed policies. It shouldn't be a shock to
anybody that we are seeing it right now again. In fact, it is
embarrassing that we saw it once, and this Administration is
walking into the same thing, putting your hand right on that
red hot stove all over again, and then pointing to everybody
else as the cause. And it is shown over, and over, and over
again that the excuses that have been brought up by this
Administration are completely untrue.
So, let's be crystal clear. It is this Administration's
policies, your lack of lease sales that are causing higher
energy prices. You are completely screwing this country's
energy security in the future with the 10-year timeline it
takes to go from lease sales into production. You are putting
communities in the Gulf of Mexico at risk because Mr. Cantor is
not going to have a penny in revenue sharing that, under our
Constitution, is required to be spent on resiliency projects
like restoring our coastal ecosystem, on hurricane protection,
and on flood control projects, putting these people as sitting
ducks for future hurricanes. And consumers are paying, when
this Administration took office, $1.74 a gallon were gasoline
prices, lowest prices in Louisiana. Today, I am going to guess
three bucks. Completely screwing communities.
Look Mr. Chairman, I know I am out of time. I just want to
see if Mr. Sligh or Ms. Klein can give us any clarity on the
financial assurance rule. Specifically, is that BOEM or BSEE's
intent to call upon the additional supplemental bonds when a
current operator can't fulfill their decommissioning obligation
before going after the predecessor lessees? It should be a yes
or no.
Ms. Klein. The Financial Assurances Rule is meant to ensure
that current lessees and grant holders undertake their
obligations to clean up after themselves when they are done.
So, we would be going to those financial assurance requirements
before we went to predecessors.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. Thank you for answering that
question.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
Mr. Graves. I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. We will now go to Representative Huffman for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We expect a lot of fossil fuel boosterism in this Committee
and this Subcommittee, but recently it has risen to the level
of almost cartoonish fealty to the fossil fuel industry. At a
time when you are talking about record production, record
exports, record profits, we continue to hear this rhetoric
about the Biden administration declaring a war on oil and gas.
It is just not something that can credibly be said. But if you
are so beholden to fossil fuel that without blushing you can
mouth these talking points, this is the place where we hear it.
And when we see clear evidence that these fossil fuel
interests are colluding with OPEC to screw American consumers
and rig the global price of oil, and Democrats try to do
something about it on a bipartisan basis, we hear crickets from
the other side, because they just can't bring themselves to
ever stand up to this massive industry, no matter how much it
abuses the environment or American consumers.
In fact, we have a moment here where you have a chance to
choose between the American people and consumers, and
protecting them from high gas prices or your friends at Big
Oil. And it looks like, to no one's surprise, our friends
across the aisle choose Big Oil every time.
Director Klein, it is a little rich when the Chair lectures
you about good faith. And you should just know that when that
term is used around here, it has a coded meaning. ``Good
faith'' means absolute boosterism for fossil fuel at all costs.
The $60 million minimum and other provisions of the IRA
that you were asked about were formulas that one U.S. Senator
insisted upon in the Inflation Reduction Act. It is not sacred,
and it doesn't mean you have to go over and above that. It
doesn't mean that you have to bow and scrape at the throne of
Big Oil, as the Chair would ask you to do, in order to comport
with his notion of good faith. So, I would say minimum
compliance with this formula that was forced in to the IRA,
something that most Members of Congress in both houses, I
believe, did not support, I certainly opposed it, but minimum
compliance is just fine, and certainly meets the good faith
standard, in my view.
With respect to offshore wind, the Chair is having some fun
with the nuance of how royalties work, and how auction credits
work, and it is misleading. So, we need to clean this up a
little bit. When he says that no money goes back to local
coastal communities from these auctions, that is not right. I
know that because I represent one of those coastal communities,
where there were credits that the successful bidders embraced
as part of their bid, and a lot of money is going back to local
communities. Isn't that correct, through those auction credits?
Ms. Klein. Yes, we have certainly set up systems where,
during the auctions, we can make sure that we are supporting
domestic supply chain, domestic workforce, and supporting
communities where these projects will go.
Mr. Huffman. Do you envision using auction credits in other
offshore wind leases to make sure that some of that money
actually gets turned back around into community benefit
agreements, tribes, fishermen, and other interests that will
benefit from those auction credits?
Ms. Klein. Yes, we do.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
The Chair is correct that, in terms of long-term royalties
and revenues from the sale of energy, oil and gas is in a
different place than offshore wind. Oil and gas has a mechanism
to turn that money back into the Land and Water Conservation
Fund and to benefit states and local communities. And right
now, offshore wind does not. We need to fix that.
I am working on legislation that will address that, and
eventually we need to get there. But to extrapolate from that,
as the Chair does, that instead of doing offshore wind you
should just do more oil and gas is certainly problematic if you
care about the climate crisis and the transition to clean
energy.
I only have about 30 seconds left. The last question I want
to ask you about involves tribal consultation, because I do
want the project in Humboldt County to succeed. And I think you
know that we have heard loud and clear from tribes that we need
better engagement by BOEM. There is a co-management Executive
Order, Joint Secretarial Order 3403, where other agencies have
rolled out their co-stewardship plans for land and waters for
tribes. We have yet to see anything from BOEM on that. I am
still waiting for a response on my request for better
engagement, including somebody on the ground for California and
other West Coast, in the remaining time I have, could you speak
to where we stand on these things?
Ms. Klein. Sure. Thank you for that question, and I
appreciate the feedback we have received and the inquiries that
you have sent to us.
We are spending a lot of time at BOEM, making sure that we
really have a robust tribal engagement program. Our Fiscal Year
2025 budget request identifies some additional resources that
we think would be helpful in order to do that not just within
BOEM, but also support tribal capacity at tribes themselves to
be able to meaningfully engage in this.
So, obviously, a long history of mistrust between many
tribes and the Federal Government, and I think working together
with the Subcommittee we can start to address that.
Mr. Huffman. It is very important. I appreciate that.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much. We will now go to the
Chair of the Full Committee.
Representative Westerman, you are up for 5 minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Stauber. Thank you to
the witnesses for being here today.
Director Klein, we have already talked about the three
lease sales in the next 5 years in the 5-year plan, and the 12
wind lease sales. But I just want to be sure that, on Lease
Sale 262, is that going to proceed as planned, particularly if
no additional wind lease sales are deemed necessary for 2025 to
2026?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question. We have started the
environmental review process for the three sales that were
identified in the 5-year plan. We recently issued the area
identification. The next step would be the draft environmental
impact statement that analyzes those potential sales, so that--
--
Mr. Westerman. So, your planning----
Ms. Klein. That process is underway.
Mr. Westerman. You are planning to hold the sale. Do you
anticipate any hiccups in the process, or delays?
Ms. Klein. I have learned not to try to anticipate hiccups,
but, as I said, the environmental process is underway for those
lease sales, and we expect the draft environmental impact
statement to be out in the next couple----
Mr. Westerman. Well, last fall you told me there wouldn't
be any delays for Lease Sale 261, yet you voluntarily chose to
delay it. Has your agency done any planning or work which sets
up the cancellation of any of the three offshore oil and gas
lease sales?
Ms. Klein. I am sorry, could you repeat the question?
Mr. Westerman. Have you done any planning to delay the
three sales?
Ms. Klein. No, we have not done any planning to delay any
sales.
Mr. Westerman. So, there is no scenario or plan in place to
cancel any of the three oil and gas lease sales.
Ms. Klein. We are required under the National Environmental
Policy Act and a number of other statutes to conduct
environmental analysis of those potential sales, so that
process is underway. And, of course, an agency like BOEM
doesn't act until there is a Record of Decision, and that is
where we are in the process right now.
Mr. Westerman. What is an example of something that would
cause you to trigger your authority and cancel the sales, even
though doing so would destroy the ability to sell offshore
wind?
Ms. Klein. Well, one of the reasons that sales have been
canceled in the past was the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, which
killed 11 people and caused billions of dollars worth of damage
in the Gulf of Mexico.
Mr. Westerman. So, you are saying if there was another
incident like that, you would cancel the oil and gas sales, and
all the wind sales?
Ms. Klein. Saying anything about canceling lease sales at
this point would be pre-decisional. As I said, we are in the
environmental review process, and that process is underway.
Mr. Westerman. Representative Graves talked about how long
it takes to construct an offshore oil platform, and the cost
that goes with it. How much of that cost gets offset by the
Federal Government or by the taxpayer?
Like, what programs are out there to help oil companies
develop offshore platforms?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question.
I think over the years there have been a number of programs
that have supported the development of fossil fuel, including
the statutes we operate under, our tax code, the way that
royalties are set----
Mr. Westerman. When you say tax code, are you talking about
depreciation of assets?
Ms. Klein. As I said, at the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management we are really focused on ensuring that, in part,
operators are fully internalizing the cost of doing business.
We mentioned the financial assurances rule, which is one of the
ways that we are making sure of doing that.
Mr. Westerman. I think you are missing the question. There
is no program that subsidizes the oil and gas industry. That is
outside of any kind of tax program, that any business gets to
depreciate assets. I have heard my colleagues across the aisle
talk about the handouts to oil and gas companies, and I finally
figured out they were talking about depreciation schedules,
which any manufacturing company, if you own a bakery you get to
depreciate your ovens.
But let's switch gears and talk about offshore wind. If you
are going to build an 8 megawatt wind tower, what kind of
programs are out there from the government to help the
construction cost?
Ms. Klein. Well, I think the President has made clear that
he thinks the climate crisis is a real challenge, and the
Federal Government has an obligation to do something about it,
so----
Mr. Westerman. But what are those programs like? Like, what
kind of tax credits are available?
Ms. Klein. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management is not
responsible for the suite of tax credits, but they do exist for
the offshore wind----
Mr. Westerman. Well, there are 30 percent tax credits,
there are production tax credits, you can get $0.027 or $0.03
per kilowatt hour, which could be, if the windmills actually
operate, hundreds of thousands, if not millions of dollars of
taxpayer money every year, which if that is a decision Congress
has made, it is the Administration's job. But it is not fair to
say that offshore oil and gas gets subsidized when they don't,
when they actually are paying in royalties off of what they
produce, yet offshore wind gets huge, huge subsidies from the
taxpayer. Otherwise, it wouldn't be cost effective to build
these facilities.
So, I think we just need to clear the air on who is getting
the subsidies, where the cost is to the taxpayer that they are
not seeing because it is hidden in tax cost. And the oil and
gas industry does not get these huge subsidies and credits that
it is often claimed that they get.
And I am way out of time, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
and the Members for their questions.
The members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing.
And to the witnesses, you will have questions given to you.
We were going to go a Round 2, but it was decided we won't.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Wednesday, May 29. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for these responses.
OK. Well, we hadn't closed down, Representative Gosar. We
were just closing statements. You made it, good job.
You can open up your books, there will be more questions.
Representative Gosar, you are up for 5 minutes. You made it
just in time.
Mr. Huffman. Mr. Chairman, to give Mr. Gosar a chance to
catch his breath, could I ask for unanimous consent on two
things real quick?
Mr. Stauber. Yes, you can.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you. I would like to enter into the
record a report from the IMF citing over $649 billion in
subsidies for oil and gas. That is if you consider the health
and environmental impacts that the taxpayers pick up the tab
for every year.
And then a second one I would like to enter into the record
by unanimous consent is just the final vote on the Inflation
Reduction Act in both Houses, because we have had a long line
of questioning where my Republican friends are hopping mad
about the fossil fuel giveaways in that leasing formula, and
every one of them voted against the legislation.
Mr. Stauber. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II06/20240523/117251/HHRG-
118-II06-20240523-SD005.pdf

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
Mr. Stauber. Representative Gosar, have you got your
breath?
Dr. Gosar. I got my breath.
Mr. Stauber. You are up for 5 minutes.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman from California for giving
me my breath back. I know it has been a left-handed day in a
right-handed world or, if you are a left-hander, it is a right-
handed day in a left-handed world.
Anyway, Directors, when each of you issue an order or a
decision to an operator, that decision is appealable. However,
it is not appealable to an independent judge. Instead, the
operator must go through the Department's administrative
process, which means the appellate proceeds through the
Interior Board of Land Appeals, or the IBLA, which answers to
the Secretary.
Currently, that board has a backlog of over 600 matters. Of
these, your agencies collectively account for one-third, some
of them dating back to 2014. Specifically, BSEE has 157 pending
appeals; ONR squared has 37; BOEM has 2. Now, some of these
appeals may be voluntarily paused. However, others are not, and
these appellants are stuck in an administrative purgatory that
cannot be easily resolved.
So, a question for each of you. Until the IBLA or the
Secretary issues a final decision, can an operator seek
judicial relief within the Federal courts?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question. We are happy to take
that back. I imagine that it depends on the nature of the
appeal.
Dr. Gosar. OK.
Mr. Sligh. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. I
would have to agree with Director Klein. Each case is based on
its own merits, and we would have to take that back as a
question for the record.
Dr. Gosar. OK. So, Director Klein and Director Sligh, is
there a time limit on your appeals?
Ms. Klein. Again, I would have to take that back. I think
it depends on the nature of the appeal.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Director Cantor, do you have a time limit on
the appeal?
Mr. Cantor. Thank you for the question, Congressman. There
is a 33-month time limit on appeals that are made to the IBLA,
and then the IBLA loses jurisdiction, and the company has an
opportunity to go to Federal court.
Dr. Gosar. Is there an incentive? Because it is my
understanding that if the time expires, the amount is over
$10,000, that that ruling is automatically in your favor.
Correct?
Mr. Cantor. That is correct.
Dr. Gosar. Mr. Cantor, what we have heard is the deck is
stacked against operators that receive an adverse ruling
through your agencies. They must sit through an indefinite
administrative appeal or be forced to face an automatic loss,
where they must overcome agency deference. It sounds like a
legislative solution might be needed to fix this process.
Would you commit to work with me and my office on a
solution that works to resolve this process of what sounds a
bit like choosing between a rock and a hard place?
Mr. Cantor. I thank you for the question, Congressman. We
are always open to working with you and your staff.
Dr. Gosar. Wonderful. Thank you so much. I also have some
questions.
The proposed budget includes funding for land acquisition.
In reality, many counties that I represent have way too much
Federal land. For example, La Paz County, Arizona is about 95
percent Federal lands, depriving the locality of development
and revenue.
Mr. Biden's budget also proposes significant increases in
funding for environmental efforts, yet fails to address the
urgent need for reforms in the revenue-sharing agreements with
states that host Federal lands. How can you justify
prioritizing conservation spreading over ensuring equitable
compensation for states like Arizona that bear the burden of
hosting these resources?
Ms. Klein. Thank you for the question. I think much of that
is probably directed to the onshore agencies, and we would be
happy to take that question back and get an answer for the
record.
Dr. Gosar. OK. Well, I am going to do one more. Given the
recent increase in energy prices and concerns about energy
independence, how does the budget proposal address the need to
streamline permitting processes and encourage domestic energy
production on Federal lands, rather than imposing barriers and
delays?
Ms. Klein. Thank you again for that question. Certainly, we
have been spending a lot of time to streamline our permitting
processes to ensure that we are still resulting in robust
decisions that reflect our environmental and statutory
responsibilities in the offshore wind context. We have been
able to go from zero to eight approved projects, given our all-
of-government approach and our ability to streamline a lot of
those permitting processes.
Dr. Gosar. Have you seen any derogatory effects of these
big wind projects, particularly with the whales? Or is it
constantly in study?
Ms. Klein. I am sorry, could you repeat the question?
Dr. Gosar. Yes, some of the thought processes were that the
wind turbines, these offshore wind turbines, were having some
effect in regards to whales and their geospatial placement.
Ms. Klein. Sure. Thank you for that question. There is
really no evidence right now that anything having to do with
offshore wind, and particularly the G&G work that is done
before offshore wind construction, is having any effect on
whales. We certainly have a whole suite of mitigation measures
that we require of offshore wind operators before they can
proceed with construction and throughout the project to make
sure that their activities are avoiding, minimizing, and then
mitigating any impacts that might occur. But right now, there
is no data to suggest that the operations so far have had any
impact on whales.
Dr. Gosar. Is it an ongoing study?
Ms. Klein. Well, we have a number of studies that are
underway, and active monitoring at our construction projects.
And, again, there is just no evidence that any of the whale
strandings that have occurred on the East Coast are at all
related to the G&G and seismic work and any of the work that is
happening on the offshore wind space.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
Mr. Stauber. Thank you very much.
Before we close, I do want to enter into the record, at
Representative Graves' request, I want to enter it with
unanimous consent. It is a chart, ``Record Profits Are Higher
Under Democratic Administrations.''

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Mr. Stauber. Also, Representative Huffman brought up the
IRA. He, under unanimous consent, wanted the roll call vote in
the record. I will note the IRA was endorsed and supported by
the oil and gas industry, and every Republican in the House of
Representatives voted against it.
So, the members of this Subcommittee, as I said, may have
some additional questions for the witnesses, and we will ask
you to respond to these in writing. And I already told you that
you are going to have some.
Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
Wednesday, May 29. The hearing record will be held open for 10
business days for your responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Committee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:08 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
