- EXAMINING OPPORTUNITIES TO PROMOTE AND ENHANCE TRIBAL FOREST MANAGEMENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING OPPORTUNITIES TO PROMOTE AND ENHANCE TRIBAL

FOREST MANAGEMENT

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-82

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-285 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, C                          OGrace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                    Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                          CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                           Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                        Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS             Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                         Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster,                          FLKatie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR             Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                         Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                         Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                       Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                          Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                           Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                       Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                       Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                          Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                          Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                           Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                       Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FEDERAL LANDS

TOM TIFFANY, WI, Chairman
JOHN R. CURTIS, UT, Vice Chair
JOE NEGUSE, CO, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Katie Porter, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Pete Stauber, MN                         CNMI
John R. Curtis, UT                   Mike Levin, CA
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Jim Moylan, GU                       Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, December 5, 2023........................     1

Statement of Members:

Tiffany, Hon. Tom, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Wisconsin.........................................     1
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     9
Neguse, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Colorado................................................    15

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel I:

Crockett, John, Associate Deputy Chief, State, Private, and
Tribal Forestry, U.S. Forest Service, Washington, DC.......     3
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Questions submitted for the record.......................     9
Shaw, Bodie, Deputy Regional Director, Trust Services,
Northwest Region, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Portland,
Oregon.....................................................    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    20

Panel II:

Rice, Hon. Robert, Council Member, Mescalero Apache Tribe,
Mescalero, New Mexico......................................    29
Prepared statement of....................................    31
Desautel, Cody, President, Intertribal Timber Council,
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, Nespelem,
Washington.................................................    36
Prepared statement of....................................    37
Skenadore, Michael, President, Menominee Tribal Enterprises,
Keshena, Wisconsin.........................................    40
Prepared statement of....................................    41
Blake, Dawn, Director, Yurok Tribal Forestry Department,
Klamath, California........................................    45
Prepared statement of....................................    46
Rigdon, Phil, Vice President, Intertribal Timber Council,
Yakama Nation, Toppenish, Washington.......................    49
Prepared statement of....................................    51

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Bill Tripp, Director of Natural Resources and
Environmental Policy for the Karuk Tribe, Statement for
the Record.............................................    10

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON EXAMINING OPPORTUNITIES TO PROMOTE AND ENHANCE

TRIBAL FOREST MANAGEMENT

----------

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Federal Lands

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:57 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Tom Tiffany
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

Present: Representatives Tiffany, Bentz, Westerman; Neguse,
and Leger Fernandez.
Also present: Representative Huffman.

Mr. Tiffany. The Subcommittee on Federal Lands will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today for the purpose of
examining opportunities to promote and enhance tribal forest
management.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from California,
Mr. Huffman, be allowed to participate in today's hearing from
the dais.
Without objection, so ordered.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Minority
Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all other
Members' opening statements be made part of the hearing record
if they are submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TOM TIFFANY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN

Mr. Tiffany. As the Subcommittee wraps up 2023, I would
like to briefly reflect on our accomplishments this year. This
Subcommittee has held 17 hearings and considered more than 50
pieces of bipartisan legislation. In fact, we have considered
more bills this year than in any of the previous 8 years of
this Subcommittee.
Committee Republicans have held the Biden administration
accountable through numerous budget hearings where we examined
out-of-control spending; uncovered a secret $200 million payout
to Nancy Pelosi's Presidio Park; we have taken steps to improve
the lives of people in rural America by working to block the
Bureau of Land Management's harmful Lands Rule; we have
considered comprehensive recreation legislation that will
improve access to our public lands; we have passed meaningful
legislation on the House Floor by bipartisan margins, including
my ACRES Act, the Treating Tribes and Counties as Good
Neighbors Act, and just last week, Representative Malliotakis'
Protecting our Communities from Failure to Secure the Border
Act.
As we approach 2024, I look forward to advancing more
meaningful legislation that will rein in wasteful spending,
address our wildfire and forest health crisis, improve access
to public lands, and support jobs in rural communities.
With that, I will turn to the topic of today's hearing,
which is to examine opportunities to promote and enhance tribal
forest management. Wildfires and other calamities impacting our
forests do not respect man-made boundaries. Our approach to
confronting the wildfire crisis must reflect this reality.
Tribes, along with state and local governments, are critically
important partners that must be better utilized in order to
turn the tide against a crisis of this magnitude.
The Federal Government has much to learn from tribes when
it comes to forest management. For centuries, tribes actively
managed these lands in a manner that provided subsistence,
supported a healthy forest ecosystem and wildlife populations,
and created numerous cultural and religious benefits for
tribes. Today, Federal land managers often let these same
forests go unmanaged, their resources underutilized, and
providing no ecological or economic benefits.
In contrast, the 19 million acres of forest lands managed
by tribes today are consistently healthier and more resilient
to wildfires, drought, insects, and disease. I am pleased to
see one such tribe leading the nation in forest management
being represented here today from my home state of Wisconsin.
The Menominee Tribe provides a shining example of
responsible forest management that yields results that are good
for the forest and good for people. For nearly 170 years, the
forests of the Menominee Reservation in northeastern Wisconsin
have been responsibly managed with a focus on sustainable
harvesting. Over 2.25 billion board feet of timber have been
harvested in that time, yet there is more standing timber in
the forest now than there was over a century and a half ago.
That sustainable harvesting has consistently produced high-
quality wood products, and has even been used to create the
hardwood basketball courts for the Final Four and our home
state Milwaukee Bucks.
I look forward to discussing ways, that is why Giannis can
jump as high as he can.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. I look forward to discussing ways we can take
this model and expand it across the nation to support healthier
forests and tribal economies.
We have already made some good progress in this regard. The
Tribal Forest Protection Act, passed in 2004, directed the
Departments of Agriculture and the Interior to give greater
consideration to stewardship projects proposed by tribes for
managing adjacent forest lands.
Relatedly, the 2018 Farm Bill made tribes eligible
participants in Good Neighbor Authority agreements with Federal
land managers, but there is still much room for improvement.
In Fiscal Year 2023, the Forest Service had only 17 Good
Neighbor Authority agreements with tribes across the country.
Further, tribes frequently lack the infrastructure necessary to
process hazardous fuels and excess biomass, or encountered
difficulties accessing markets for these products. It is vital
that we pursue innovative solutions that will improve
coordination in co-stewardship opportunities, enhance existing
tools and authorities, and create new markets for wood products
for tribes.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today. I
look forward to this important discussion.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member.
As soon as Representative Neguse gets here we will get his
opening statement. First, we are going to move on to our first
witness panel.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules, you
must limit your oral statement to 5 minutes, but your entire
statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. At the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red, and I
will ask you to please complete your statement.
First, I would like to introduce Mr. John Crockett,
Associate Deputy Chief of State, Private, and Tribal Forestry
for the U.S. Forest Service.
Associate Deputy Chief Crockett, you are recognized for 5
minutes, and welcome before the Subcommittee.

STATEMENT OF JOHN CROCKETT, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY CHIEF, STATE,
PRIVATE, AND TRIBAL FORESTRY, U.S. FOREST SERVICE, WASHINGTON,
DC

Mr. Crockett. Good afternoon, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking
Member Neguse, members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the
invitation to testify today regarding the examination of
opportunities to promote and enhance tribal forest management.
My name is John Crockett, and I serve as Associate Deputy Chief
for State, Private, and Tribal Forestry.
With over 26 years of experience as a career Forest Service
employee, and the last 11 focused on national-level policy
issues, I have gained a valuable experience in doing meaningful
consultation with tribes and implementing authorities such as
the Tribal Forest Protection Act, Good Neighbor Authority,
stewardship contracting, and the recent 638 demonstration
authority provided by the 2018 Farm Bill.
The USDA is dedicated to fulfilling the trust
responsibility and establishing nurturing, enduring government
relationships with the federally recognized tribes. We
acknowledge that many of the Federal lands managed by the USDA
are home to sacred burial sites and sources of Indigenous foods
and medicines. In many of these lands, tribes have reserved
rights to hunt, fish, gather, and practice their traditional
ceremonies.
In alignment with our commitment to sovereign Tribal
Nations, fostering government-to-government relationships,
embracing environmental justice, and conserving natural
resources, the Forest Service is actively implementing various
Executive Orders, Presidential Memorandums, and Memorandums of
Understanding. These include Executive Order 13007 on Indian
Sacred sites; Executive Order 13175 on the consultation and
coordination with Indian tribal governments; and Executive
Order 13985 on advancing racial equity and support for
underserved communities.
Furthermore, the Forest Service is dedicated to promoting
and enhancing the management of conservation of tribal forest
and grassland through four major efforts.
First, we aim to establish co-stewardship agreements as the
model to engage tribal interest. These agreements involve
forest and grassland management practices that restore fire-
adapted ecosystem; integrate Indigenous and traditional
ecological knowledge and management decisions; and safeguard
water resources, wildlife habitat, treaty, and sovereign and
ceremonial activities.
Second, leveraging USDA tribal authorities to increase our
investments as funds allow. In Fiscal Year 2023, we executed
more than 120 tribal-related agreements with an investment of
over $68 million, tripling our investment from Fiscal Year
2022.
The third major effort involves drafting the first-ever
tribal relation action plan, titled ``Strengthening Tribal
Consultation and Nation-to-Nation Relationship.'' This plan
serves as a new roadmap to deepen our commitment to regular and
meaningful consultation with Tribal Nations. It will act as a
guide for Forest Service employees to implement new ways of
thinking that builds trust and innovative opportunities in
Indian Country.
And finally, the Forest Service is engaging with American
Indian tribes, Alaska Native corporations, tribal colleges,
inter-tribal organizations, and other Indigenous groups and
research partnerships. These partnerships aim to co-produce
products that include traditional knowledge and tribal
research. The primary objective is to support tribal values and
Indigenous ways of living, encourage shared learning and
advance stewardship, both within tribally controlled lands and
lands now owned and managed as national forests.
Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my remarks, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have for me.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Crockett follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Crockett, Associate Deputy Chief, State,
Private, and Tribal Forestry, United States Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the views of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Federally recognized Indian Tribes are sovereign nations with long-
standing government-to-government relationships with the Federal
Government. We acknowledge that some of the Federal lands and waters
managed by the USDA and the Department of the Interior (DOI) are
frequently the traditional territories of American Indians and Alaska
Natives. These lands are sometimes home to sacred sites and burial
sites, wildlife, and other sources of Indigenous foods and medicines.
Many of these lands are in areas where Tribes have reserved rights to
hunt, fish, gather, and practice their traditional ceremonies pursuant
to statutes and ratified treaties and agreements with the Federal
Government.
Tribal co-stewardship agreements made in response to Joint
Secretarial Order 3403 promote an approach to managing national forests
and grasslands that seeks to protect the treaty, religious, subsistence
and cultural interests of federally recognized Indian Tribes. The
agreements reflect a wide array of Tribal interests and address
priorities including caring for forest and watershed health, restoring
fire-adapted ecosystems, integrating Indigenous Knowledge into land
management decision-making, and protecting cultural resources, treaty
rights, wildlife habitat, food sovereignty, and ceremonial and
traditional activities.
The Forest Service is also implementing numerous Executive Orders,
Presidential Memorandums, and Memorandums of Understanding that seek to
strengthen relationships; better honor the role of sovereign Tribal
nations; and further the Biden Administration's ambitious environmental
justice goals.

These include:

Executive Order 13007 on Indian Sacred Sites

Executive Order 13175 on Consultation and Coordination
with Indian Tribal Governments

Executive Order 13985 on Advancing Racial Equity and
Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal
Government

Executive Order 14096 on Revitalizing Our Nation's
Commitment to Environmental Justice for All

Presidential Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and
Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships

Presidential Memorandum on Uniform Standards for Tribal
Consultation

White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and
Council on Environmental Quality Memorandum on
Implementation of Guidance for Federal Departments and
Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge

Memorandum Of Understanding Regarding Interagency
Coordination and Collaboration for The Protection of
Indigenous Sacred Sites

Memorandum Of Understanding Regarding Interagency
Coordination and Collaboration for The Protection of Tribal
Treaty Rights and Reserved Rights

Forest Service policy and action towards promoting and enhancing
Tribal forest management is based on a suite of treaties, Federal laws
and regulations, court decisions, executive orders and memorandums,
interagency agreements, and agency-specific direction.
Implementation of USDA Tribal Authorities

In Fiscal Year (FY) 2023, the Forest Service and Tribes executed
more than 120 agreements, representing a total investment of
approximately $68 million, more than triple the $19.8 million invested
in FY 2022.
Several statutes and implementing regulations authorize the Forest
Service to enter into agreements and contracts with and/or provide
grants to Indian Tribes to protect Tribal land, communities, and
resources. For example, the Tribal Forest Protection Act of 2004 (TFPA)
provides the authority for the Forest Service to enter into an
agreement or contract to carry out projects on the National Forest
System (NFS) that protect bordering or adjacent Indian trust lands and
resources from threats such as fire, insects, and disease while being
informed by Tribal values and knowledge. Indian Tribes may submit
requests to the Secretary of Agriculture to enter into agreements or
contracts.
The 2018 Farm Bill provided for a new Tribal forestry self-
determination demonstration authority for Tribes to propose projects on
NFS lands that border or are adjacent to Tribal lands.
The new Tribal forestry demonstration authority, or TFPA 638
Demonstration Authority, allows the Forest Service and Tribes to use
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (Pub. L. 95-
638), as amended, to enter into contracts with Tribes under TFPA to
``perform administrative, management, and other functions of
programs.''
As of October 2023, 21 agreements totaling $41.7 million were
executed using the TFPA 638 Demonstration Authority. Most of this
investment, approximately $37 million, occurred in fiscal year 2023, up
from approximately $4.3M in fiscal year 2022.
These agreements implement vegetation management projects to
protect Tribal land and communities and reduce hazardous fuels in
critical and cultural landscapes while strengthening our government-to-
government relationships with Tribal nations to achieve shared
stewardship and co-stewardship objectives.
The 2018 Farm Bill also expanded the Good Neighbor Authority (GNA)
to Tribes. The GNA allows the Forest Service to enter into cooperative
agreements and contracts with Indian tribes, states, and counties to
perform forest, rangeland, and watershed restoration services on NFS
lands, including hazardous fuels, fish and wildlife, and insect/disease
activities.
Since FY 2018, Tribes have entered 30 GNA agreements, totaling $7.3
million, to accomplish a variety of restoration work, including
addressing wildfires, pest control, climate change vulnerability
assessments, and cultural resource protection. Enhanced collaboration
between Tribal, Federal, state, and county governments, ultimately
advances better forest stewardship on Federal lands.
In FY 2021, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) made
additional funds available for Indian tribes and states to implement
forest management and wildfire mitigation and risk reduction projects
on Federal lands pursuant to the GNA or the TFPA.
The IIJA provided the Forest Service with $5.5 billion to reduce
wildfire risk and create healthy and resilient ecosystems across
Tribal, Federal, state, and private lands. These included the first-
ever Tribal program appropriations for the Forest Service, increased
eligibility for Tribes, and opportunity for priority allocations for
Tribes.
In addition to the above activities, the Inflation Reduction Act
(IRA) of 2022 created landowner assistance programs that originate new
markets and technology for wood products and to restore forest health
and resiliency through partnerships and collaboration across
landscapes.
The IRA provided an additional $5 billion to reduce wildfire risk
in the wildland urban interface, improve NFS lands health and
resilience, provide competitive grants for non-Federal private forest
landowners, including underserved landowners and those with less than
2500 acres, as well as provide grants for Wood Innovation, Forest
Legacy, and Urban and Community Forestry programs.
With this increased funding, the Forest Service is working to
restore health and resilience to America's forested landscapes and
advancing Tribal self-determination principles. Woven throughout this
work are the overarching themes of addressing the wildfire challenges
we face as a Nation, delivering programs equitably including the
Justice 40 initiative which are in two executive orders--Executive
Order 13985, ``Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved
Communities Through the Federal Government and Executive Order 14008,
``Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad''--mitigating climate
change and sharing stewardship of the lands that the Forest Service has
been entrusted with caring for.

Some key accomplishments in Tribal relations and Tribal forest
management include:

Wood Innovation Grants in support of the development of
new products, facilities and uses, including 4 projects
with specific connections to Tribes, totaling $1.1 million.

The Wood Products Infrastructure Assistance program funded
10 Tribal Projects in FY 2023, totaling over $6 million.

The Temporary Bridge Program funded 10 Tribal projects
totaling $2 million.

The partnerships to expand access to affordable home
heating for Tribes and others through the Firewood banks
and the Wood for Life programs. In FY 2022, through our
partner, Alliance for Green Heat, funding was provided to
46 existing firewood banks in 18 states from Maine to
Alaska with Tribes representing 35 percent of the banks
funded. We have continued this program again in FY 2023
with similar funding and results as in FY 2022.

Through our Office of General Counsel, we revised legal
guidance that interprets non-industrial private forest land
to include land held in trust. This greatly expanded
eligible land under the Landscape Scale Restoration (LSR)
program to be of relevance to Tribes. We initiated a $3
million Tribal set-aside and released a unique Request for
Proposals for federally recognized Tribes and Alaska
Natives and Native Corporations. As a result, in FY 2023,
the LSR program funded 11 projects for $3 million.

The State Forest Legacy Program supports permanent land
protection of forests threatened by conversion. The
resulting protected lands are typically managed as state
lands or as private working forests with a conservation
easement. Recognizing that threatened forests impact
traditional Tribal uses and Tribal lands, a new funding
category for FY 2024 in the IRA Forest Legacy Program is
being developed to encourage Tribal/State cooperative
projects that will conserve and protect forest resources of
priority or cultural relevance to Tribes (up to $250
million in FY 2024 for all projects, no set-aside).

Seven Tribal nursery grants for $1.8 million were awarded
in FY 2022 and FY 2023 with IIJA funds to produce
culturally important tree seeds and seedlings for
reforestation.

A grant opportunity was announced in August 2023 for up to
$150 million in FY 2023 IRA Forest Landowner Support to
underserved (including Tribal) and small acreage landowners
to help them access emerging climate-mitigation and forest-
resilience markets. An additional, Tribal-specific Notice
of Funding Opportunity for this program is expected in
winter FY 2024.

For Forest Health Protection, IIJA-funded Invasive species
projects, including 2 projects specifically with Tribes.

FY 2023 IRA investments in Urban and Community Forestry,
including direct awards to 4 Tribes for $4.1 million.

The IIJA Community Wildfire Defense Grant program provides
funding to reduce wildfire risks to communities, including
7 projects with Tribes from the first round of funding
totaling $4.8 million.

Forest Service's Tribal Relations Action Plan

In FY2023 the Forest Service released its first ever Tribal
Relations Action Plan, Strengthening Tribal Consultations and Nation-
to-Nation Relationships. This plan is a new roadmap to serve Tribal
Nations with a deeper commitment to regular and meaningful
consultation. National Forests and Grasslands often include ancestral
homelands that Tribes have stewarded for centuries. Indigenous Nations
are a key partner in how the Forest Service values, co-manages, and
stewards our Nation's grasslands and forests. Understanding the
perspective and knowledge of Indigenous people gives the Forest Service
an opportunity to reflect on our policies, programs and practices, the
real-life implications they have on Indigenous peoples and what role we
can play in rectifying historical or ongoing issues. This plan will act
as a guide for Forest Service employees to implement a new way of
working that will build trust and create innovative opportunities with
Tribal Nations. In it, there are three areas of focus, which include
commitments to enhance, expand, improve, engage, and grow agency and
Tribal capacity to get the work done. These focuses are to:

Strengthen relationships between Tribes and the USDA
Forest Service.

Enhance co-stewardship of the Nation's forests and
grasslands.

Advance Tribal relations within the USDA Forest Service,
including engaging in legislative and policy monitoring,
expanding collaboration with working groups and coalitions,
engaging youth, growing the agency and Tribal capacity
through training and collaboration, implementing reporting,
accountability, and performance measures, improving Tribal
relations program configuration and staffing, and promoting
and implementing the Administration's direction.

The plan also emphasizes the agency's unique, shared responsibility
to ensure that decisions relating to Federal stewardship of lands,
waters and wildlife include consideration of how to safeguard the
reserved treaty rights and spiritual, subsistence and cultural
interests of any federally recognized Tribe. As part of this work, in
February 2023 the Forest Service renamed the State & Private Forestry
deputy chief area to State, Private & Tribal Forestry to emphasize our
commitment.

Forest Service Research and Development

Forest Service scientists engage in research partnerships with
Tribes, Alaska Native Corporations, Tribal colleges, Intertribal
organizations, and other Indigenous groups. The goal of these research
partnerships is to support Tribal values and Indigenous ways of living,
to encourage shared learning, and to advance stewardship within both
tribally controlled lands and areas that are now managed as national
forests and grasslands. These collaborative research efforts advance
our shared interests in conserving and restoring our Nation's
biological and cultural diversity and heritage.
Examples of research that focus on Tribal interests and engagement
include:

General Technical Report (PSW-GTR-275) was published with
Tribes in the Western U.S. to determine best practices for
effective partnerships for Forest Service-Tribal
coordination. This report responds to and addresses the
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and
Council on Environmental Quality's guidance for working
with Indigenous Knowledge and aligns with the agency's
Tribal Action Plan, Equity Action Plan, and core values.

Providing new science around native seeds and
reforestation, and directly supporting the Reforestation,
Nurseries, and Genetic Resources Network to increase
capacity for Tribal nurseries. Research and Development
(R&D) staff serve as a Coauthor and Core Team leader for
the 4th National Indian Forest Management Assessment a
congressionally mandated, national, multi-year independent
assessment of the status of Tribal forestry and Tribal
forestry programs as part an USDA Intergovernmental
Personnel Act agreement with the Intertribal Timber Council
and the Forest Service.

R&D expanded activities with Tribes in FY 2023, renewing
an Interagency Personnel Agreement that formalizes our
strong partnership with the Eastern Band of Cherokee
Indians. Scientists hosted the first in-person Rivercane
Gathering, and engaged 95 partners, Tribes and
stakeholders, including representatives of 12 Tribes and
multiple Forest Service personnel which resulted in
sustained co-stewardship efforts of culturally sensitive
plants on Federal lands.

Forest Service research provided science-based guidance to
National Forests for land and resource management planning
on topics that are important to Tribes and Indigenous
communities, including areas of Tribal importance,
traditional Tribal knowledge or Traditional Ecological
Knowledge held by Indigenous communities, and environmental
justice issues.

Forest Service R&D oversees research within a network of
long-term experimental areas. A recently established
experimental forest, Heen Latinee Experimental Forest
(meaning ``River Watcher'' in the Tlingit language), has a
goal of understanding climate change impacts and supporting
engagement of Tribal youth and elders in research.

Indigenous stewardship practices, including cultural
burning, carried out by generations of Native Americans
helped maintain a balanced relationship with the critical
ecological process of fire. Forest Service research is
helping to shed light on the many benefits of those
stewardship practices and how to support and integrate
traditional knowledge and practices into broader land
management.

Forest Service Tribal-research partners include:

Intertribal Timber Council Research Subcommittee

American Indian Higher Education Consortium

National Congress of American Indians

IUFRO Research Group on Forest History and Traditional
Knowledge

College of Menominee National Sustainable Development
Institute

University of Oregon Tribal Climate Change Project

Native American Fish and Wildlife Society

We express our sincere gratitude for your valuable time and commend
the dedicated efforts undertaken by this Subcommittee and its
counterparts in formulating, negotiating, and advancing legislation
aimed at bolstering the Forest Service's capacity to foster and improve
Tribal partnerships in forest management. Your commitment helps advance
our goals of strengthening Tribal relationships, improving the health
and resiliency of the nation's forests and grasslands. Thank you for
your dedication to this critical mission.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. John Crockett, Associate
Deputy Chief, State, Private, and Tribal Forest, U.S. Forest Service

Mr. Crockett did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Last year I introduced legislation, along with
Congressman LaMalfa, that would create a Tribal Biochar Demonstration
Project similar to the existing Tribal Biomass Demonstration Project.
Can you please share what opportunities you see to support Tribal
biochar production, and how that could help improve forest health and
support Tribal jobs?

Question 2. The testimony that I submitted for the record during my
opening statement included a recommendation that: ``The Forest Service
should consider how to partner with and enable Tribes to effectively
prepare NEPA and other environmental documents when required for land
management activities.'' Has the Forest Service evaluated this
potential and how could allowing Tribes to prepare NEPA documents help
speed up the process for approving forest management projects?

Question 3. Do you believe that the federal government is currently
coordinating with Tribes on forest management, and what additional
tools are necessary to increase coordination between Tribes and the
Forest Service?

______

Mr. Tiffany. I want to thank the gentleman for his
comments.
Next, I am going to turn to the Chairman of the Full
Natural Resources Committee, Mr. Westerman, for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, and thank you
to the witnesses for being here today. It is a very important
subject that we are talking about, and I am very glad to be
here to discuss tribal forest management, which is a crucial
topic, given the various crises currently threatening the
health and resiliency of our nation's forests.
Tribes have a rich history in forest management dating back
centuries. Tribes historically managed forests across the
country for a variety of uses, including economic development,
spiritual and cultural values, wildlife habitat diversity,
improved air and water quality, and to protect sacred
landscapes.
In fact, Indigenous people used fire to great effect when
managing the forest in my home state of Arkansas. Their
frequent low-intensity fires helped maintain a healthy forest
ecosystem that supported a vibrant mix of wildlife, including
the red cockaded woodpecker, which thrives in open pine
woodlands and savannas.
I see my good friend, Phil Rigdon, in the audience today.
Phil and I were classmates at the Yale School of Forestry, and
I had to go to forestry school to learn something that was
being done long before the Yale School of Forestry ever
existed, and that is to manage land the way that our tribal
ancestors managed land here in America. And I am glad to see
Phil here, and the great work that he is doing.
And I have often said that if our Federal land managers
just managed our forests like some of the tribes that I have
visited with throughout my tenure in Congress, that we wouldn't
have the same level of catastrophic wildfires we are seeing
today. When European settlers moved in, many of the cultural
burning practices that had been going on for centuries were
banned. Our Federal forests became overstocked with trees that
were competing for those things they require to grow:
nutrients, water, sunlight. And as a result, these forests
became more susceptible to wildfires, insects, drought, and
disease.
The sad part is that, in many cases now, tribes are bearing
the brunt of mismanagement on lands that were once pristinely
maintained by their ancestors. In California, tribal members
are three times more concentrated in areas at the highest risk
of wildland fire. This has had devastating consequences.
For years, the Karuk Tribe urged the Forest Service to use
more cultural burning in the Klamath National Forest, as their
Tribe had done for thousands of years. Nothing happened. And in
2020, the Slater Fire burned 100,000 acres in less than 12
hours, and two tribal members lost their lives along with
roughly 200 homes.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
submit the testimony of Bill Tripp, the Director of Natural
Resources and Environment Policy for the Karuk Tribe into the
record.
Mr. Tiffany. So ordered.

[The information follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bill Tripp, Intertribal Timber Council
My name is Bill Tripp I am the Director of Natural Resources and
Environmental Policy for the Karuk Tribe Department of Natural
Resources. I am delivering testimony here today on behalf of the
Intertribal Timber Council, which is a nonprofit nation-wide consortium
of Tribes dedicated to improving the management of natural resources of
importance to Native American communities.
It is a great pleasure to have the honor of addressing the House
Natural Resources Committee on this important topic.
Today, I wish to convey some impacts of the Slater Fire that
occurred in 2020, and begin to lead the conversation toward long term
solutions for the wildfire crises we now face. Events like the Slater
Fire tend to perpetuate fear-driven motives in how we approach fire
management. We cannot allow this fear to perpetuate a negative
relationship with fire.
Instead, in focusing on the beneficial aspects of fire, we can set
the stage for averting future catastrophes. We can restore conditions
conducive of increasing community-based and collaborative fire use
across large landscapes. Such efforts are already underway, such as the
Indigenous Peoples Burning Network and Western Klamath Restoration
Partnership; those programs led by Tribes like the Karuk and San Carlos
Apache; and those efforts being coordinated by non-governmental
organizations like the Nature Conservancy's family of fire networks and
the Forest Stewards Guild's all hands all lands burning program. These
efforts are supported by a plethora of agency and institutional
partners. However, we also need the help of Congress if we are going to
create the positive and lasting change, we will need to maintain the
resiliency we create together moving forward.
The Slater Fire happened above the community of Happy Camp,
California. It burned over 100,000 acres in less than 12 hours. It
started by electrical infrastructure. It reset the entire Indian Creek
watershed to a landscape filled with snags and brush, with very few
pockets of large live trees remaining. Two lives were lost, and half
the homes in Happy Camp burned down, rendering many homeless. Pets,
livestock and wildlife had little chance of survival, many of which
died. A third person died during the post fire recovery efforts. It
will take multiple generations of people to restore this watershed to
any semblance of what it once was.
This year, many eastern states experienced smoke impacts like those
we face in the west nearly every year. The Slater Fire produced
readings on the Air Quality Index that exceed 850 for long durations.
This is more than double the threshold considered Hazardous to human
health.
On June 29, 2023, CBS News reported Washington DC as having some of
the worst air quality of the world. According to AirNow.Gov, Washington
DC's Air Quality Index (AQI) was at 163 as of 7 a.m., which is
considered unhealthy. However, this was less than 20% of the impact we
experienced in a given day of the Slater Fire.
The primary Karuk village in the Happy Camp area is called
athivthuuvvuunupma, or place where hazel creek flows through. This
Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge indicates that there was
once a lot of healthy hazel to make baskets out of and to provide nuts
for food. The best hazel comes from black oak stands, which grow on
slopes where the sun shines most intensely, some of the driest, most
fire prone places. Excluding fire from this kind of environment sets
the stage for disastrous consequences. Every year, I witness fire being
excluded from areas that need to burn for our homelands to remain
survivable. Through most of my career I have watched the existing
management paradigm put Native American Cultural Identity at risk. The
occurrence of the Slater Fire had the worst consequence I have seen
yet, but in the same vein signals an inflection point that serves to
remind us that we must look to our past, be mindful of the changes
coming in our future, resolve our differences, and rely on cultural
foundations to lead us into a viable future. It is currently against
state and federal law, regulation and policy to burn in the time of
year we are supposed to burn black oak woodlands according to our
Indigenous laws of the land; we need to bring alignment between these
systems.
California has a 1 Million acre treatment goal, with nearly half of
the acres slated for beneficial fire use. A fraction of this is likely
to get done given the recent trajectory. However, most people don't
realize that burning 20 acres a day over a 14-day period 3 times a year
in 120 different places would accomplish over 100,000 acres. This would
amount to about 10% of the statewide goal on less than 1% of the target
landscape. We need to pool our resources to restore conditions
conducive of carrying out these historic fire regimes, with peoples of
place, while enabling a growing cultural fire practitioner base to lead
the charge in maintaining the resiliency we all create together. As
Indigenous peoples, we did not ask for fire to be taken from us, it was
taken without consent. It is our responsibility in the modern era to
give it back to the people, or we will continue to have the negative
consequences that come with fire events like the Slater Fire. None of
us, not even with the most advanced fire management systems in the
world that currently exist here in the United States, can do it alone.
Congress has an important role in this effort, both by providing
equitable funding to Tribes and by creating a legal framework that
enables Tribal stewardship not just on Tribal lands, but across the
landscape. Some specific recommendations can be found in the attached
letter, from the Karuk Tribe to the U.S. Forest Service.
I would like to thank the esteemed chair Bruce Westerman and rest
of this committee for affording me this opportunity to speak. I am
happy to field any questions you may have during this session or in
following up as requested.

*****

ATTACHMENT

Karuk Tribe

Happy Camp, CA

June 20, 2023

Christopher Swanston
Director, Office of Sustainability and Climate
201 14th Street SW, Mailstop 1108
Washington, DC 20250-1124
Submitted via: www.regulations.gov

Re: Comments of the Karuk Tribe on Advanced Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking re Forest Service Organization, Functions, and
Procedures (Docket ID FS-2023-0006)

Ayukii (Greetings) Mr. Swanston,

Since time immemorial, the Karuk People have lived in the Klamath-
Siskiyou Mountains in the mid-Klamath River region of northern
California. With an Aboriginal Territory that includes an estimated
1.38 million acres, Karuk people historically resided in more than one
hundred villages along the Klamath and Salmon Rivers and tributaries,
and we continue to live here and practice our culture today. Thriving
with an economy supported by rich natural endowments and a strong
culture-based commitment to land stewardship, Karuk eco-cultural
management has shaped the region's ecological conditions for millennia
and continues to do so.

The Klamath River and its tributaries, forests, grasslands, and
high country are essential for the cultural, spiritual, economic, and
physical health of Karuk people. Because the changing climate poses
serious threats for Karuk culture, sovereignty, and all life on earth,
it is essential that Karuk people be involved in management and co-
management of our lands of territorial affiliation. While a serious
threat, the needs to address climate change is perhaps most
productively viewed as an opportunity to assert and expand Karuk
traditional practices, tribal management authority, and culture in
recognition of Karuk tribal sovereignty.

Karuk tribal knowledge and management principles can be used to
mitigate, prepare for, and adapt to the growing impacts of climate
change. However, we need our Forest Service partners to create the
enabling conditions that support the Tribe to effectively engage on
federally administered lands. Thus, the Karuk Tribe recommends the
following reforms to the USDA Forest Service's policies and practices
in order to promote climate resilience:
1. Cultural Burning: Separate and Distinct from Prescribed Fire

The fire suppression and exclusion paradigm has adversely affected
ecosystems and the human communities that depend on them, including the
Karuk. This has contributed to the increasing scale and severity of
wildfire and has made our landscapes and communities more vulnerable to
the many effects of climate change (see more within the Karuk Climate
Vulnerability Assessment and Karuk Climate Adaptation Plan--available
here: https://karuktribeclimatechangeprojects.com/).

One important step in the right direction would be for the US
Forest Service to recognize cultural burning as separate and distinct
from prescribed fire. Cultural burning is governed under the sovereign
authority of tribes, and Indigenous cultural burning practices are
distinguished from other types of fire management (e.g., local, state
and federal agency) as they are applied within the context of
traditional law, rights, objectives, and outcomes. The Karuk Tribe
seeks to retain this practice and have our federal partners recognize
our traditional forest management practice.

Enabling and supporting Indigenous cultural fire practitioners to
reinstate cultural fire regimes is critical to restore and maintain
balanced ecosystem processes and functions and make them more resilient
to climate change. It is also one step towards accounting for past
social and ecological injustices. In addition to recognizing cultural
burning as separate and distinct from prescribed fire, the USFS should
enable and accommodate cultural burning by Tribes on all lands
administered by the Forest Service that fall within the each Tribe's
lands of territorial affiliation. Coordination and communication
between the USFS and the interested Tribe(s) should be encouraged, but
federal agency approval should not be required. This will be an
important way to demonstrate co-management between the USFS and Tribes
by creating spaces and structures for mutually-beneficial coordinated
decision-making.
2. Agency-specific NEPA Regulatory Changes

For millennia, Indigenous people have applied fire to landscapes
across the United States in deliberate, frequent, and highly
knowledgeable ways. As such, the intentional use of fire by Tribes
should be considered a component of baseline environmental conditions,
and not as a major federal action requiring National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA) review and assessment.

Moreover, the Forest Service should consider how to partner with
and enable Tribes to effectively prepare NEPA and other environmental
documents when required for land management activities that can help us
both adapt to and mitigate the climate crisis. Often the environmental
compliance portion of a project can take years, and we are watching our
landscapes (and communities like Happy Camp, CA) both accumulate fuels
and then burn in high severity wildfire while we wait. Empowering
Tribes to prepare cultural resource sections as well as entire NEPA
documents, and to engage in planning activities in ancestral
territories and across jurisdictions using tools such as Integrated
Resource Management Plans, will help the Forest Service and other
federal agencies better address the climate crisis.

In order to do so, it will be critical that the USFS actively fill
leadership positions with people willing to engage with Tribes and
willing to lead the agency into a new era of co-management, co-
stewardship, and coordinated decision-making. Criteria for hiring and
promoting Forest Supervisors, District Rangers, Regional leads, and
other key leadership positions should reflect this as a priority.
3. Co-Management Agreement Templates

The Administration has repeatedly highlighted the importance of
Tribal co-stewardship and co-management, and has directed the Secretary
of Agriculture to strengthen partnerships between Tribes and federal
agencies. However, meaningful co-management has been hindered by
federal law and unclear guidance. Agreements outside of the TFPA
context have not been designed for work with Tribes. Thus, the Forest
Service should examine the agreement structures they are currently
using to work with tribes, and should then collaborate with tribes to
develop co-management agreement templates that recognize tribal
decision-making authority, tribal sovereignty, self governance, and
self determination.

Additionally, the USFS should assess hiring and promotions criteria
and invest in the training and resources required to develop a
workforce that is sufficiently knowledgeable, cooperative, and creative
in order to meaningfully partner with Tribes on co-management
agreements. The USFS should provide funding to tribal programs included
in co-management agreements to allow tribes to carry out activities of
mutual benefit to Tribes, the federal government, and the public. In
short, it is essential for USFS to invest in the future of the Tribes
and their workforces, while promoting co-management.
4. Planning Authority (IRMP)

Effective collaboration and integration of Indigenous Knowledge
into management practices on USFS lands depends not only on landscape-
scale project implementation but landscape-scale planning efforts and
engagement with Tribes. This requires cross-boundary planning, burning,
and land management. Currently, Integrated Resource Management Plans
(IRMP) are a tool that allow for comprehensive management of natural
resources on Tribal lands, and, in limited circumstances, federal lands
adjacent to Tribal lands.

Expansion of the use of IRMPs across boundaries and jurisdictions,
including on USFS lands throughout Tribes' ancestral territories could
promote cohesive, sustainable ecological restoration and climate
resilience through effective planning and coordination across
jurisdictions and in ways that honor and respect tribal sovereignty and
Indigenous knowledge, practice, and belief systems. The Forest Service
should explore how to better engage with this tool within its existing
authority, and we would be happy to collaborate as a pilot example.
5. Reserved and Retained Treaty Rights

Reserved, retained, and other tribal rights are often misunderstood
and ignored in the context of Tribal sovereignty and land stewardship.
Treaties generally outline the rights that Tribes give up in exchange
for other benefits, actions, or commitments from the United States. Any
rights not explicitly described in treaties are therefore retained, and
must be respected by the U.S. Government. These rights may be applied
both on land retained and land ceded throughout Tribes' lands of
territorial affiliation, including land administered by the USFS.

While some rights have been recognized and respected as retained by
the USFS, there are a number of other rights that are also retained by
Tribes, but not always recognized by the Forest Service. These include
rights such as cultural burning, as well as the right to access and
utilize traditional foods, fibers, and medicines.

The USFS should, whenever appropriate, proactively seek out Tribal
consultation to ensure that retained rights are upheld on land
administered by the USFS that falls within Tribal lands of territorial
affiliation, including those of cultural and customary use. The USFS
should also identify potential barriers to the exercise of reserved,
retained and other rights by Tribal members, including the right to
cultural burning and access and resource utilization, and make clear to
employees and representatives of the USFS that the exercising of these
rights is welcome and encouraged.
6. Regenerative Economic Systems

Current funding mechanisms for collaboration between Tribes and the
USFS are incompatible with the concept of Tribal sovereignty, as
implementation of tribal policies and priorities is heavily dependent
on funder priorities, review, and approval. As the USFS seeks to
integrate Indigenous Knowledge into its management practices, fiscal
limitations on these activities and on Tribal authority to manage funds
impacts the potential for sustainable co-management between Tribes and
the USFS. Reliance on project-based grant funding, in particular, makes
it difficult for Tribes to build stability and reclaim self-
sufficiency.

Developing a stable, skilled land management workforce, for
example, is challenging based on a system of project-based funding,
given that positions cannot be guaranteed beyond the timeline of a
given project. Members of the local Tribal community may be unable to
accept the instability of project-based grant-funded positions as a way
to build their careers, making it difficult to attract and retain a
skilled Tribal workforce, while also creating challenges for Tribes
seeking to build institutional knowledge. The accumulation of
institutional knowledge, local workforce capacity, and financial
resources over time is difficult to impossible within this funding
paradigm.

This is happening at a time when there is immense need for tribal
leadership and tribal workforce to implement landscape-scale
restoration of the ecological systems and fire regimes needed to ensure
greater resilience in the face of climate change.

In contrast, regenerative economic systems are built on the concept
that tribal programs can and should eventually become self-sustaining
or otherwise perpetuated. Instead of a linear system in which Tribes
must receive and exhaust funding repeatedly, a regenerative system
could follow various models, such as an endowment model, where income
under Tribal management could be invested in order to provide cash-flow
over time. Transitioning to regenerative economic systems will require
transformative change. However, specific policy changes can promote
Tribal sovereignty as well as collaboration for the purpose of
landscape-scale stewardship. When creating or implementing funding
programs and agreements, the Forest Service should keep these
principles in mind, and consider innovative ways that tribes can be
supported to re-invest in themselves and in tribal programs to create
long-term sustainability, resilient tribal programs, and a stable
tribal workforce.
7. Consultation Funding

To effectively and meaningfully engage in Tribal consultation
requests put forth by the Forest Service, Tribes must often dedicate
significant time and resource capacity, which they often do not have to
give. If the Forest Service wishes to equitably seek and integrate
tribal consultation into agency functions, policies, and procedures
moving forward, the USFS should consider providing funding to Tribes to
enable meaningful participation.

Tribal knowledge and management principles mitigate climate impacts
for the benefit of Native and non-Native communities alike--so
increased investment to develop reciprocal relationships between
governments is critical to preserving social, economic, cultural, and
ecological resilience to climate change.

Yootva (thank you) for taking these recommendations into
consideration. The Karuk people are a ``fix the world'' people, and we
look forward to meaningful engagement with you all on these
recommendations as the climate and wildfire realities we are facing
require coordinated and effective action.

Yootva (Thank you),

Russell Attebery,
Karuk Tribal Chairman

______

Mr. Westerman. We heard from Mr. Tripp earlier this year
during a field hearing we held out in Yosemite. And his
testimony outlines the experience of the Karuk Tribe and why
environmental regulations stemming from NEPA were the root
cause of inaction. This is unacceptable.
Instead of bearing the brunt of Federal mismanagement,
tribes should be looked at as models of ways we can improve the
health and resiliency of our Federal forests. I had the
opportunity to see one such model firsthand in New Mexico when
I visited the Mescalero Apache Reservation.
[Slide.]
Mr. Westerman. As you can see behind me, the Lincoln
National Forest, which borders the Mescalero Reservation and is
largely overgrown, experienced devastating wildfires that
turned it into a moonscape. On the right hand side of that
picture, you will see the forest managed by the Mescalero
Apache which is in pristine condition, wonderful elk habitat.
It is what you would hope to see in a textbook if you opened up
a textbook on forest management.
[Slide.]
Mr. Westerman. I believe another such model is the Tule
River Tribe in California, which successfully managed the giant
sequoias for thousands of years. On the picture behind me, you
can see tribal members standing in a burned out sequoia grove
on Federal lands. If tribes had been allowed to manage that
grove, I can almost guarantee you that picture would look a lot
different.
When 20 percent of our giant sequoias died in just 2 years,
the Tule River Tribe led the charge in forming the bipartisan
Save Our Sequoias Act. I believe this legislation is a great
example for how we can use traditional ecological knowledge to
inform better practices for both Federal and tribal forest
management. It also shows that tribal forest management
shouldn't be an area of partisan division, but rather,
bipartisan compromise.
I look forward to hearing more ideas about bipartisan
compromises today and from our expert panel of witnesses. I
would like to again thank you all for traveling here to be with
us.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields, and I would like to
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Neguse, for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOE NEGUSE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany. It is another busy
week for the Federal Lands Subcommittee, and today's overview
of tribal forestry is an important and welcome focus.
Before I get into my remarks, I want to first say thank you
to all of the witnesses for taking the time to discuss this
critical issue with us today. I know it is not always easy to
get to Washington, DC, and we certainly appreciate the effort
that you each made to be here today, particularly as we are
welcoming many guests from the western United States, where I
am lucky to call home.
Tribes are stewards of millions of acres of trust and
federally recognized lands that provide habitat for more than
500 endangered species. They contain over 13,000 miles of
rivers and nearly 1 million lakes. Importantly for today's
discussion, this includes 19.2 million acres of tribal forests.
Since time immemorial, Indigenous peoples have managed
forests for cultural and ecological benefit, and to this day
forestry remains a vital cultural practice as well as a vital
source of income. It is critical that Congress and this
Subcommittee hear directly from tribal voices.
Today's hearing is an important part of our work to uphold
and to maintain the critical trust responsibility toward Indian
forest lands, examining the significance of tribal sovereignty
and self-determination, identifying opportunities to strengthen
tribal consultation to work closely with tribes to identify and
protect sacred sites and, perhaps most importantly, to support
tribal control of their own land and resources.
While there is still work to do, Congress has made
significant progress in many of these areas. Most recently, as
outlined in the written testimony from our Administrative
witnesses, both the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the
Inflation Reduction Act, which I was proud to support, invested
millions of dollars in the restoration of public lands and
national forests.
These investments included targeted programs for tribes,
and aimed to increase eligibility for tribes in a wide range of
activities. This was significant progress that has enabled the
Biden administration to advance critical restoration work with
states and with tribes through authorities such as the Tribal
Forest Protection Act and Good Neighbor Authority.
However, I do think it is important that I reiterate a
message that my colleagues have heard me say often, going back
to the beginning of this year, which is the investments that
were secured by House Democrats and President Biden in the last
Congress were a downpayment, a downpayment. We cannot stop
there. We can't leave land management agencies hollowed out by
failing to fund their agencies at the level required, and
failing to provide tribal communities with the support and the
resources that they need to truly scale up forestry and
restoration efforts. That is a reoccurring theme that I have
noticed in the testimony that has been submitted for the record
in today's hearing.
In the context of tribal forestry, there is a stark
inequity and the need, in my view, for sustained investment to
ultimately achieve that parity. This Subcommittee does not
always have the opportunity to engage on issues related to the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, so I appreciate that they are with us
here today. I look forward to working with my colleagues and,
of course, Chairman Tiffany on finding ways to address that
disparity and to many of the other priority issues that have
been identified.
Again, I want to say thank you to the witnesses for your
time for joining us. I certainly look forward to learning more
from all of you during today's discussion.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ranking Member Neguse. Now I would
like to introduce Mr. Bodie Shaw, our other panelist on this
panel, Deputy Regional Director for Trust Services at the
Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Mr. Shaw, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BODIE SHAW, DEPUTY REGIONAL DIRECTOR, TRUST
SERVICES, NORTHWEST REGION, BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS, PORTLAND,
OREGON

Mr. Shaw. Good afternoon, and thank you, Chairman Tiffany,
Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you for this opportunity to provide testimony on opportunities
to promote and enhance tribal forest management.
I am Bodie Shaw, Deputy Regional Director from Bureau of
Indian Affairs, Portland, Oregon. I am also a confederated
tribal member from Warm Springs. I am glad to see Congressman
Bentz, our reservation resides within his district. Good to see
you again.
At the Bureau of Indian Affairs, our forest mission is to
provide for the efficient, effective management and protection
of forest resources held in trust for the benefit of American
Indians and Alaska Natives. We do this through recognition and
support of tribal resource management goals to further self-
determination, consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's
trust responsibilities. This responsibility applies to the
management of tribal forests, which cover, as we have heard
already, just over 19 million acres through 33 different
states, and a commercial timber volume of approximately 66
billion board feet.
Management of tribal forests, in fact, do not go without
challenges, as documented by the recent Indian Forest
Management Assessment Team, a congressionally-mandated non-
governmental team that reports back to Congress every 10 years,
highlighting the disparity--roughly a third--of the cost we
receive for our BIA tribal forests with our other Federal
partners, as well as showing the under-staffed nature that many
of us have, some of our needs within our infrastructure through
the IFMAT report. A link to that report is in my full written
testimony.
Beyond the work at the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the
Department recognizes that forest and ecosystem health does not
stop at the border of tribal lands. The Department is committed
to strengthening the role of tribal communities and Federal
land management. I will draw attention to a couple different
items that we have been working on here of recent time.
Secretarial Order 3403 affirms the trust relationship
between the United States and tribes, and acknowledges that the
United States can benefit from the land management, expertise,
and practices Tribal Nations have developed over centuries. The
Secretarial Order is a commitment and, to quote, ``to ensure
the tribal governments play an integral role in decision-making
related to the management of Federal lands and waters through
consultation, capacity building, and other means consistent
with applicable authority.'' We have made notable progress
implementing Secretarial Order 3403, including agreements that
encompass forest lands.
In 2018, Congress expanded the Good Neighbor Authority to
authorize tribes to enter into agreements with DOI's Bureau of
Land Management and the Forest Service to perform forest
restoration work on Federal lands managed by those agencies.
However, at present the Good Neighbor Authority lacks
authorization for tribes to retain timber sale revenues. This
has been a considerable obstacle preventing greater tribal
participation. Other participation challenges for tribes
include limited staffing, funding, and other resources to enter
into these agreements.
The Tribal Forest Protection Act from 2004 authorizes the
Secretary of the Interior and Agriculture to enter into
agreements or contracts with tribes to carry out projects to
protect Indian forest land. Ongoing Federal efforts aimed at
creating healthy, resilient forests, preventing large-scale
resource loss due to wildfire, and fully implementing climate-
based strategies are expected to better facilitate tribal work
with the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the importance of the
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, which
allows tribes to assume responsibility for natural resources
management. While most tribes still receive forestry program
services directly from the BIA, about 30 percent of the tribes
with trust resources operate their forestry programs directly
under this Act.
Finally, in conclusion, thank you for this opportunity to
discuss the Department's work to fulfill the trust
responsibility to tribes in the area of forestry, and that our
work to ensure the effective management of Federal and tribal
forests continues. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Shaw follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bodie K. Shaw, Deputy Regional Director-Trust
Services, Northwest Region, Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Department
of the Interior

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on
opportunities to promote and enhance Tribal forest management. I am
Bodie K. Shaw, Deputy Regional Director-Trust Services, Northwest
Region, Bureau of Indian Affairs at in the Department of the Interior
(Department).
Tribal forestry has a unique standing among federal land management
programs in that Congress has declared that ``the United States that
has a trust responsibility toward Indian forest lands'' in the National
Indian Forest Resources Management Act of 1990 (NIFRMA) (Pub. L. 101-
630, Title III, 104 Stat. 4532). This responsibility applies to the
management of Tribal forests, which cover approximately 19.2 million
acres across 33 States, with a commercial timber volume of
approximately 66 billion board feet with an allowable annual harvest of
732 million board feet. These forests provide critical economic and
employment opportunities to Tribes and tribal communities and hold
important historical, spiritual, and cultural significance.
The Department recognizes that forest and ecosystem health does not
stop at the border of Tribal lands. The Department is committed to
improving the stewardship of our Nation's federal forest lands by
strengthening the role of Tribal communities in federal land
management, honoring Tribal sovereignty, and supporting the priorities
of Tribal Nations. Our testimony will also share our ongoing work in
the areas of Tribal co-stewardship to create resilient, productive
forest lands within and adjacent to Tribal lands.
Bureau of Indian Affairs

BIA Forestry's mission is to provide for the efficient, effective
management and protection of forest resources held in trust for the
benefit of American Indians and Alaska Natives. We do this through
recognition and support of Tribal resource management goals, to further
self-determination consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's
trust responsibilities.
Funding of Tribal Forestry Programs and Activities
BIA and Tribal forestry programs are funded through annual
appropriations. BIA Forestry funds are primarily used to support staff
that conduct forest land management activities. The emphasis for this
program is the preparation and administration of forest product sales,
and the management and technical oversight of those activities. In FY
2022, the BIA and Tribes harvested 312,673,000 board feet of forest
products generating $79,084,044 in revenue to the Tribes.
The sale of forest products is a vital source of Tribal revenue and
employment. Forest product sales support BIA efforts to promote self-
sustaining communities and healthy and resilient Indian forest
resources. Forestry staff perform program oversight and administrative
functions that support management priorities identified in Tribal
Forest Management Plans and ensure compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.
The Forestry Projects funds support a labor-intensive program
employing full-time and seasonal positions that perform on-the-ground
activities designed to meet forest management objectives through direct
service or contracts. Forestry Projects includes programs critical to
sustainable Indian forest management, such as Forest Development;
Forest Management Inventory and Planning; Woodland Management; and the
Timber Harvest Initiative.
Forest Management Plans
Forest management plans provide for the regulation of the multiple-
use operation of Indian forest land. Plans set forth methods to ensure
that forest lands remain in a continuously productive state while
meeting a Tribe's objectives. An approved forest management plan is
required to conduct forest land management activities, and at present,
all Tribal forest lands held in trust are covered by approved plans.
Each plan includes information on funding and staffing requirements
necessary to carry out the plan, and quantitative criteria to evaluate
performance of the plan's objectives.
Indian Forest Management Assessment Team (IFMAT) Report
The NIFRMA requires the Secretary to conduct an assessment of the
management of Indian forest lands every 10 years. This assessment is
conducted by an independent team of non-government forestry specialists
who issue a report of their findings and recommendations. IFMAT IV,
published in 2023, identified a number of challenges the BIA faces in
the management of Indian forest lands. As with IFMATs I, II, and III,
IFMAT IV found that ``Indian trust forest lands are funded at about a
third per acre of comparable federal forests.'' IFMAT IV also found
that Tribal forestry departments are understaffed and high stand
density, combined with limited processing infrastructure, has created
complex forest health conditions. Even so, Tribal forestry serves as a
positive example of promoting environmental stewardship. The full
IFMAT-IV Report can be found at https://www.bia.gov/service/indian-
forest-management-assessment.
Indian Trust Asset Reform Act (ITARA)
The Indian Trust Asset Reform Act was passed into law on June 22,
2016. Title II of the act authorizes the Secretary of the Department of
the Interior to establish and carry out an Indian Trust Asset
Management Demonstration Project (project), which was established on
October 1, 2018. The purpose of ITARA is to go a step further and
provide Tribes greater sovereignty in the management of their trust
forest lands.
Under the project, Tribes engaged in forest land management and/or
surface leasing activities on trust lands may apply to participate in
the project. If selected, Tribes must submit an Indian Trust Asset
Management Plan (ITAMP), for the management of any Tribal trust assets.
An approved plan could allow Tribes to develop Tribal forestry and/or
surface leasing regulations and assume certain approval authorities
currently held by the Secretary. At present, four Tribes have been
approved to participate in the project, and two of the Tribes are
operating their forestry programs under their approved ITAMPs and
Tribal forestry regulations.
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA)

Title I of ISDEAA allows federally recognized Tribes to contract
with the BIA to plan and administer some forestry program functions
with federal funding through 638 contracts or self-determination
contracts. In 1994, the Tribal Self-Governance Act (TSGA) amended
ISDEAA and added a new Title V authorizing federally recognized Tribes
to enter into compacts with DOI to assume full funding and control over
forestry programs.
While ISDEAA allows Tribes to assume responsibility for natural
resources management, most Tribes still receive forestry program
services directly from the BIA. About 30% of the Tribes with trust
forest resources operate their forestry programs under ISDEAA contracts
or self-governance compacts. The Department stands ready to use ISDEAA
as an avenue to support more Tribes who seek to steward federal forest
lands.
Tribal Co-Stewardship and Management of Federal Lands
Secretarial Order 3403

On November 15, 2021, Secretary Haaland and Secretary of
Agriculture Vilsack issued Secretary's Order 3403: Joint Secretarial
Order on Fulfilling the Trust Responsibility to Indian Tribes in the
Stewardship of Federal Lands and Waters. At last year's Tribal Nations
Summit, on November 22, 2022, Secretary of Commerce Raimondo joined
Secretarial Order 3403.
Secretarial Order 3403 affirms the trust relationship between the
United States and Tribes, and acknowledges that the United States can
benefit from the land management expertise and practices Tribal nations
have developed over centuries. The Order is also a commitment, ``to
ensure that Tribal governments play an integral role in decision making
related to the management of federal lands and waters through
consultation, capacity building, and other means consistent with
applicable authority.''
We have made notable progress implementing Secretarial Order 3403,
including announcing a number of agreements that effect Tribal
stewardship of the Department's lands and waters and represent the
Government's commitment to Tribal co-stewardship. Several of those
agreements encompass forest lands. Equally important, we are building
the infrastructure within the Department to strengthen this critical
work by carrying out and making available legal analyses on many of the
authorities that may underpin co-stewardship, implementing guidance
from land management agencies and Indian Affairs, and creating better
pathways for public-private partnerships that support co-stewardship.
Good Neighbor Authority (GNA)
In 2018, Congress expanded The Good Neighbor Authority (GNA) to
allow the Department of Agriculture's United States Forest Service
(USFS) and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to collaborate with
federally recognized Tribes to plan and execute restoration projects on
federal lands. The GNA authorizes Tribes to enter into a Good Neighbor
Agreement with the USFS or BLM to perform forest restoration work on
federal lands managed by those agencies. Projects could include insect
and disease treatments, hazardous fuels reduction, timber harvesting,
tree planting or seeding, and other restoration activities.
At present, the GNA lacks authorization for Tribes to retain timber
sales revenues. This has been a considerable obstacle preventing
greater Tribal participation. Other participation challenges for Tribes
include limited staffing, funding, and other resources to enter into
Good Neighbor Agreements.
Tribal Forest Protection Act (TFPA)
The Tribal Forest Protection Act of 2004 (TFPA), Public Law 108-
278, 116 Stat. 868, is intended to protect Tribal forest assets by
authorizing the Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture to enter
into agreements or contracts with Indian Tribes to carry out projects
to protect Indian forest land. Ongoing federal efforts aimed at
creating healthy, resilient forests, preventing large-scale resource
loss due to wildfire, and fully implementing climate-related strategies
are expected to better facilitate Tribal work with the USFS and the
BLM. These ongoing efforts are informing development and implementation
of larger cross-jurisdictional land management treatments.
The Department recognizes that forest management treatments and
restoration projects benefit from unique collaborative partnership and
Tribal co-stewardship opportunities. In June 2023, the BLM and the Cow
Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) to develop a collaborative stewardship framework to
guide resource management decisions on federal lands administered by
BLM in a manner that seeks to protect the Tribe's treaty, religious,
subsistence, and cultural interests, support ecosystem resilience, and
protect forestlands from the threats of uncontrolled wildfire,
diseases, and invasive and noxious species. The MOU is a critical first
step towards collaboratively undertaking vital work under the TFPA.
Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Department's work to
fulfill the trust responsibility to Tribes in the area of forestry and
our work to ensure the effective management of federal and Tribal
forests.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Bodie Shaw, Deputy Regional
Director (Northwest Region), Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department
of the Interior

Mr. Shaw did not submit responses to the Committee by the appropriate
deadline for inclusion in the printed record.

Questions Submitted by Representative Westerman

Question 1. Earlier this fall, the Intertribal Timber Council
released the fourth ever assessment of tribal forest management
practices and trends, along with recommendations to Congress. Among the
primary concerns flagged by that report, the overall health of tribal
forests remains a major concern with ``excessive stand density, high
fuel accumulations, and insect and disease'' threatening the long-term
sustainability of these forests. What in your view needs to be done to
increase the forest management activities necessary to address this
serious concern?

Question 2. Tribal and federal forest managers, particularly out
West, have continued to struggle to figure out what to do with low-
value excess fuels that need to be removed. One of the suggestions
contained in the IFMAT IV (IF-MATT-4) assessment is the need to explore
other revenue options including biofuels and biomass use, which both
offer great potential as a solution to this excess fuel problem. What
is the BIA currently doing to encourage more innovative uses of excess
forest material? Do you believe more can be done to encourage biomass
and biofuels opportunities?

Question 3. The Committee has heard concerns about the BLM's
efforts to finalize the Utility Master Operation and Maintenance and
Consolidation (MOMAC) Plan they have been working on with Pacific Gas
and Electric (PG&E).

3a)  Can you provide an explanation for why it is taking the BLM so
long to establish an Operations and Management (O&M) plan with Pacific
Gas and Electric (PG&E) and Southern California Edison (SCE) to adhere
to the requirements of FLPMA 512 taking so long?

3b)  When is this plan expected to be completed?

3c)  What has delayed completion?

3d)  Can you please explain the BLM's decision to establish a pilot
team to work with PG&E, rather than assigning California State Office
Staff?

3e)  Is the Bakersfield Pilot Team staffed appropriately with
individuals with the necessary expertise?

3f)  Is the State Office involved with accountability of timelines
and deliverables?

3g)  Can the BLM direct the SCE to adopt an IM-approach as opposed
to developing a new O&M Plan?

3h)  Is it possible for the O&M Plan to be a standalone guidance
document rather than a term and condition of a ROW grant so that it can
govern all of the utilities' operation and maintenance work regardless
of the type of Rights-of-Way (easement, ROW Grant)?

3i)  As required by FLPMA 512 and the recently published NOPR, will
the utilities easements be addressed in the O&M Plan?

3j)  How will claims of prescriptions be addressed in the O&M Plan?

3k)  How will BLM maintain consistency throughout the state when
the O&M Plan is shared with other Field Offices?

3l)  Will the Field Office Special Consideration Areas (FOSCAs)
reduce consistency and predictability of implementation of the O&M
Plan?

3m)  What will not be covered under this O&M Plan that is a
requirement of FLPMA 512?

3n)  Is the process outlined in O&M Plan a predictable process that
adheres to the requirements of FLPMA 512?

3o)  Does BLM feel that the draft O&M Plan with PG&E and SCE
establishes a process that prevents wildfire starts to the best of its
ability and allows them to address critical O&M activity with limited
delay?

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Shaw. I will now recognize
Members for their questions for up to 5 minutes. First, we will
turn to Mr. Bentz from Oregon.
You have 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to welcome both
panelists, of course, with particular emphasis upon Mr. Shaw.
So, very, very happy to see you here.
I reached out this morning to the Klamath Tribe. Dr.
Clayton Dumont is Chairman of the Klamath Tribe and a friend.
And I asked him what his experience has been in this space of
intersection between tribes on the one hand, and forest and BLM
agencies on the other. I am going to read you his response.
Klamath Tribal Chairman Clayton Dumont reports that they
really do need help with the U.S. Forest Service. On August 14,
2023, the Klamath Tribe submitted a Tribal Forest Protection
Act project application, which would enable prescribed burning
on treaty-protected lands in the Fremont-Winema National
Forest. This would reduce fire danger and improve the health of
the forest while creating local jobs between Saddleback
Mountain and Chiloquin.
Let me pause there and ask unanimous consent that that
application be included in the record.
Mr. Tiffany. Without objection.
Mr. Bentz. The Tribe has asked both the U.S. Forest Service
regional and national offices for an update, but they haven't
heard anything. For background, the Klamath Tribe also
submitted a similar project to the BLM, and approval was
granted within weeks.
So, Mr. Crockett, a question, and here it is. In August of
this year, the tribes based in my district submitted all
documents required for a Tribal Forest Protection Act project.
This project would reduce the fire danger on treaty-protected
lands and improve the overall health of the forest in southern
Oregon. Could you please provide me with your knowledge of any
of that project?
And is it normal to have 4 months go by without responding
to those who file applications?
Mr. Crockett. Thank you for the question, and to answer
your question directly is it normal to take 4 months to respond
to Tribal Forests Protection Act, the answer is no.
I am not familiar with the details of this specific
request. I am familiar with the work that the Karuk is doing on
the Klamath side, but not on the Oregon side. I will commit to
following up to make sure that that TFPA application is
reviewed and given full consideration.
Mr. Bentz. I appreciate that very much. And I, for years,
have thought that this opportunity that the tribes enjoy to
utilize their historical care for the land, in today's
environment of incredibly onerous regulatory burdens on just
about everybody, including tribes. But still, I have thought
that the tribes had a step up, and we should be giving them
every deference that we possibly can because we are in
desperate straits when it comes to our forests. Everyone knows
that that is here. So, to the extent that your agency could
help out, we would deeply appreciate it. And I know you are
trying, so I appreciate your looking into this.
Unfortunately, well, or fortunately, I have to go meet with
the Speaker now, so I won't be able to stay for the rest of the
hearing. But I very much appreciate all of you being here, and
I look forward to working with all of you in the future. Thank
you.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Neguse for his questioning.
Mr. Neguse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shaw, thank you again for joining us today. As I
mentioned in my opening statement, we are certainly glad to
have you join us here in the Federal Lands Subcommittee today
from the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
I want to kind of drill down, I guess, on an issue that
certainly we have heard from tribal communities and wonder if
you might be able to expound on it a bit, and that is, really,
the way in which the lack of adequate funding for tribal
forestry impacts public safety, because that is a component of
this that in some ways can sometimes be forgotten or neglected.
Whether that extends to the increased risk of wildfires,
degradation of wildlife habitat, cultural resources, climate
change impacts, but clearly, very significant public safety
challenges that, in my view, the lack of funding contributes
towards creating. And I wonder if you agree with that
assessment. And if you do, if you might be able to expound a
bit on your view.
Mr. Shaw. Thank you, Ranking Member Neguse, I appreciate
that, and that is a great question. I think many in the room,
those behind me, would like to hear a further discussion about
that.
And you are right, from a public safety standpoint, we talk
and we hear a lot about wildfire risk, the impacts, the
inability, whether it be from a tribal standpoint, I will talk
about labor with our tribes and our labor pool, the inability
many times when we are under-funded to be able to carry out
much of the wildfire mitigation. Whether that be through timber
harvest, whether that be through fuels reductions, it does pose
many challenges when it comes to the inability from a funding
standpoint.
I think some of the other challenges that we see from a
public safety standpoint, many are fully aware of the current
atmospheric river hitting the Pacific Northwest. And you look
at some of the landslide implications, some of the exceeded
riverbanks and the flooding occurring. Proper forest
management, and it is not news to anybody in the room, really
assists with that ability.
And once again, to your point, when we are under-funded we
can't carry out as much as we would like to. But we still, I
think, from a BIA and a tribal forestry standpoint, I think
that we have been very effective, very efficient in terms of
the money we do receive and getting that to the ground.
I hope that answers your question.
Mr. Neguse. It does, and I think it underscores the
necessity for BIA to continue the work that you are doing top
down and across agency to find ways in which to utilize
resources that might be available to you.
And, of course, from an advocacy perspective I think making
clear to the Congress, this Subcommittee, the Full Committee,
and the other Committees of jurisdiction the unique funding
needs and challenges so that we can do our part and meet our
obligations as far as addressing some of those funding needs.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I am going to ask a
couple of questions here with time allotted to me.
Mr. Shaw, the Wildland Fire Mitigation and Management
Commission recently released its report on the ongoing wildfire
concerns, and a key recommendation is that the Bureau of Indian
Affairs acknowledged that federally recognized tribes may be
allowed to develop fire programs on tribal trust lands. What is
your agency's position on that proposal by the Wildland Fire
Mitigation and Management Commission?
Mr. Shaw. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we are very
happy the next panel will have the Intertribal Timber Council
President, who is also on that Committee, as well, and I am
sure that will probably be part of some of his remarks, as
well, Cody Desautel.
From our standpoint, and we will talk a little bit about
the Indian Trust Asset Reform Act, and those remarks are in my
full testimony about the authority and the ability for tribes
to take on much more of the forestry programmatic pieces, which
we call the Indian Trust Asset Management Plan, ITAMP, and we
are willing to push the boundary when it comes to offering that
ability for tribes not only from a forestry standpoint, but
forestry and wildland fire go hand-in-hand in terms of how we
address it, how we mitigate it. We have to address both, there
is just no two ways about it.
Forest health, obviously, is primary, but we also know the
implications when we don't fully address forest health
concerns. So, that is something, Chairman, we are actively
pursuing opportunities that ensure that we still have a place
at the table with the tribe, Bureau of Indian Affairs, as we
continuously do.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Crockett, if tribes have only a small
fraction of the financial resources of the Forest Service, why
are they able to manage their forests so much better?
Mr. Crockett. Thank you for the question, Chair. I don't
like to speak on behalf of tribes when they are in the room.
Obviously, I think that would be a good opportunity for the
next panel to answer that question.
Mr. Tiffany. I think you should speak on behalf of the
Forest Service, from the Forest Service perspective, because it
must be a concern for the Forest Service that we see tribes,
counties, and states most of the time do manage their forests
better. Why is that, from the Forest Service perspective?
Mr. Crockett. There could be a multitude of reasons for
that. Let me share with you some areas where we are having
success with management of the national forests.
I will admit there is a problem nationally with overall
management of the 193 million acres that we steward as a
Federal entity.
The areas of success, we have been anchoring to science and
delivery of our work, and the science tells us that if we focus
in on 20 percent of the treatments, we can get 80 percent of
return on our investment in high-risk landscape, high-risk
watersheds. So, what we have done is we have focused on over
250 fire sheds, and there is a subset of 21 landscapes that we
have prioritized our actions on. So, within those 21
landscapes, that is where we are seeing 85 percent of reducing
the fire risk to communities. And as of this year, we exceeded
our accomplishments within those 21 landscapes.
Now, that is a small subset of the work that we are doing
nationally. But for me to speak as to why tribes can do it
better, I am sure there are a lot of considerations at play.
But I know the areas that we have been able to focus in on this
year, we have had a lot of successes.
Mr. Tiffany. Is it possible, Mr. Crockett, you look at the
historical record, and before European settlement, like in
California, each acre held about 64 trees per acre; we are up
to 300 trees per acre now. Is it a matter of a lack of
management, not being aggressive enough in removing some of
those trees to make it a healthier landscape?
Mr. Crockett. Yes, overstocked forests are definitely a
valid concern, and going in and doing treatments to reduce the
fuel loading has been a focus of ours in those over-stocked
areas.
Mr. Tiffany. So, should we be cutting more wood on Federal
lands?
Mr. Crockett. There is no one silver bullet solution. Using
the suite of tools from harvesting and collecting wood products
off of it, treating the landscape to reduce the risk of
wildfire impacts by getting the small-diameter material, which
is generally a low value product, taking that out and finding
markets for it is another opportunity to be able to do that.
But overall, doing some type of treatment that ultimately
leads to a reduction in the stocking of the forest is a primary
objective.
Mr. Tiffany. I really appreciate your answers here today. I
would say it goes up on the other end also, because I have seen
up in my neck of the woods in northern Wisconsin where we are
seeing some large-diameter trees that really should be taken
out. There has been a certain aggressiveness with some of the
smaller diameter, but some of those larger diameter trees
should be removed also to end up with a forest that is not too
mature that ends up, in many cases, being a dead zone,
especially for game species.
But anyhow, thank you. My time is up here, and I would like
to turn to Representative Leger Fernandez if she has questions
that she would like to ask our panelists.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and
thank you, panelists, for coming, and all those who are
attending with us today and listening.
Tribes have been managing our forest lands for millennia.
It was wonderful earlier today, that ``time immemorial,'' we
had a wonderful description of what that meant, and it was as
the glaciers receded, before the valleys were created. Time
immemorial is a long time. And tribes have done amazing work in
managing those forests, and we are getting to the point now
where I think that the recognition of tribal Indigenous
knowledge of how do we incorporate that into our Federal
agencies, we are starting to get there, which is pretty
exciting. I am pleased that the Biden administration has
adopted this approach and is moving towards that.
Last Friday, we had a historic co-stewardship agreement
signed between Ohkay Owingeh, the Forest Service, and the
Bureau of Land Management. It will allow Ohkay Owingeh, who is
in my district, to work alongside the Forest Service and BLM to
maintain precious resources in that area. And I look forward to
seeing a lot more of these agreements. So, let it be known I am
going to be asking about those.
I just came from my office with the San Felipe Pueblo, who
wants to make sure that some important areas of theirs are
protected that are not being protected. We are going to look
for those kinds of co-stewardship agreements because we hear
over and over again in San Felipe Pueblo there is an inholding
completely surrounded by reservation land that needs to be
protected.
In Caja del Rio, which is near Santa Fe, very much needs
protection, and we have vandalism that is happening. We know
where the vandalism is. It is on those beautiful petroglyphs.
We need to figure out how to protect it. And until we can
actually move something congressionally, we are going to rely
on the Federal agencies to do that.
So, Mr. Crockett, why don't you describe to me what you
need so you and your partners can work to stop some of these
attacks on these beautiful places like Caja del Rio, like the
area of concern within San Felipe, like these other areas? What
all do we need to get you so you can help protect these areas?
Mr. Crockett. Thank you for the question, and I do want to
acknowledge that the story that you told around the vandalism
that is taking place to the historic petroglyphs that are
there, we agree it should not happen.
Obviously, it is multi-jurisdictional. The Forest Service
manages a component of it. We think bringing the tribal voices
to the table to assist with designing more protection measures
would be important. We generally think of this through the co-
stewardship lens, just as you described about the other project
that was just signed. So, we would welcome an opportunity to
engage with tribes more in the co-stewardship realm on how to
manage the site to protect the petroglyphs.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Yes, thank you, and I would note that
in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law we had $116 million that
was going to advance the work. I think many on this Committee
on both sides of the aisle have talked about the importance of
the Good Neighbor Authority, the importance of the Tribal
Forest Protection Act, and there was another $32 million
identified for the national priority landscapes so that we
could have more of the state and tribal working together.
I would once again make a plea that the Interior
appropriations bill, as advanced by the Republicans, included
an overall cut to the Forest Service of $255 million, and this
would include a $32.56 million cut to state, private, and
tribal forestry account. I think it is important that, as we
talk about these programs that I think are pushing us into the
right kind of collaboration, co-stewardship, that they also
take resources, right?
As we asked you how are you going to work with Ohkay
Owingeh, how are you going to work with Cochiti, Santo Domingo,
Santa Clara, and the other tribes that are trying to protect
the petroglyphs, and the Forest Service needs to devote
resources to that. They don't have the resources, so we need to
make sure that we provide them the funding, provide them the
budget to get that done. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Crockett. I agree, resources are needed for protection
of areas. And the additional resources that were provided
through the Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law has definitely helped us do more engagement
and put more funding in the hands of tribes directly, and
provided more opportunities to do co-stewardship opportunities
with tribes. So, yes, resources are always helpful.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you. I see my time is up, so I
yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Mr. Shaw, if you have any comments in regards
to the question there, you are welcome, too.
Mr. Shaw. Just one comment in terms of the traditional
tribal environmental knowledge. I have been involved with this
for a long time, 25 years, when it was considered anecdotal
when tribes were bringing up a lot of the co-management
opportunities. So, very happy to hear that, yes, from a Federal
standpoint, that we will implement a lot of the tribal
environmental knowledge not considered anecdotal, but really
taking a look, as the purpose of this hearing is, to talk a
little bit about how we do that.
And TFPA, Good Neighbor Authority, great opportunities, so
I am glad you brought that point up.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. I would now like to
recognize Mr. Westerman for his questioning.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you again, Chairman Tiffany, and thank
you to the witnesses. And I thank the gentlelady from New
Mexico for setting up my question so well by talking about the
Tribal Forest Protection Act and the Good Neighbor Authority,
which are two tools that have been provided by Congress to
create additional cross-boundary forest management projects in
cooperation between the Federal Government and tribes.
Associate Deputy Chief Crockett, can you please talk about
the successes of both of these authorities and areas where they
could be improved by Congress to incentivize more cross-
boundary forest management projects?
Mr. Crockett. Thank you for the question. Yes, I will start
by going back to 2004, when the Tribal Forest Protection Act
was put in place.
We had what I would describe as small measures of success
related to it, particularly because it was an unfunded mandate,
and we had to figure out how to put resources in place to
support it. And we did it primarily through stewardship
contracting.
Fast forward to now, well 2018, and the most recent version
of the Farm Bill, where we got the expanded authority for Good
Neighbor to engage with tribes, still missing the revenue
retention piece of it. So, that revenue retention piece is
extremely important from tribes. This is what we have heard as
Federal land managers from tribal interests.
So, we have been able to develop Good Neighbor Authority
projects. We have 30 that have been put in place since the 2018
Farm Bill with 17 tribes, and they have been able to do that
many Good Neighbor Authority agreements without the revenue
retention piece. So, imagine if that revenue retention piece
was in place, how many more would we be able to do with tribes
who really want to be able to retain the receipts from the Good
Neighbor Work to be able to put those resources back into the
projects on the ground.
For the Tribal Forest Protection Act, we have been able to
accomplish 22 agreements with an investment of over $40 million
since the 2008 version of the Farm Bill has been put in place,
and it also provided us with the 638 demonstration authority,
which has also been helpful.
Mr. Westerman. I am so glad you talked about the receipts
part of Good Neighbor Authority. Earlier this year, the House
unanimously passed the Treating Tribes and Counties as Good
Neighbors Act, and this bill would make tribes full partners in
the Good Neighbor Authority by allowing them to retain timber
receipts. It has not been passed in the Senate yet. We hope to
work to get that in the Farm Bill if the Senate doesn't pass it
on its own.
You have talked about this a little bit, but how much do
you think this would improve Good Neighbor Authority if the
tribes were able to retain those receipts and have the funding
to go do the next management project, and the next management
project?
Mr. Crockett. I think it would be extremely helpful if
tribes received that authority, and I will put it in the
category of parity. The states have had the authority for quite
some time in the original version of the Good Neighbor
Authority. But tribes and counties, because counties were named
in the authority, as well, did not get revenue retention in the
2018 version of the Farm Bill. And if that is able to be
rectified, I think the amount of agreements that we see both
with tribes and counties would start to increase.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
Mr. Shaw, earlier this fall the Intertribal Timber Council
released the fourth-ever assessment of tribal forest management
practices and trends, along with their recommendations to
Congress. And among the primary concerns flagged in that report
was the fact that the overall health of tribal forests remains
a major concern with ``excessive stand density, high fuel
accumulations, and insect, and disease.''
If Congress doesn't take action to address the health of
our nation's tribal forests, what do you think that will mean
in the long term for the resiliency of these forests?
Mr. Shaw. Thank you for that question, and I think,
obviously, given the background that we are currently operating
in, we will see the continual decline, more catastrophic fires
continuing.
It is not news to anybody in the room here that every year
we seem to hit a new high water mark when it comes to damage,
the amount of Federal funds expended for fire suppression, and
the long-term damage to these coniferous forests in the West.
And without having the full opportunity--and when I say
full opportunity, and working in partnership with Intertribal
Timber Council also recognized in the Indian Forest Management
Assessment Team, we will continue to have catastrophic impacts
to our tribal forests. Not only tribal forests, but those
impacts on the tribal communities.
I think, as everyone is aware, the trust assets, when we
talk about timber, the common denominator there are those
communities live off the revenue generated from the timber that
is on their reservation. I am very happy to hear, especially
from the Good Neighbor Authority, having the potential
opportunity for the tribes who work on, through the Good
Neighbor Authority, to have that opportunity maybe eventually
to get some of the revenues. That will add to the labor pool
and, once again, affect an impact, positively, tribes, tribal
communities at work in those surrounding areas, whether it be
on their ceded, usual, and accustomed lands. It could be very
important.
So, thank you for that question.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields back, and that is it for
the questioning for this panel.
Thank you very much, Mr. Crockett and Mr. Shaw, for joining
us today. We, the Committee, really appreciate your testimony.
And at this time, we are going to move on to our second panel
of witnesses.
As the Clerk resets the witness table, let me remind the
witnesses that under Committee Rules, you must limit your oral
statement to 5 minutes, but your entire statement will appear
in the hearing record. To begin your testimony, please press
the ``on'' button on the microphone. We use timing lights. When
you begin, the light will turn green. At the end of 5 minutes,
the light will turn red, and I will ask you to please complete
your statement.
[Pause.]
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you to our second panelists for joining
us.
I would like to recognize the Honorable Robert Rice,
Council Member of the Mescalero Apache Tribe.
Mr. Rice, I think we met in the elevator this morning,
didn't we?
Mr. Rice. I think so.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Tiffany. Well, it is great to make your acquaintance.
And Councilman Rice, you have 5 minutes for your testimony.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROBERT RICE, COUNCIL MEMBER, MESCALERO
APACHE TRIBE, MESCALERO, NEW MEXICO

Mr. Rice. Good afternoon, Chairman Westerman, Chairman
Tiffany, and the members of the Subcommittee, and a special
hello to Representative Leger Fernandez. My name is Robert
Rice. I have been honored to serve on the Mescalero Apache
Tribal Council for 2 years now. Thank you for this opportunity
to testify about tribal forestry management practices.
Before I begin, I want to acknowledge members of the Tribal
Council who have joined me today on that side.
Our ancestors roamed the Southwest, but always returned to
the sacred White Mountain and its forests.
[Slide.]
Mr. Rice. As you can see, the Lincoln National Forest
borders our reservation to the north and the south. The forest
was carved out of our ancestral homelands, and is part of the
initial reservation that was promised in our treaty. We have
maintained our connection to these lands. Our people continue
to gather medicines and conduct ceremonies throughout the
Lincoln.
For the Mescalero people, forestry is part of our way of
life. To us, the forest provides water, food, and shelter to
our people. For more than a century, we worked with BIA to make
the forestry program one of the best in the Southwest. The
Tribe has treated more than 180,000 acres through commercial
harvest and thinning projects. Hazardous fuel reduction
projects are vital to our management practice. By reducing tree
density we enhance the available water, light, and nutrients to
the trees.
[Slide.]
Mr. Rice. On the monitor there is a photo of the southern
boundary border with Lincoln National Forest. You can clearly
see the difference in the forest management styles. The dense
area is the Lincoln National Forest. This dense forest,
particularly in drought, becomes very vulnerable to insect
infestation and, of course, wildfire. The 2012 Little Bear Fire
showed the impact of an unhealthy forest.
This fire started with a lightning strike. The Forest
Service viewed it as non-threatening, and allowed it to smolder
for days. On the 5th day, the fire exploded and crossed onto
the tribal lands. As the fire approached the reservation, our
hazardous fuel treatments were critical in preventing complete
devastation to the reservation and the village of Ruidoso.
However, the fire burned more than 44,000 acres of prime timber
and destroyed more than 255 homes. The damage exceeded $100
million.
While our hazardous fuels treatments limited the damage,
the Tribe's resort, Ski Apache, suffered more than $1.5 million
in losses. Ski Apache is vital to our economy, generating 350
jobs and contributing millions to the local economy. So, again,
strong forest management is critical to our community. Our
reservation and nearby communities rely heavily on watersheds
sustained by the forest as well as on the forest itself.
In the past, we have operated two sawmills. The Mescalero
Forest Products sawmill was a vital first line forest
management tool for our program. Closure of the sawmills more
than a decade ago has limited the effective management of our
forests. Since closing the mills, we have experienced an
increase in density and associated decline in forest health. As
a result, the groundwater levels are dropping, causing the
Tribe to redrill range water and domestic wells. If something
isn't done to reinstate the sawmill or find an alternative, we
estimate that in 20 to 25 years reservation forest conditions
will be the same as those in the Lincoln National Forest.
The work of the tribal forest managers nationwide has
proven effective to protecting lives and property throughout
Indian Country, while maintaining the healthiest forests in the
nation. In closing, I want to make two recommendations to
enhance the work of the tribal forest management.
First, we must bring the tribal forest management funding
into parity with Federal forest funding. We support the IFMAT
IV recommendations to increase tribal forestry funding by $96
million, increase fire preparedness by $42 million, and
establish a separate budget line for tribal forest roads at $89
million per year.
Second, Congress should enhance tribal control over Federal
lands. To accomplish this we urge the Committee to amend the
Tribal Forest Protection Act to establish a pilot program to
authorize tribal co-management of Federal lands to implement
tribal forest management practices. Tribal work under the TFPA
should extend beyond adjacent lands and be authorized
throughout Federal Forest Service and BLM lands where tribes
have proven connections.
Our forest is our home. We must work together to ensure its
health. Again, thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I
am prepared to answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Rice follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Rice, Council Member,
Mescalero Apache Tribe
Good afternoon Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and Members
of the Subcommittee. My name is Robert Rice. I serve as a Council
Member of the Mescalero Apache Tribe (``Mescalero'' or ``Tribe'').
Thank you for this opportunity to testify about opportunities to
enhance tribal forest management practices.
Background: the Mescalero Apache Tribe

The Mescalero, Lipan and Chiricahua Apache, make up the Mescalero
Apache Tribe. Long before the first European settlers came to this
land, our Apache ancestors roamed the Southwestern region, from Texas
to central Arizona and from as far south as Mexico to the peaks of
Colorado. We were protected by our four sacred mountains: White
Mountain/Sierra Blanca, Guadalupe Mountains, Tres Hermanas/Three
Sisters Mountains, and Oscura Peak. We traveled the rough Apacheria
through mountains and deserts but always returned to our sacred White
Mountain.
As Europeans began to encroach on our lands, the Apaches entered
into a treaty with the United States on July 1, 1852. The Treaty with
the Apaches promised the Tribe a permanent homeland in our aboriginal
territory. The Mescalero Apache Reservation (``Reservation''), located
in the White and Sacramento Mountains of rural south-central New
Mexico, was established through a succession of Executive Orders in the
1870s and 1880s. The Reservation spans approximately 720 square miles
(460,405 acres). Our Reservation is home to 5,500 tribal citizens and
approximately 200 non-Indian residents.
The original Reservation boundaries included lands that are
currently held in federal ownership, such as Lincoln National Forest
(``LNF'') and Bureau of Land Management (``BLM'') lands surrounding the
Fort Stanton State Monument. These federal lands were carved out of our
ancestral homelands. However, the Mescalero Apache people have
maintained strong cultural ties to these lands. To this day, we
continue to gather plants important to our traditions and conduct
ceremonies on these federal lands. To strengthen our ties to these
lands and to have input into their management, the Tribe has entered
into Memoranda of Understanding (``MOUs'') with federal agencies,
including the U.S. military and LNF.
Mescalero Apache Forest Management

For centuries, we have managed our forests holistically, as a way
of life, to promote the growth of food and medicinal plants, to manage
the wildlife in these forests, and to protect our lands from invaders.
This tradition of forestry was put into formal practice when the
Bureau of Indian Affairs (``BIA'') Mescalero Agency opened its Branch
of Forestry in 1910. Mescalero's first major commercial timber sale was
in 1919. With the opening of the tribally owned Mescalero Forest
Products' (``MFP'') sawmill in 1987, the Tribe entered a new era of
forest management. Today, the Mescalero forest remains one of the best-
managed, healthiest forests in the Southwest.
For more than a century, the BIA Mescalero Agency and the Tribe
have worked to develop a premier forestry program on the Reservation.
During the 1990s and early 2000s, the BIA Branch of Forestry employed 3
professional foresters and 2 forestry technicians in the Timber Sale
section.
This small staff was responsible for preparing and offering for
sale lumber at 16.8 million board feet annually and completing all sale
planning, environmental compliance work, timber sale layout and
administration. Due to the amount of timber harvested, the BIA
identifies the Reservation as a Category 1-Major Forested Reservation.
Additionally, the Fire Management and Fuels Management Programs are
each rated as High Complexity. These ratings describe not only the
complexity of addressing fire concerns across a large landscape but
also the need for coordinated efforts among programs and agencies.
Operating on a shoestring budget, the Tribe's Division of Resource
Management and Protection has been able to provide high quality
forestry services on the Reservation, assisting the BIA in timber sales
and performing fuels management projects. The strong working
relationship with BIA Forestry and the implementation of contracts
under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (P.L.
93-638) helped the Tribe build a strong forest management system.
Before the Tribal sawmill, Mescalero Forest Products (``MFP''),
closed in 2012, the Tribe treated one full rotation of the commercial
forest, totaling 183,876 out of a total Reservation land base of
460,405 acres. All 183,876 acres were considered for logging. Areas
that were not treated contained arch sites, threatened and endangered
species, or homesites.
Despite the importance of this mission and a small budget, the
Mescalero BIA Branch of Forestry experienced a 43% reduction in its
staffing levels since 2016. As a result, in FY2022 the Tribal Council
passed a Resolution to contract for and take over the BIA Branch of
Forestry and Branch of Natural Resources activities through Public Law
93-638 Self-Determination contracts. This has allowed the Tribe to
focus on prioritizing Tribal goals and objectives for managing our
forest.
We view our forest as a dynamic living entity. It provides water,
food, shelter and a means of providing jobs and revenue for Tribal
members. When the Tribe first began commercially harvesting timber,
many opposed the concept. This resistance to proactive forest
management began to dissipate in 1996 when the Tribe experienced its
first large fire in recent history, the Chino Well Fire. This fire
began on a windy spring day in April. Within one day, the fire
threatened 42 homes, forcing evacuations, and burning a seven-mile
strip of forest of more than 8,000 acres. Due to the rapid-fire
response of Tribal fire crews, no homes were damaged. Soon after the
fire, homeowners wanted to learn how they could protect their homes
from future wildfires.
With the advent of the National Fire Plan in the late 1990s, the
BIA Branch of Forestry worked with the Tribe to develop strategic
ridgetop fuel breaks and implement wildland urban interface treatments
around residential and recreational areas across the Reservation.
Through this program, the Tribe has treated an additional 63,968 acres
through hazardous fuels reduction projects. These projects were
coordinated with harvest operations, recognizing that understory
thinning alone would not reduce the potential for destructive crown
fires. As a result of implementing wildfire mitigation measures to
reduce fire danger, the Tribe earned Firewise Communities/USA
recognition in 2003 and was the first tribe in New Mexico to earn such
recognition.
National forestry policy has always been important to the Mescalero
Apache Tribe. Mescalero leadership and forestry staff provided
congressional testimony and advised the government in developing the
Healthy Forest Restoration Act of 2003 and the Tribal Forest Protection
Act of 2004 (``TFPA''). The TFPA, in particular, helped pave the way
for the Tribe to work with LNF to develop the first Tribal stewardship
contract called the 16 Springs Stewardship contract in 2006 to
implement hazardous fuel reduction projects on adjacent U.S. National
Forest lands. Under the 16 Springs Stewardship contract the Tribe was
able to complete approximately $6,000,000 of fuels treatments along the
Tribe's southern boundary. The TFPA continues to be a useful tool to
help the Tribe expand the implementation of our healthy forest
management practices to nearby lands. However, as noted below, the Act
needs to be expanded and updated.
Hazardous fuel reduction projects are vital to our forest
management practices. Forests are living organisms. With reductions in
density, trees and ground cover are better able to thrive. Southwestern
forests grow with very little precipitation. On the Reservation and in
LNF, 26 inches of annual precipitation is considered a ``wet'' year. By
reducing tree densities to ensure the crowns are not touching, we
greatly enhance the available water, light and nutrients each
individual tree receives. With open forest conditions, pine seedlings
have a better environment to germinate, resulting in increased forest
regeneration.
In addition to its hazardous fuels management program, the Tribe
used to operate the MFP sawmill. However, the decline in the lumber
market, combined with process inefficiencies and a lack of by-product
markets, resulted in the closure of MFP twice, once in December 2008
and again in July 2012. The closure of the sawmill resulted in the loss
of 55 jobs for mill workers and close to 150 supporting staff
(including marking, harvesting, hauling, and administrative staff). The
Tribe was also forced to close a second mill that it owned in
Alamogordo, which employed 82 workers.
The Mescalero Forest Product sawmill was a vital first-line forest
management tool that enabled the Tribe to treat the larger trees of the
forest overstory through selective harvests that were followed up with
hazardous fuels reduction projects in the smaller size classes. Closure
of these sawmills has significantly limited our ability to effectively
manage our forest and assist in the management of LNF.
Since the closing of Mescalero Forest Products in 2012, we are
already experiencing significant increases in forest densities and
associated declines in forest health. We are not able to effectively
treat forest overstories to remove dwarf mistletoe and bark beetles,
which does not allow the young understory trees to grow to their full
potential. In the future, this will greatly affect the overall health
of our forest. Furthermore, the ground water table levels are dropping,
causing the Tribe to redrill many range water wells and some domestic
wells. If something is not done to reinstate the sawmill or find a
suitable alternative, Tribal and BIA Foresters have estimated that in
20 to 25 years, Reservation Forest conditions will be the same as those
in LNF.
In addition, congressional funding cuts, implemented over the past
two decades, have further strained our ability to continue our forestry
practices. Prior to these cuts, the Tribe was able to manage our forest
better than the LNF on a fraction of the federal agency's budget.
Failure to restore this modest funding will ensure the demise of a
hugely successful program.
Concerns with Federal Forest Health: Lessons Learned from the Little
Bear Fire

While the Tribe has worked hard to maintain a healthy forest on our
Reservation, Tribal leadership has long-standing concerns about the
very dense forest conditions in LNF, which borders our Reservation on
three sides. Due to the overly dense and unhealthy condition of the
LNF, we have seen the escalation of insect populations, including bark
beetles and other defoliators on the Reservation, and have watched as
large swaths of USFS forest lands die around us.
It is not too late to remedy this situation. A case in point is the
successful stewardship contract that the Tribe entered into with the
USFS pursuant to the TFPA. Through the 16 Springs Stewardship contract
with LNF, the Tribe treated more than 6,300 acres of LNF lands mostly
located along the shared boundary between our Reservation and LNF. Due
to the Tribe's efforts, these USFS lands are much healthier than they
were. However, there are many thousands of additional acres of dense
forest within LNF that remain untreated and continue to threaten the
lives and property of Tribal members and the public.
Nature provided us a preview of what will happen if the Mescalero
forestry program is allowed to fail. The Little Bear Fire started in a
modest way on Monday, June 4, 2012. The initial small fire was caused
by lightning in the White Mountain wilderness in LNF. Over the first
five days, LNF deployed relatively few assets to contain what it
thought was a non-threatening forest fire. Firefighters worked only on
day shifts, air tanker resources were not utilized, and helicopter
water drops were minimal. On the fifth day, the fire jumped the fire
line and high winds turned the fire into a devastating inferno. By that
night, the fire had blazed through the Tribal ski area, Ski Apache
Resort (``Ski Apache''), and crossed onto Tribal lands. Within two
weeks, the Little Bear Fire burned 35,339 acres in LNF, 8,522 acres of
private land, 112 acres of state land and 357 acres of the Reservation.
The fire also destroyed more than 255 buildings and homes in the region
and burned 44,500 acres of prime watershed. The overall estimated cost
of the fire, including suppression and damages, exceeded $100 million.
The Little Bear Fire's impacts provided a clear contrast between
the healthier tribal forests and much less healthy LNF, demonstrating
the need for continued funding of smart fuels management projects and
increased funding for Tribal Forestry Management.
In 2008, the Tribe completed an important, cost-effective hazardous
fuels reduction project on a portion of the Reservation called Eagle
Creek. As the Little Bear Fire moved across the landscape, the
previously treated Eagle Creek project area was used as a defensible
space to turn the Little Bear Fire away from the steep, densely
forested terrain of the North Fork of the Rio Ruidoso and prevented
complete devastation of the Village of Ruidoso and its source waters.
The Little Bear Fire is proof positive that hazardous fuels reduction
projects work.
Many members of the surrounding communities, including our Tribal
community, felt that this fire should have been contained and
controlled within the first few days after detection. The proximity of
the fire to Tribal lands, Tribal infrastructure, the Village of Ruidoso
and its location within a New Mexico State priority watershed should
have triggered a more aggressive response to suppress the fire.
Unreasonable restrictions placed on fire suppression actions within LNF
wilderness areas contributed to the failure to immediately suppress the
fire using all available resources. Had Mescalero not managed its
forest through fuels management projects, the fire would have
devastated the Village of Ruidoso.
Mescalero Apache Investments in Lincoln National Forest

As noted above, much of LNF is carved out of the ancestral
homelands of the Mescalero Apache. Evidence of our connection to LNF
can be found throughout the forest, from rock art to mescal pits to the
Apache Trail, which was a prime route for water in the Sacramento
Mountains. These Mountains are home to the Mountain Spirit Dancers, who
are holy beings that ensure our well-being.
Since 1960, the Tribe has leased approximately 860 acres of LNF
lands under two special use permits to establish, manage, and operate
Ski Apache. Ski Apache is located on the northern border of the
Reservation. The land is part of the Tribe's aboriginal homelands and
is located within the Sierra Blanca Mountain Range, which is sacred to
the Mescalero Apache people.
Over the past 60 years, the Tribe has made significant improvements
to the Resort. In 2012, the Tribe invested $15 million to triple the
ski lift capacity at Ski Apache. In addition, the Tribe invested $2.6
million for non-ski/year-round recreation at Ski Apache. Ski Apache
employs 350 people during the ski season and contributes millions of
dollars to the local economy.
To protect these investments and our sacred lands, the Tribe has a
considerable interest in preventing future wildfires and resulting
flooding that would devastate the Resort.
Under the current arrangement, the USFS administers these lands,
and LNF has the legal responsibility to respond to emergencies, such as
the June 2012 Little Bear Fire. However, it has been the Tribe that has
acted as the primary first responder in emergency situations. If the
Tribe had not taken the initiative, our assets at Ski Apache would have
been lost in the Little Bear Fire.
Ski Apache incurred over $1.5 million to tribal assets within the
special use permit area due to the Little Bear Fire. Ski Apache is
located at the highest point of the Little Bear Fire. Failure to
address flooding at higher elevations would have made rehabilitation at
lower elevations less effective. The Little Bear Fire crossed the
Reservation line at a key topographic area. There are two major
canyons, Upper Canyon and the Eagle Creek area, that start on the
Reservation and then lead off the Reservation. Both areas are heavily
populated off-Reservation. Because of the volume of trees that were
burnt, there was a real danger that resulting flooding would have
destroyed buildings, access roads, and existing ski runs. However, due
to additional investments and hazardous fuels projects conducted by the
Tribe, major flooding was avoided.
Even though the Tribe, as a permittee, is solely responsible for
rehabilitation and all costs incurred from the Little Bear Fire, the
Tribe first had to gain approval from LNF prior to taking action to
begin rehabilitation efforts. However, it took LNF months to respond.
While LNF committed to cleaning piles of burned trees, it took over 18
months for that action to occur.
The BIA has a Burned Area Emergency Response (``BAER'') team that
tried to communicate with the USDA/LNF/BAER team to discuss rehab,
especially in the area of these two canyons. However, USDA/LNF/BAER and
BIA BAER teams lacked coordination to fight fires and flooding, leaving
the Tribe and Ski Apache in the middle and out of the loop.
Little consideration was given to the importance of Ski Apache to
the Tribe's and our nearby community's economies. Closure of Ski Apache
for a single season would devastate the economies of both the Village
of Ruidoso and the Tribe. Despite the importance of Ski Apache, LNF
prioritized other areas for fire rehabilitation efforts instead of Ski
Apache.
Specific Recommendations to Enhance Tribal Forest Management

The work of Tribal Forest managers nationwide has proven effective
to protecting lives and property throughout Indian Country while
maintaining the healthiest forests in the nation. In addition, Tribal
Foresters, through activities taken on through the Tribal Forest
Protection Act, our practices have worked to improve the health of
nearby federal forests. To enhance the work of Tribal Forest
Management, we make the following recommendations:

The primary barrier to enhancing Tribal Forest Management
is the lack of funding. Tribal forestry programs receive
far less funding than our state and federal counterparts.
The 2023 Report by the Indian Forest Management Assessment
Team acknowledged that ``Indian forests [receive] much less
forest management funding per acre than adjacent forest
landowners.'' BIA allocations to tribes average only $3.11/
acre, while National Forests receive $8.57/acre and state
forests in the western U.S. average an astounding $20.46/
acre. At one-third to one-tenth of the funding our state
and federal counterparts receive, tribes still accomplish
vastly more reductions in hazardous fuels and have
healthier, functioning forest ecosystems. In addition to
greatly reducing wildfire hazard on reservations, tribal
land managers have seen forest thinning treatments result
in increased water yields despite the current extreme
drought situation. However, this work is not sustainable.

RECOMMENDATION 1: We support the IFMAT IV recommendations to increase
Tribal Forestry funding by $96 million, increase fire preparedness by
$42 million, and establish a separate budget line for tribal forest
roads to be funded at $89 million/year. All of this would bring Indian
forest funding closer to parity with federal forests.

Tribal governments are among the largest owners of forest
lands in the United States. Of the approximately 56 million
acres of federal Indian trust land, more than 18 million
acres are forest lands. The Forest Service shares
approximately 4,000 miles of boundaries with Tribal lands,
and much of the National Forest System and BLM lands were
carved out of Indian Reservations and ancestral Tribal
government homelands and include lands on which Tribal
governments exercise legal treaty rights.

As noted above, it is not enough that tribal forest managers work
to protect tribal homelands. Missteps and mismanagement of nearby
federal lands can just as easily destroy thousands of acres of adjacent
Indian lands. The TFPA is working to improve communication and Tribal
government input in federal forestry decision-making, but it has fallen
far short. Few federal land management agencies implement Tribal Forest
management practices or incorporate Tribal forestry knowledge. In
addition, while the TFPA is working to protect adjacent lands, dense
and unhealthy forests exist throughout Forest Service and BLM lands--
which continues to pose a risk to Indian lands and communities.

RECOMMENDATION 2: While the Biden Administration has attempted to
enhance Tribal co-management of federal lands, these policies need
congressional authorization to take real effect. Amend the TFPA to
establish a Pilot Program to authorize Tribal Co-management of federal
lands to incorporate Tribal Forest management practices throughout
Forest Service and BLM lands to achieve landscape-scale management.
TFPA Tribal work should extend beyond adjacent lands, and instead be
authorized throughout certain federal Forest Service and BLM lands with
which Tribes have proven connections. The contracting tools developed,
such as PL 93-638, should facilitate the process of co-management.
Legislative language to accomplish a portion of this goal was included
in Section 302 of Chairman Westerman's Emergency Wildfire and Forest
Management Act of 2016, which passed the U.S. House of Representatives.

RECOMMENDATION 3: Make the 2018 Farm Bill's 638 Tribal Forestry
Demonstration Project permanent and dedicate funding to TFPA 638
contracts. Use of 638 authority provides a funding mechanism through
the Forest Service to cover the cost of Tribal staff and resources
(prior to the 2018 Farm Bill, those costs would have to be covered by
the Tribal Nation in question). However, no funding for this purpose
was allocated in the 2018 Farm Bill, which has limited implementation
of the program.

RECOMMENDATION 4: Federal land management laws provide state and local
governments and non-profits to administratively acquire federal lands
but fail to permit similar transactions with Tribal governments. To
achieve parity and respect for the governmental status of Indian
Tribes, Congress should amend these laws to provide the Forest Service
and BLM with legal authority to administratively transfer federally
managed forest lands back to Tribal governments in situations where
such lands are former reservations or encompass ancestral lands.
Conclusion

The Reservation is our permanent homeland. Our lands serve as the
groundwater recharge areas for much of south-central and southeastern
New Mexico. We cannot allow a century of work to restore forest health
and reduce the threat of wildfire to simply fall by the wayside.
Congress must work with tribes to find large-scale long-term solutions
to this problem to maintain the forestry infrastructure necessary to
accomplish a fully integrated forest health treatment program that will
help maintain our way of life, create jobs in Indian Country, and
sustain the vital watershed for the Apache people and our neighbors.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, Councilman Rice.
Next, I would like to introduce Mr. Cody Desautel,
President of the Intertribal Timber Council and a member of the
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation.
Mr. Desautel, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome
back before the Committee.

STATEMENT OF CODY DESAUTEL, PRESIDENT, INTERTRIBAL TIMBER
COUNCIL, CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE COLVILLE RESERVATION,
NESPELEM, WASHINGTON

Mr. Desautel. Thank you, Chair Tiffany.
Hello, Chair Westerman. Good to see you again.
I am Cody Desautel, President of the Intertribal Timber
Council and Executive Director for the Confederated Tribes of
the Colville Reservation in north central Washington State. On
behalf of the ITC and its more than 60 member tribes, I
appreciate this opportunity to examine the existing and
potential value of Indian forest management nationwide.
I will start by describing some of the authorities and
opportunities tribes have for cross-boundary management, and
then touch on the challenges, including those documented in the
recent IFMAT report.
The most widely used authority to date has been the Tribal
Forest Protection Act, or TFPA. TFPA allows tribes to petition
the Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior to perform
stewardship activities on their lands adjacent to Indian lands.
The 2018 Farm Bill expanded TFP authority to include
contracting under the Indian Self-Determination and Education
Assistance Act. The 2018 Farm Bill also gave tribes and
counties the authority to enter into Good Neighbor Agreements,
or GNA, with Federal agencies.
However, a technical oversight has restricted tribes from
using GNA. A legislative fix to include tribes as eligible
partners to use project revenue for restoration services would
address this. I appreciate this Committee's work to pass
Representative Fulcher's legislation to ensure that tribes can
fully participate in GNA.
The Department of the Interior also has a program called
Reserved Treaty Rights Lands that funds treatment of adjacent
lands with ancestral and reserved treaty rights. This is a
competitive grant program that helps tribes protect their
natural and cultural resources through restoration projects on
non-tribal lands with high wildfire risk. However, funding is
limited to $15 million annually.
ITC has worked hard in partnerships with the Forest Service
and BLM to ensure that both tribes and Federal land managers
are aware of these programs and implement them to improve
forest health and resiliency to wildfire. There are many
success stories, but also continuing barriers. My own tribe can
provide one such example.
In 2014, the Colville Tribe submitted a TFPA proposal for
the Sanpoil Project on the adjacent Colville National Forest,
which resulted in a TFPA agreement. In June 2023, the U.S.
District Court for Eastern Washington ruled in favor of an
environmental lawsuit aimed to stop the Sanpoil Project.
Despite the technical input and partnership with the Colville
Tribes and the need to protect the reservation from wildfire,
the court's decision never mentioned my tribe or the TFPA
agreement.
This example demonstrates that even when tribes and the
Forest Service agree on what is right for the land, a Federal
court can stop years of collaboration and analysis simply based
on technicalities. Perhaps Congress can provide additional
direction to Federal judges, as it did in the Healthy Forest
Restoration Act, to weigh the long-term impacts of inaction
versus the short-term impacts of forest management activities.
Indian people suffer most from forest mismanagement at
places like Colville, Yakama, and Warm Springs. The national
forests are our largest neighbor. Limited suppression resources
are often sent to higher-risk Federal forests, allowing
wildfire to destroy our resources and impact sources of tribal
revenue for generations. For example, the Colville Tribe has
seen more than 1 billion board feet of timber burn since 2015,
with a current delivered log value of approximately a half
billion dollars.
Despite all this, there is no greater partner than Indian
Country to bring balance and restore resilience to Federal
forests.
Another impediment to getting TFPA and GNA work done by
tribes is internal capacity. Many tribes are under-funded to
manage their own land, let alone have additional staffing
needed to plan large landscape projects on adjacent Federal
land. Despite generous funding from Congress to implement TFPA
and GNA projects, relatively few have been initiated because of
limited tribal capacity. The Tribe would like to work with this
Committee and the Administration to find better ways of
building tribal capacity to get work done on Federal lands.
The primary finding in this IFMAT report and the three that
preceded it are the significant inequities in Federal funding
for Indian forest management when compared to other Federal
forests, such as the U.S. Forest Service and BLM. The IFMAT
report found that budget parity between the BIA-responsible
forests, national forest system, and BLM forests would require
an additional $96 million per year to the current $56 million
per year budget for BIA forestry, and $42 million in additional
wildfire funding to the current $120 million BIA budget.
This Committee is vested with oversight of all of these
agencies and their budgets. I urge you to engage with the
Department of the Interior in a constructive dialogue about how
to change the massive funding disparities across federally
managed forests.
I also request that the House Natural Resources Committee
hold a full oversight hearing on the IFMAT report to ensure
that its recommendations are heeded and not forgotten on a
bookshelf.
I would like to close by restating Indian tribes across the
country stand ready to bring our traditional knowledge and
modern expertise to Federal forest management. I appreciate
this Committee's continued interest in and support of
partnerships with Federal agencies. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Desautel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Cody Desautel, President, Intertribal Timber
Council & Executive Director, Confederated Tribes
of the Colville Reservation

I am Cody Desautel, President of the Intertribal Timber Council
(ITC) and Executive Director for the Confederated Tribes of the
Colville Reservation in Washington State. On behalf of the ITC and its
more than 60 member Tribes, I appreciate this opportunity to examine
the existing and potential value of Indian forest management
nationwide.
Background

All of America's forests were once inhabited, managed and used by
Indian people. Today, only a small portion of those lands remain under
direct Indian management. On a total of 334 reservations in 36 states,
19.3 million acres of forests and woodlands are held in trust by the
United States and managed for the benefit of Indians.
Tribes actively manage their forests for multiple uses, including
economic revenue, jobs, cultural foods and materials and for other
cultural purposes. Catastrophic wildfire can negatively impact all of
these uses for multiple generations.
The risk of wildfire to Indian lands is compounded by the thousands
of miles of shared boundary with federal agencies, primarily the U.S.
Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management. There are countless
examples of wildfire spilling over from federal lands onto tribal
forests, causing significant economic and ecological losses. These
fires regularly pose a risk to human life on Indian lands and have
resulted in fatalities.
Available Tools

There are many tools to support cross-boundary forest health
restoration work with tribes. The Department of the Interior has a
small program called ``Reserved Treaty Rights Lands'' that funds
treatment of adjacent lands with ancestral and reserved treaty rights.
This is a successful, competitive grant program that helps tribes
protect their natural and cultural resources through restoration
projects on non-tribal lands that are at high risk from wildfire.
Congress recognized the need for tribes to work closely with their
federal neighbors to reduce the threat of fire across shared
boundaries. The result was the Tribal Forest Protection Act (``TFPA''),
which allows tribes to petition the Secretaries of Agriculture and
Interior to perform stewardship activities on their lands adjacent to
Indian lands.
The 2018 Farm Bill not only expanded TFPA authorities but also gave
tribes and counties the authority to enter into Good Neighbor
Agreements with federal agencies. I appreciate this committee's work to
pass Rep. Fulcher's legislation to ensure that tribes are able to be
full participants in the GNA program.
The ITC has worked hard, in partnership with the Forest Service and
BLM to ensure that both tribes and federal land managers are aware of
these programs and implement them to improve forest health and
resiliency to wildfire.
There are many success stories, but also continuing barriers. My
own tribe, the Confederated Tribes of Colville provides one such
example.
For years the Colville Tribes urged the adjacent Colville National
Forest to address the forest health problems in in our ancestral lands
near the Reservation. Years of fire suppression followed by a lack of
forest management activities created areas of overstocked stands that
are infested with disease and are now vulnerable to catastrophic fire
events. We worked with the National Forest on the Sanpoil Project,
which resulted in a TFPA agreement.
In June 2023, the U.S. District Court for Eastern Washington sided
with an environmental lawsuit aimed to stop the Sanpoil project.
Despite the technical input and partnership with the Colville Tribes,
and the need to protect the reservation from wildfire, the court's
decision never mentioned my tribe or the TFPA agreement.
This example simply demonstrates that even when tribes and the
Forest Service agree on what's right for the land, a federal court can
stop years of collaboration and analysis, simply based on
technicalities. Perhaps Congress could provide additional direction to
federal judges--as it did in the Healthy Forests Restoration Act--to
weigh the long-term impacts of inaction (e.g., catastrophic wildfire)
versus the short-term impacts of forest management activities.
Another impediment to getting TFPA and GNA work done by tribes is
internal capacity. Many tribes are underfunded to manage their own
land, let alone have additional staffing needed to plan large,
landscape projects on adjacent federal land. Despite generous funding
from Congress to implement TFPA and GNA projects, relatively few have
been initiated because of limited tribal capacity. The ITC would like
to work with this committee and the Administration to find better ways
of building tribal capacity to get work done on federal lands.
Reconnecting tribes to their ancestral homelands is not just a
matter of righting past wrongs. The removal of Indigenous people from
the land and the discontinuation of seasonal lifeways over millennia
have had drastic consequences on the land. Indian Tribes want to
reverse those negative consequences, and I do not believe significant
progress can be made without integrating Indigenous concepts of balance
and interconnectedness back to the land.
Tribes hold razor thin threads of knowledge passed through native
languages for thousands of years that tie us to places in which our
people lived, died, and practiced unique cultures. We are collectively
grasping those threads to regain knowledges that help guide our
stewardship of our resources.
Indian people suffer most from forest mismanagement. At places like
Colville, Yakama, and Warm Springs, the reservations are the largest
neighbor of National Forests that were carved from our original
homelands. When fires burn, we breathe the smoke. We suffer the loss of
wildlife habitat. Our water quality is impacted, our fisheries damaged.
Fires from federal lands burn our own lands, destroy our timber
resources and impact sources of tribal revenue for generations. For
example, the Colville Tribe has seen more than one billion board feet
of our timber burn since 2015, with a current delivered log value of
approximately $500,000,000.
There is no greater partner than Indian Country to bring balance
and restore resilience to federal forests. Yet we, too, are at a
breaking point.
IFMAT Report

Unlike any other federal forests, Congress mandates an independent,
scientific review of Indian forests and their management. Every ten
years, the ``Indians Forest Management Assessment Team'' (or ``IFMAT'')
prepares and presents a report to Congress and the Administration. The
fourth such report was finalized earlier this year and presented to
you.
I request that the House Natural Resources Committee hold a full
oversight hearing on the IFMAT report to ensure that its recommendation
are heeded and not forgotten on a bookshelf.
The primary finding of the IFMAT report--and all those that precede
it--is the significant inequity of federal funding for Indian forest
management versus other federal forests, such as the U.S. Forest
Service and BLM.
Based in the IFMAT report's finding, BIA Forestry is funded at
about $2.89 per acre for tribes without hazardous fuels funding and
$4.89 for those who receive hazardous fuels funding.
Compare that to an estimated $12.24 for National Forest System
lands and $41.41 for western Oregon BLM lands. Thus, forests managed by
the BIA for tribes receive four times less than the Forest Service and
14 times less than BLM forests.
With respect to wildfire-related funding, the IFMAT report found
that BIA receives $3.98 per acre for preparedness--compared to $10.88
per acre for the U.S. Forest Service. The BIA received $2.34 per acre
for hazardous fuels reduction, while the Forest Service receives $3.53
per acre. Also, much of this funding is competitive, which makes it
difficult to build the capacity needed within tribal programs to treat
landscapes at scale with funding uncertainty.
The result of this inequity is catastrophic on Indian communities.
The IFMAT report found reduced funding to BIA for forest management
resulted in $400 million is foregone timber revenue to tribes between
2010-2019. That means $400 million was not generated to provide
essential social, educational, and public safety services to some of
the most vulnerable Americans.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe IFMAT report found that budget parity between BIA-
responsible forests, National Forest System and BLM forests would
require an. Additional $96 million per year for BIA Forestry and $42
million in additional wildfire funding.
This committee is vested with an important oversight of all these
agencies and their budgets. I urge you to engage with the Department of
the Interior in a constructive dialogue about how to change the massive
funding disparity across federally managed forests.
Conclusion

Indian Tribes across the country stand ready to bring our
traditional knowledge and modern expertise to federal forest
management. I appreciate this Committee's continued interest in and
support of our partnership with federal agencies. Thank you for
inviting me and my colleagues from other tribes to share our
perspective with you.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Desautel. Next, I would like to
recognize Mr. Michael Skenadore, President of Menominee Tribal
Enterprises from my home state of Wisconsin.
Mr. Skenadore, welcome, and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL SKENADORE, PRESIDENT, MENOMINEE TRIBAL
ENTERPRISES, KESHENA, WISCONSIN

Mr. Skenadore. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and
members of the Subcommittee, I would like to thank you for the
invitation to provide testimony on opportunities to promote and
enhance tribal forest management. My name is Michael Skenadore,
and I am the President of Menominee Tribal Enterprises, a
wholly-owned entity of the Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin.
We are located about 50 miles north and west of Green Bay in
Wisconsin.
Since the establishment of our reservation in 1854, my
Tribe has practiced sustained yield timber harvesting, a forest
management practice where the allowable harvest does not exceed
the annual estimated forest growth. As a result, my Tribe has
harvested nearly twice the volume of our Menominee forest, but
today we have 40 percent more standing timber than when we
started managing our forest in 1854. Our methods do work.
Our history. Our harvesting philosophy was first proclaimed
by Chief Oshkosh shortly after the formation of our
reservation. And he said, ``Start with the rising sun and work
towards the setting sun. But take only the mature trees, the
sick trees, and the trees that have fallen. When you reach the
end of the reservation, turn and cut from the setting sun to
the rising sun, and the trees will last forever.''
We have clear-cut our entire reservation two-and-a-half
times using that basic philosophy. This philosophy prioritizes
sustainability and preservation by only harvesting weak, sick,
and fallen trees, and leaving behind mostly healthy trees to
grow, reproduce, and hopefully improve the genetic stock of our
forest and improve the quality of our standing timber. As a
result, our forest gets healthier and the quality of timber
improves over time with mostly assisted regeneration and very
limited planting activities.
My Tribe grew and developed our forestry and milling
operations with great success. But when Congress terminated its
trust relationship with our Tribe in 1954, this period of
growth and prosperity came to a halt, and we were thrust into
poverty. After tireless advocacy by our tribal leadership and
the support of President Nixon, Congress later restored our
nation-to-nation relationship in 1973, recognizing the
partnership between our Tribe and the United States in managing
our forest resources.
Today, Menominee Tribal Enterprises still embodies the
philosophy of Chief Oshkosh while incorporating the latest
scientific developments and technology into our practices. One
example is the use of drones to help us identify trees
suffering from oak wilt, so that our loggers can remove them
before they infect other trees. Our fuels team uses the modern
practice of mechanical mastication, but also the traditional
practice of controlled burns, an ancient practice our ancestors
understood for millennia to remove material that could cause
wildfires, but also to provide beneficial habitat for
traditional medicines, plants, and forest regeneration.
Our sustainable forestry practices have been documented and
recognized worldwide by the Forest Stewardship Council, the New
York Times, and the Princeton Ecological Review, and many
others.
The future of our forests. Despite our successes, we still
face challenges that the United States, our trustee and partner
in forest management, must help us to overcome. While
controlled burns are widely used, our non-tribal neighbors
often do not understand, and fear the practice. We actually
have the Wisconsin DNR that tells us not to burn on our tribal
lands because they do not understand the practice.
Congress must appropriate funds to support efforts to
increase education on controlled burns and their important role
in forest management. Our increased reliance on technology
requires expanded internet available and computer processing
power. We urge this Subcommittee to support our efforts to
continue investing in tribal broadband infrastructure and
future funding practices. It is critical that we develop
trained and educated foresters, ecologists, IT specialists, and
loggers essentially to managing our forest.
I thank you again for the invitation to provide testimony
on opportunities to promote and enhance tribal forest
management. I look forward to answering any questions you have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Skenadore follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Skenadore President, Menominee Tribal
Enterprises

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to provide testimony on
opportunities to promote and enhance Tribal forest management. My name
is Michael Skenadore, and I am the President of Menominee Tribal
Enterprises, a wholly-owned entity of the Menominee Indian Tribe of
Wisconsin. Since the establishment of our 235,000 acre reservation,
which is 93 percent forest, my people have practiced sustained yield
lumber harvesting, a forest management practice where the allowable
harvest does not exceed annual forest growth. After nearly 170 years of
sustainable forestry, my Tribe has harvested nearly twice the forest's
former volume of timber, but has 40 percent more standing wood than
when we started.
Our History

Our harvesting philosophy was first proclaimed by Chief Oshkosh
shortly after the formation of our reservation in 1854. Chief Oshkosh
said,

Start with the rising sun and work toward the setting sun, but
take only the mature trees, the sick trees, and the trees that
have fallen. When you reach the end of the reservation, turn
and cut from the setting sun to the rising sun, and the trees
will last forever.

Chief Oshkosh's philosophy of forest management prioritizes
sustainability and preservation by only harvesting weak, sick, and
fallen trees and leaving behind healthy trees to grow and reproduce. As
a result, the forest gets healthier and the quality of wood improves
over time, without having to plant a thing.

In 1908, a significant wind event downed millions of feet of timber
on our reservation. In response, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA)
established three sawmills on the reservation to process the downed
timber into boards--the last of the original three mills is still
standing and in operation in Neopit, Wisconsin. My Tribe grew and
developed our forestry and milling operations with great success. But
like over 100 of our fellow Tribal Nations, the Termination era brought
this period of growth and prosperity to a screeching halt: Congress
terminated its trust relationship with our Tribe in 1954.\1\ The
Menominee Termination Act devastated the Tribal economy and bankrupted
Menominee Tribal Enterprises as the business struggled to maintain the
reservation's land base. After tireless advocacy by our Tribal
leadership, Congress later restored our nation-to-nation relationship
in 1973,\2\ recognizing the relationship between our Tribe and the
United States as partners in managing our reservation's forest
resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pub. L. No. 83-399, 68 Stat. 250 (June 17, 1954).
\2\ Pub. L. No. 93-197, 87 Stat. 770 (Dec. 22, 1973).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our Forest Management Practices

Today, Menominee Tribal Enterprises still embodies the philosophy
of Chief Oshkosh while incorporating the latest scientific developments
and modern technology into our practices. We have seven departments
with unique responsibilities, and each department makes decisions based
on what is best for the forest--not people, or profit. For example, our
Harvest Preparation team surveys thousands of acres of forest annually
and identifies sick and old trees that are more than ten inches in
diameter for harvesting. Our loggers then wait until winter, when the
ground is frozen, to harvest the trees, so that the logs do not damage
the ground.
Our Fuels team uses controlled burns, an ancient practice our
ancestors understood thousands of years ago, to burn undergrowth and
logging leftovers at the start of the summer. This practice, now
recognized by the U.S. Forest Service \3\ (USFS) as an environmental
resilience strategy, removes material that could cause wildfires. These
burns also clear small spaces of the forest to assist in the growth of
oak trees, which require plenty of sunlight, and increase fertile
ground to support berries and other wild gatherable resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See U.S. Forest Serv., National Prescribed Fire Resource
Mobilization Strategy (2023), https://www.fs.usda.gov/sites/default/
files/2023-06/Rx-Fire-Strategy.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Though we still abide by the foundational principles and practices
established by our ancestors, we incorporate science and technology to
effectively manage our forest. Drones help to identify trees suffering
from oak wilt, a fungal disease, so that our loggers can remove them
before they infect other trees. Geographic information system (GIS)
mapping allows our foresters to identify and monitor forest cover
types, forest soil types, forest harvest compartments, known
archeological/historic sites where logging is prohibited, and the
spread of disease and pests throughout the forest. Light detection and
ranging (LIDAR) and other flyover technologies allow our foresters to
view the impact of human activity on the forest floor, such as by
identifying burial locations and village sites.
Our forestry practices are integral to our Tribal culture. My
people tap maple trees for syrup each spring, gather medicinal plants
like bitterroot and ginseng, and use our wood resources for traditional
crafts, such as basketry and canoes. On the business side, for which I
am responsible, our lumber sales account for approximately 50 percent
of our Tribe's economic activity. We employ 125 full-time staff, most
of whom are Tribal members.
Our sustainable forestry practices have been recognized worldwide.
The Menominee Forest was one of the first to receive certification from
the Forest Stewardship Council after its formation in 1993. A 2018
study by researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and
Dartmouth College demonstrated that our forestlands ``exceed nontribal
lands in measures of ecological function (biomass, carbon storage, and
plant diversity) and the criteria commonly used to assess forest
sustainability (sustained yields, forest stature, and diversity,
natural regeneration success).'' \4\ And journalists have come from
around the world to document our forestry for publications like the New
York Times,\5\ Yale Environment360,\6\ and Orion Magazine.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Donald M. Waller & Nicholas J. Reo, First Stewards: Ecological
Outcomes of Forest and Wildlife Stewardship by Indigenous peoples of
Wisconsin, USA, 23 Ecology & Soc'y, no. 1, at 11 (2018).
\5\ Cara Buckley, The Giving Forest, N.Y. Times, Apr. 27, 2023,
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/04/22/climate/menominee-forest-
sustainable-earth-day.html.
\6\ Fred Pearce, Tree Keepers: Where Sustaining the Forest is a
Tribal Tradition, Yale Env't360, July 24, 2023, https://e360.yale.edu/
features/menominee-forest-management-logging.
\7\ Alexandra Tempus, The People's Forest: How the Menominee Are
Facing Climate Change, Orion Mag., Dec. 30, 2018, https://
orionmagazine.org/article/the-peoples-forest/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Future of Our Forest

Despite our highly successful forestry practices, we still face
challenges that the United States, as our trustee and partner in
managing our reservation forest, must help us overcome. This section
outlines some of the most pressing issues we face and what Congress can
do to ensure that our forest continues to thrive for generations to
come.

While controlled burns have received more widespread
recognition, our non-Tribal neighbors often do not
understand and fear the practice. This is unsurprising, as
federal and state laws criminalized and stigmatized
controlled burns for decades. Now that the practice is
recognized as a critical component of forest stewardship
and wildfire prevention, Congress must appropriate funds to
support efforts to educate residents of land adjacent to
forests about controlled burns and their important role in
preservation and preventing wildfires.

Our increased reliance on drones, GIS mapping, LIDAR,
satellite imagery, and other airplane flyover technology
requires expanded computing power and Internet availability
to support these data intensive practices. The Menominee
Indian Tribe received $500,000 from the Tribal Broadband
Connectivity Program \8\ to deploy a middle-mile and Fiber
to the Home network in rural areas of the reservation. We
know firsthand the impact that Congressional infrastructure
investments can have on Tribal communities, and we urge
this Subcommittee to support efforts to build on these
investments in future funding packages.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Round One Award Recipients: Tribal Broadband Connectivity
Program, Nat'l Telecomm. & Info. Admin., https://
broadbandusa.ntia.doc.gov/funding-programs/tribal-broadband-
connectivity/award-recipients#M (last visited Nov. 28, 2023).

A trained and educated workforce is essential to managing
our forests. We need to employ foresters, ecologists, and
IT specialists to ensure we are leveraging cutting-edge
science and effectively using the latest innovations in
forest management. In addition, we need additional
investments in workforce development to attract young
people to our work, improve forestry education, and
preserve our forestry philosophy and practices. This
Subcommittee should support efforts to fund our Tribe's
outreach programs to middle and high schools, paid forestry
internships for college and graduate students, and post-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
doctoral study opportunities.

Menominee Tribal Enterprises frequently hosts budding
forest management professionals, including those employed
by the federal government, to learn our forestry practices
and sustained yield philosophy. Our Fuels team often
travels the United States to share its expertise in
controlled burns. Most of this education is uncompensated.
We deserve fair compensation for sharing this proprietary
knowledge, and this Subcommittee should direct the BIA and
other federal agencies to enter funding agreements with our
Tribe when federal employees are sent to the Menominee
forest for training. We also urge this Subcommittee to
support efforts to establish grant programs that could
support our forest management education.

As the Congressional Research Service detailed in its
October 5, 2020 report, the Good Neighbor Authority allows
states, counties, and Tribes to enter into a Good Neighbor
Agreement (GNA) with the USFS or Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) to perform forest, rangeland, and watershed
restoration work on the federal land managed by those
agencies.\9\ As also detailed in the report, in 2018,
Congress specified that, through Fiscal Year 2023, funds
received by a state through the sale of timber under a GNA
may be retained and used by a state on additional GNA
projects. However, no such provision exists for Tribes or
counties. Providing parity for Tribes and counties could
make these GNAs more attractive to enter into. There is
federal forest land adjacent to the Menominee forest, and
my Tribe would be very interested in bringing our cutting-
edge practices to our neighboring federal lands under a
GNA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Anne A. Riddle, Cong. Rsch. Serv., IF11658, The Good Neighbor
Authority on Federal Lands (2023), https://crsreports.Congress.gov/
product/pdf/IF/IF11658.

As such, we would like to thank Representative Fulcher for
introducing bipartisan legislation (H.R. 1450, the
``Treating Tribes and Counties as Good Neighbors Act''
\10\) which seeks to address this problem by extending the
ability to retain timber receipts from GNA projects to
Tribes and counties for additional restoration
projects.\11\ This legislation would also improve cross-
boundary restoration work by allowing restoration projects
to occur on non-federal lands as well as federal lands.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Treating Tribes and Counties as Good Neighbors Act, H.R. 1450,
118th Cong. (2023).
\11\ H.R. Rep. No. 118-168, pt. 2, at 3 (2023), https://
www.congress.gov/118/crpt/hrpt168/CRPT-118hrpt168-pt2.pdf.
\12\ Id.

As a member of the Intertribal Timber Council (ITC), our Tribe
echoes the testimony of ITC President Cody Desautel before
this Subcommittee on May 23, 2023.\13\ In addition, we
would like to thank this Subcommittee for expeditiously
holding the hearing, both the House Natural Resources
Committee and the House Agriculture Committee for
unanimously reporting this legislation out, and the whole
House of Representatives for passing it by an overwhelming
bipartisan majority on a voice vote. Finally, we would like
to thank Senator Risch for introducing the companion
legislation in the Senate as S. 697.\14\ We urge the Senate
to expeditiously pass this bipartisan, commonsense
legislation to provide parity for Tribes and counties under
the Good Neighbor Authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Legislative Hearing on H.R. 188, H.R. 932, ``Treating Tribes
and Counties as Good Neighbors Act'', ``Continued Rapid Ohia Death
Response Act of 2023'', ``FIRESHEDS Act'', ``Direct Hire to Fight
Fires'', ``Emergency Wildfire Fighting Technology Act of 2023'', ``Fire
Department Repayment Act of 2023'' and ``Forest Service Flexible
Housing Partnerships Act of 2023'' Before the Subcomm. on Fed. Lands of
the H. Comm. on Nat. Res., 118th Cong. (2023) (testimony of Cody
Desautel, President, Intertribal Timber Council), https://
naturalresources.house.gov/uploadedfiles/testimony_desautel_.pdf.
\14\ Treating Tribes and Counties as Good Neighbors Act, S. 697,
118th Cong. (2023).

As a member of the ITC, our Tribe also echoes the findings
of the 2023 Assessment of Indian Forests and Forest
Management in the United States \15\ and encourages this
Subcommittee to review and support the recommendations
outlined in the report. Pursuant to the National Indian
Forest Resources Management Act,\16\ this assessment of
Indian forest lands and management practices is produced
every ten years through a cooperative agreement between the
BIA Division of Forestry and the ITC. The 2023 report is
the fourth of its kind and offers recommendations to
improve the U.S. government's management of Indian forest
lands. In particular, we emphasize the importance of
increasing BIA forestry funding to achieve parity with the
USFS and BLM, clarifying federal responsibilities in
forestry co-management, and addressing immediate threats to
Tribal forests, such as wildfire resiliency, staff training
and workforce development, and education on controlled
burns. The Subcommittee should examine the annual budget
requests for forest management and fire management across
the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the
Interior for discrepancies in funding between Tribal
forests and federal forests, and demand parity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Fourth Indian Mgmt. Assessment Team, Intertribal Timber
Council, Assessment of Indian Forests and Forest Management in the
United States (2023), https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/
media_document/ifmat_iv_report.pdf.
\16\ 25 U.S.C. Sec. 3111(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

Thank you again for the invitation to provide testimony on
opportunities to promote and enhance Tribal forest management. The
Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin looks forward to continuing to work
with this Subcommittee to advance the priorities articulated in this
testimony, preserve the Menominee forest for generations to come, and
advance sustained yield forestry practices throughout the United
States.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Skenadore. Now I would like to
recognize Ms. Dawn Blake, Director of the Yurok Tribal Forestry
Department.
Ms. Blake, welcome. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAWN BLAKE, DIRECTOR, YUROK TRIBAL FORESTRY
DEPARTMENT, KLAMATH, CALIFORNIA

Ms. Blake. Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak on
behalf of Yurok Tribe Forestry Department. My name is Dawn
Blake. I am an enrolled member of the Hoopa Valley Tribe and a
Yurok descendant. I became the Yurok Tribe Forestry Director in
February 2021.
My expertise in forest ecosystems started with my study of
pileated woodpeckers. Woodpeckers are considered ecosystem
engineers because they provide habitats for themselves and
other animals, in part, by creating cavities in trees. Their
presence and activity influenced the entire forest ecosystem.
Native people are also ecosystem engineers. Fire management
clears the way and invites other animals and species into the
forest. Prohibition of placing low-intensity fires on the
ground has prevented us from fulfilling this ecosystem role in
the forest and initiating some of these long processes, such as
snag development and cavity development. This has been our
battle cry for decades, and while prescribed fire is happening
again, Native people do not have control over the process.
Fire management must return to tribal hands. Right now,
burns are overly reliant on the BIA and other agencies. This
creates a backlog of forest acres that should burn, including
site preparation acres that allow for reforestation. We have
dedicated significant time and resources to professional
development and increasing qualifications for tribal members.
We are capable and ready to step up. I strongly urge those who
oversee prescribed fire to recognize this local expertise.
Tribes also benefit from broader access to the forest. The
tribes that I am affiliated with manage their land for multiple
beneficial uses, including food and medicine. But we should
continue to expand access and use.
Our culture is inextricably linked to the land, and we need
prescriptive solutions to enhance our culture and provide for a
higher quality of life and human resilience.
There are also funding issues that could be resolved.
Tribes often need capital to complete projects and currently
work on a reimbursement basis. However, reimbursement processes
can be lengthy. For example, in these authorities that we are
talking about, funds transferred from agencies like the Forest
Service to the BIA, then make the funds available to the tribe.
This takes a lot of time for the tribe to track down those
funds as they go into the IFLA accounts. It would be better to
have a mechanism for a direct transfer from the agencies to the
tribes in these cases.
Checkerboard jurisdictions. Our issues created by
burdensome land transfer processes should also be addressed.
The Yurok Tribe has both lands held in trust as well as fee-
simple land awaiting trust status. The fee-simple land is more
difficult to manage, and subject to state jurisdiction
different from Federal trust lands. This is an issue for the
Tribe, which sometimes has fee-simple land positioned next to
trust lands. Both areas have the same land use, but are subject
to different jurisdictions. This increases vulnerability to
lawbreakers, creates compliance issues, and complicates
management.
Frustratingly, the jurisdiction issues remain a problem
throughout the several years it takes for the land to be taken
into trust. One suggestion to ease this burden is for Congress
to adopt language that includes tribal ownership as tribal land
in fee simple, awaiting to be taken into trust.
My effort as Director is more than just a job to me. It is
a passion that reflects both my personal beliefs and culture. I
appreciate working for a tribe that leads with its values. I
hope to pass on my experience not just from a scientific
perspective, but culturally.
In my last 12 seconds I would like to veer from my script
and just say that I dedicate my life and my career to
increasing the health of my people in body, mind, and spirit,
and I think that what we are talking about in forest health is
really directly correlated to the health of the people who
depend on that land, as well. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Blake follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dawn Blake, Director of the Yurok Tribal Forestry
Department

I. Introduction

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, members of the
Subcommittee, let me express my sincere thanks to you for inviting me
to speak on behalf of the Yurok Tribe's Forestry Department about the
important issues involved in forest land management.
My name is Dawn Blake. I am an enrolled member of the Hoopa Valley
Tribe and a Yurok descendant. I became the Yurok Tribe Forestry
Director in February 2021. In September 2022, I was appointed to the
California State Board of Forestry of Fire Protection.
Prior to becoming Director of the Forestry Department, I spent 20
years as a wildlife biologist for the Hoopa Tribe's Forestry
Department. As a biologist, I helped with various projects within the
wildlife department, including the long-term demographic study of
spotted owls (Strix occidentalis), known fate study of Pacific Fisher
(Pekania pennanti), and my own study of pileated woodpeckers on the
Hoopa Valley reservation. Additionally, I assisted with the capture and
processing of spotted owls, fishers, bears, bobcats, mountain lions,
and salamanders.
I have also participated on the Tribe's Interdisciplinary Team for
sales, including timber sales, and for Forest Management updates. In
2020 I developed a team and carried out a Natural Resources Symposium
for the local region highlighting some of the great works of the local
tribes for restoration and conservation.
My testimony will cover the following five main points: (1) the
role of Native American people as ecosystem engineers; (2) the
importance of relying on Tribe's expertise in managing prescribed
burnings to improve forest health; (3) expanding forest access and
tribal management power; (4) funding issues exacerbated by burdensome
administrative processes; and (5) complications related to checkerboard
jurisdiction.
II. Natives Americans are Ecosystem Engineers

My expertise in forest ecosystems started with my study of pileated
woodpeckers. Woodpeckers provide habitats for themselves and other
animals, in part, by creating cavities in trees. Their excavation of
these holes and presence in the ecosystem furnishes important habitats
for a multitude of other animals to use the forest. They are considered
ecosystem engineers. The cavities that woodpeckers place on the
landscape are relative to their body size from 3 in downy woodpeckers
to 24 in pileated woodpeckers. For example, large mesocarnivores, such
as fishers, use cavities that pileated woodpeckers place on the
landscape. Each cavity has the capability to host a suite of animals
throughout the forest.
In many ways, the native people are also ecosystem engineers. Our
forest management takes a holistic approach. The role we play in the
forest can welcome and improve the success of other animals within the
requisite proximity. Every species here evolved with fire by way of
native management of our respective spaces. The residual tress in this
region still represent that management. Large diameter hardwood and
conifers that are becoming uncommon on the landscape embody the effects
of low intensity fire management. We do not know what the next
recruitment of trees will look like in the absence of this management
or the effect of the dependent humans and animals. Cavity dwellers and
fire management go hand in hand. The prohibition of placing low
intensity fires on the ground in regular intervals has prevented us
from fulfilling an essential part of our jobs as ecosystem engineers.
Now many of these cavity dwelling species are in peril because fire has
been excluded for the last 100 years.
Prescribed fire is the most efficient way to reduce fuels and to
treat acreage. The number of acres that need to be treated throughout
the country to discourage uncontrollably high intensity fires is
daunting. And the current method for doing this is becoming antiquated
and is unable to sustain the scaling necessary.
This has been our battle cry for many decades and while we are
finally being heard, and prescribed fire is happening again, the native
people do not have much control over the process. The California
legislature recognizes cultural practitioners as burn bosses. A similar
framework at the federal level would be beneficial to tribal people and
the ecosystem.
It is not only a critical time in traditional ecological knowledge,
but culturally as well. I burned my grandmother's basketry patch with
her when I was 13. She did this on an annual basis to ensure she had
sticks for her baby baskets. That was in the 80's. As she aged out of
active management, her basketry material areas have been unmanaged,
while simultaneously her type of burning has increasingly been
criminalized and deemed as arson. We are now at a place in time where
local expertise is in peril as many of the threatened and endangered
species of our forests also are.
III. Fire Management Must Rely on Native Expertise

Fire management must come back to Tribal hands, at least for the
tribes with capacity and expertise to manage it. The Hoopa and Yurok
tribes have dedicated significant time and resources to professional
development and increasing qualifications for Tribal Members. Now,
multiple Tribal individuals can navigate federal agencies and conduct
conversations around the same science-based systems.
However, the process for implementing a successful burn is arduous
and overly reliant upon the BIA and other federal agencies. This
creates a tremendous backlog in forest acres that are slated to burn,
even site preparation is backlogged in this process, and there are so
many other reasons to prescribe fire for community protection, culture,
and forest health. Even though not every tribe's capacity to manage
prescribed fire is identical, they are nonetheless regulated
identically. This undermines the decades that we have dedicated to
raising our qualifications to someday prescribe fire on a large scale
or prescribe fire at all. Jurisdiction resides with federal agencies.
Our ability to develop and apply our local expertise is stymied. At the
same time, those who oversee prescribed fire must rely on the local
expertise to efficiently manage intensity.
Likewise, when I caught woodpeckers, I knew when the conditions
were correct, even though I was not able to scientifically list or
catch the variables that would make a successful capture event. There
was a feeling about it that I was sure of. I have had the great
pleasure to have witnessed a local expert in action, and he has a great
sense of the conditions and exactly the way a fire will burn. Then, the
fire behaves as he said. Local expertise is invaluable and encourages
safe practices.
IV. We Must Expand Forest Access and Tribal Management

The current framework facilitating formal agreements between tribes
and federal agencies related to land management is a great starting
point but could be improved. The framework has successfully given ease
to partnership for the goal of reducing forest threats that might
affect tribes and resources on Tribal land. Historically, the
agreements tend to focus on fuel reduction projects. However, while
fuel reduction is a worthy cause, we must also consider other causes.
For instance, tribes benefit from broader access to the forest for
food and medicine. The tribes that I am affiliated with manage their
land for multiple beneficial uses in addition to timber production, but
some tribes do not have that ability and have lost access to the
forest. Of all ethnic groups, Natives have the lowest age of mortality.
Although this issue is multifaceted, certain forest management goals
can provide health benefits. Some tribes are missing some of the food
sources that were integral to their wellbeing over the last 50-100
years. That is a trust responsibility issue that can be supported by
several federal agencies. Now that native people are nearly wholly
reliant on packaged foods, and many reservations are considered food
deserts, increasing the ability for natives to access the forest for
food and medicine, provided by forest management, is vital.
Our culture is inextricably tied to the forest, and the ability to
weigh into decision making action within our ancestral footprint can
provide opportunities for human resilience. This concept is most easily
demonstrated in youth initiatives. Our children have naturally high
ACES scores and provide them with resilience despite their traumas. As
I've learned in Trauma Care Training, you cannot change the experience
of children, but you can provide them with resilience. The most
efficient way to do so is through culture. We have seen the
extraordinary success of individuals through these types of initiates
who have flourished in their lives and careers, but who would otherwise
seemingly be on a fast track to prison.
In many cases these are lands within the ancestral footprint.
Getting to co-management rather than co-stewardship will be a great
endeavor. Co-stewardship has materialized as Tribes essentially being
contractors for the federal agencies.
V. Funding Issues

Although the relationship building between tribes and the federal
government has been positive, there are some issues that could be
resolved, especially when it comes to funding. Tribes often need
capital to complete projects, and work on a reimbursement basis.
However, the reimbursement process can be lengthy and inefficient.
For example, Forest Services first transfers funds to the BIA, who
in turn make funds available to tribes. However, tribes must follow up
with BIA frequently. This process is cumbersome for tribes and diverts
resources away from other priorities. If there were a mechanism for the
transfer of funds directly from agencies to tribes, that would be
better for tribes.
Additionally, the Inflation Reduction Act and Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law have provided funding for much needed projects. Lack
of internal personnel to carry out necessary tasks sometimes makes it
difficult to commit to funding. Consequently, we have lost out on
opportunities that the Tribe has need for. It would be beneficial for
the federal government to consider alternative funding processes. For
example, the government could consider delivering funding to tribes in
a similar manner that they are delivered to states.
VI. Complications with Checkerboard Jurisdiction

Checkerboard jurisdiction issues created by burdensome land
transfer processes should be addressed and simplified. Tribes have been
getting land back, both through initiatives and through tribal
constitutional goals. The Yurok Tribe is no different and has both land
held in trust and fee simple land awaiting trust status.
Ultimately, this is a great feat that moves the tribe in the right
direction. However, the lands in fee simple are more difficult to
manage and subject to a different jurisdiction than trust land. This
has been an issue for the Yurok Tribe, which sometimes has fee simple
land positioned next to trust land. Both areas have the same land use
but are subject to different jurisdictions--state jurisdiction for the
fee simple land and federal jurisdiction for trust land. This makes
newly acquired land vulnerable to lawbreakers, difficult to manage for
beneficial use, and expensive in the interim.
To make matters more frustrating, the process for taking fee simple
land into trust is lengthy, often taking multiple years to complete.
All the while, the jurisdictional issues remain. There are several
solutions for this. One suggestion is to adopt language that would
include tribal ownership as tribal land in fee simple awaiting to be
taken into trust.
VII. Conclusion

At a young age, I recognized the great affinity that my people have
for woodpeckers. They are represented in our tribal regalia and given
great reverence and appreciation. When I was a young mother of a red-
headed son, he was regularly referred to as pileated and acorn
woodpecker in both the Hoopa and Yurok language by my elders.
Eventually, I went on to develop my own affinity for the bird. That
affinity turned into a career of service and commitment to improving
the conditions of wildlife and the forest.
My effort as director is more than just a job to me, it is a
passion that reflects both my personal beliefs and culture. It is the
only career I have known; a career that has allowed me to raise and
teach my four children, and I appreciate being able to work for a Tribe
that leads with its values. I hope to pass down my experiences, not
just from a scientific perspective, but culturally, too. To do my part
in maintaining a continuum of traditions, food sources, and to preserve
the bond between tribal members and our inherent cultural core.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Ms. Blake. Finally, I would like to
recognize Mr. Phil Rigdon, the Vice President of the
Intertribal Council, and a member of the Yakama Nation.
Mr. Rigdon, welcome back. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PHIL RIGDON, VICE PRESIDENT, INTERTRIBAL TIMBER
COUNCIL, YAKAMA NATION, TOPPENISH, WASHINGTON

Mr. Rigdon. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member
Neguse, Chairman Westerman, and the distinguished Subcommittee
members. I am Phil Rigdon.

My Indian name is Shiakul, Inme Waniksha Shiakul. I am an
enrolled member of the Yakama Nation from south central
Washington State. I serve as the Vice President of the
Intertribal Timber Council, and I appreciate the opportunity to
share some of Yakama Nation's success and challenges in
forestry, and priorities for improvement to Federal policies
with respect to the management of tribal forest lands.

Yakama Nation Reservation consists of approximately 1.4
million acres, of which 650,000 acres is forest and woodlands.
These lands provide our way of life with water, food, medicine,
spiritual values, employment, and revenue. We operate modern,
innovative, and comprehensive natural resource programs
premised on our connectedness among the land, resources, and
our people. For example, when we look at managing a piece of
land, we are not just looking at one resource. We are thinking
about our timber, habitat for our foods such as deer, elk, the
roots, the berries, protection of our water that support our
salmon, our way of life.

So, as we have managed our forests, there are many
challenges that we face. And with respect to that, we are very
proud of what we have accomplished on our land itself, and it
is an important part of who we are. But one of our main
challenges is the inability to have the necessary workforce to
meet the needs of our land and our people. We are fortunate
with the conversation going on here as we expand out and look
at doing work on adjacent forests. But it is an important role
to play and to what we are trying to see within just what is
happening on our reservation.

Last year, the BIA only completed one timber sale at the
Yakama Nation. Under the National Indian Forest Resource
Management Act and implementing regulations, express trust
duties were established for Federal management of Indian
forests. Unfortunately, due to the workforce challenges and
lack of funding, the BIA Forestry Program at the Yakama Nation
has failed to hire many dozens of vacant forestry positions for
more than a decade.

This neglect, evident via a profound lack of staffing in
the BIA Forestry Program, has forced the Yakama Nation to
accept lost revenue, as well as put our forest infrastructure
at risk, through sheer neglect. This is a fundamental breach of
the United States' fiduciary trust responsibility owed to the
Yakama Nation. Jobs are threatened, Yakama members are losing
trust revenue that we should be receiving through a viable
timber economy.

As recommended by the most recent Indian Forest Management
Assessment Team Report, improved management by the BIA and more
funding and resources along with educational and training
programs are needed to ensure Federal programs can fulfill its
fiduciary duties. Tribal lands must be appropriately
prioritized to respond to and recover after wildfires. We need
to see those things such as in 2015, when the Cougar Creek Fire
burned over 50,000 acres, most of it on our reservation that
hit some of our most productive forest lands.

It is important to note that Yakama Forest Products was
founded in 1985. It is the second-largest tribal enterprise
employer on the Yakama Reservation, providing 220 living-wage
jobs in the poorest county in Washington State. However,
without better forest management and modernization of our mill,
Yakama Forest Products will be forced to curtail its employment
and could be forced to shut its doors. Hundreds of livelihoods
are at stake.

The inability of the BIA to adequately supply us with
enough logs annually is having an impact on our ability to
secure long-term financing for our mills, despite aggressively
pursuing bank financing, Federal grant opportunities, and tax
incentives. Modernizing our mill is crucial. Forest
infrastructure is crucial for the work that we are doing
jointly on adjacent lands, but critical for what is happening
on the reservation.

Even with these challenges, Yakama Nation is trying to meet
our forest needs and our innovative approaches. An example
would be the LiDAR-Assisted Single Tree Forest Inventory. In
collaboration with the BIA, this project utilizes LiDAR imagery
and inventory plots to create an accurate inventory database at
a single tree level. Implementing this ground-breaking approach
assists us in making better forest management decisions, and is
currently being utilized to modernize the Yakama Nation's
forest management plan.

Furthermore, the Tribal Forestry Program has used this
LiDAR inventory to complete a fire risk analysis across our
landscape. This analysis is assisting us in prioritizing fuels
and forest health treatments that will provide more resilience
to insects, disease, and catastrophic fire.

Thank you for this opportunity to testify about the many
opportunities and challenges we face within tribal forest
management and also the leadership that tribes, I believe, are
doing with the active management that we do across our
landscape. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Rigdon follows:]
Prepared Statement of Phil Rigdon, Superintendent, Department of
Natural Resources, Yakama Nation & Vice-President,
Intertribal Timber Council

Chairman Tiffany, Ranking Member Neguse, and distinguished
subcommittee members, I am Phil Rigdon, a proud member of the Yakama
Nation, Natural Resources Superintendent for the Yakama Nation in
south-central Washington State, and I also serve as Vice-President of
the Intertribal Timber Council (ITC). I appreciate this opportunity to
share some of the Yakama Nation's successes and challenges in forestry
and priorities for improvements to federal policies with respect to the
management of tribal forest land.
The Yakama Nation Reservation consists of approximately 1.4 million
acres, of which approximately 650,000 acres is forest and woodlands.
These lands provide our way of life with water, food, medicine,
spiritual values, employment, and revenue to the Yakama Nation. We
operate modern, innovative, and comprehensive natural resource programs
premised on connectedness among the land, resources, and people. For
example, when we look at managing a piece of land, we're not just
looking at one resource. We're thinking about the timber value, habitat
resources for our deer and elk hunters, impacts to water quality where
salmon live, and so forth.
I believe the Indian forest management approach is well balanced
and allows for forest management practices that can emphasize several
important categories and uses including primitive, general, recreation,
traditional use, winter wildlife habitat and riparian areas. It is more
focused on conservation of a resource than prohibition of an activity.
We protect our resources; yet we understand that utilization is
essential to sustain the health of our forests and meet and sustain
economic, ecological, and cultural values. We rely on our forests to
provide employment and entrepreneurial opportunities and to generate
income needed to care for the land and provide services for our
communities.
Indian Forest Management Assessment Team Report

Unlike any other federal forests, Indian forests and their
management, under the directive of the National Indian Forest Resources
Management Act of 1990, are reviewed by an independent scientific panel
every ten years. Earlier this year, for the fourth time since 1994, the
Indian Forest Management Assessment Team (IFMAT) issued a report. A
team of nationally known experts in forest management conduct the
assessment and prepare this report for Congress. Among other
conclusions, IFMAT IV found that tribal forestry departments are
underfunded and understaffed compared to their neighbors and high stand
density conflated with limited processing infrastructure has created
complex forest health conditions. Specifically the report notes that,
``for the fourth time the IFMAT analysis finds Indian trust forest
lands funded at about a third per acre of comparable federal forests.''
The report also found that annual timber harvests are only 50% of the
allowable levels under tribal forest management plans, resulting in
tens of millions of dollars in lost annual revenue and employment
opportunities for tribal communities and deteriorating forest health.
We hope that Congress will take a serious look at this report and act
on its recommendations.
Tribes partnering with federal agencies for forest management on
adjacent lands

Many tribes, including the Yakama Nation, retain off-reservation
treaty rights on ceded lands that became National Forests. Catastrophic
wildfire on these forests directly and negatively impacts tribes. Since
those retained rights are tied to specific areas by treaty, executive
order, or agreements with the federal government, tribes are
disproportionately impacted when those areas are devastated by
wildfire. Even with effective treatments on our own lands, severe
wildfires from adjacent federal lands inflict significant damage and
economic cost to tribal forests and resources.
As you know, authorities provided by the Tribal Forest Protection
Act (TFPA) allow tribes to petition the Secretaries of Agriculture and
Interior to conduct projects on federal land to reduce threats to
adjacent tribal lands, trust resources, and values--including
ecological, cultural or archaeological sites. The 2018 Farm Bill
contained important expansions of TFPA authorities and also gave tribes
and counties the authority to enter into Good Neighbor Agreements (GNA)
with federal agencies. The Yakama Nation is currently using these
authorities in the Okanogan-Wenatchee National Forest to make
improvements in an area adjacent to the northern exterior boundary of
the Yakama Reservation that has shown increased susceptibility to fire,
insect and disease outbreaks, declining habitat, and degrading aquatic
habitat. This area is part of the tribe's aboriginal lands where ceded
rights to hunt, fish, and gather are maintained. Also, the area
includes features unique to the Yakama Nation, including trust
resources, treaty rights, and/or culturally important areas and
resources. The intent of this project--the South Fork Tieton project--
is to implement vegetation and fuels reduction treatments on the
landscape to reduce brush, undergrowth and even tree density in over-
stocked stands thereby reducing the risk of catastrophic wildfire.
Treatments within the project area include commercial and non-
commercial thinning, and additional service work items in a cooperative
effort between the Yakama Nation and the U.S. Forest Service. This
project will also contribute economic opportunities for local
communities and supplement the only remaining log milling facility in
Yakima County--our own Yakama Forest Products.
While we have found some success in using these authorities to
carry out important forest management and fire prevention activities on
adjacent lands, these programs must be adequately funded and provide
training and technical support so tribes have the resources and staff
to implement cross-boundary projects, and recurring funding must be
sufficient to maintain tribes existing forestry needs before a tribe
can take on additional responsibilities. These are among the
recommendations included in the IFMAT report.
Tribal land must also be appropriately prioritized for response to
and recovery after a wildfire. In 2015, the Cougar Creek fire burned
over 50,000 acres of forested lands, the majority on the Yakama
Reservation. We lost more than one-half billion board feet of timber in
that fire with an estimated potential loss of $100 million in timber
revenue. A significant amount of that fire was on some of the most
productive commercial forest lands on the Yakama Reservation,
critically important cultural areas. For the Yakama Nation to respond
to the devastation, we requested a $4.1 million supplemental budget
from DOI that included a salvage strategy. While our request through
DOI was denied, we were eventually successful in getting funding from
the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and other avenues to help salvage some of the
timber and conduct other recovery work. This episode shows that the
protection and restoration of tribal trust resources must be
appropriately prioritized by the federal government in the aftermath of
a wildfire.
Workforce needs and training

As I mentioned earlier, the Yakama Nation has a 650,000-acre
forest, and last year the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) only completed
one (1) timber sale. Under the National Indian Forest Resource
Management Act and implementing regulations, express trust duties were
established for federal management of Indian forests. Unfortunately,
due to workforce challenges and lack of funding, the BIA Forestry
Program at the Yakama Agency has failed to hire many dozens of vacant
forestry positions for more than a decade. In 2014, the BIA Director
identified that BIA Forestry at the Yakama Agency was, in his words,
``on the verge of collapse.'' The program has only continued to
deteriorate since then.
The Yakama Nation made the decision, and consistent with the Indian
Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA), for the
federal government to provide direct services through the BIA Forestry
Program. Importantly, forestry management directly implicates Treaty-
reserved rights and privileges. However, the lack of staffing in the
BIA Forestry Program has forced the Yakama Nation to accept lost
revenue through sheer neglect. This is a dramatic breach of the United
States' trust obligations established by Treaty, statute, and
regulation.
This situation of lost economic benefit has put Yakama Member-owned
logging companies out of business. The Yakama Nation's commercial mill
can no longer sustain itself on timber harvested from the Yakama
Nation's own forest--threatening over 200 Yakama Member-held jobs.
Yakama Members are losing the trust revenues that they should be
receiving from a viable timber economy. As recommended by the IFMAT
report, improved management at the BIA and more funding and resources
are needed to ensure that federal direct service programs can fulfill
this federal duty so that the Yakama Nation and its members can benefit
from the forest resources. There is also a great need for stronger
educational and training programs provided by the federal government to
ensure the BIA and tribes can hire and retain the workforce needed to
staff and maintain these critical forestry programs.
Infrastructure needs

Founded in 1995, Yakama Forest Products (YFP) is the second largest
tribal enterprise employer on the Yakama Reservation providing more
than 220 living-wage jobs in the poorest county in Washington State.
However, without better forest management and modernization of our
mills, YFP will be forced to curtail employment and could be forced to
shut its doors. Hundreds of livelihoods are at stake. YFP operates two
mills that process Ponderosa Pine, Doug Fir, and other species.
Completed in 1998 and 2001 as employment projects, these mills are no
longer cost-competitive, and significant upgrades are needed to ensure
that YFP remains a growing and competitive enterprise.
The inability of the BIA to adequately supply us with enough logs
annually to run at capacity and sell saw logs to supplement our cash-
flows and finalize our forest management plan is having an impact on
our ability to secure long-term financing for our mill. We are
requesting immediate assistance from the federal government in
collaborating on short and long-term solutions for YFP to stay active
as south-central Washington's milling infrastructure. YFP has created
the opportunities to bring over $4 billion of economic benefit to our
region since operations started during the late 1990s and we must
continue this progress.
Modernizing our mills is crucial to help us remain competitive by
achieving improved energy efficiency, increased product recovery and
throughput, enhanced product quality, and ensuring safer working
conditions. Installing a wood-fired energy system for lumber drying
will significantly reduce propane consumption and fossil-based
Greenhouse Gas emissions. We also need to develop steep ground logging
capacity on Yakama lands to reduce overstocking on fire-prone
forestland; produce biochar from dead, non-merchantable forest
material; and sequester biochar in soil and in long-term products, such
as filtration systems for wastewater treatment plants. We estimate the
total cost of the modernization project to be around $130 million and
while our staff has been aggressive in pursuing private bank financing,
federal grant opportunities, and tax incentives, we have found that the
lack of a consistent timber sale program and a modernized forest
management plan and other factors have hindered our ability to secure
these critical financial resources. We would urge this committee to
look at ways to make the many federal grant programs funded in recent
years through the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction
Act and other legislation more accessible to tribes and give us the
needed technical assistance and capacity to compete for these funds.
This is in line with recommendations in the IFMAT report calling for a
review of national policy on providing tribes with funding and
technical assistance and its effect on the tribes' ability to develop a
forest products infrastructure. Without forest infrastructure, our
ability to implement this important work is jeopardized.
Even with these challenges, the Yakama Nation is driven to
sustainably manage our forestlands to meet the needs of our people and
resources our lands provide. An example would be the Lidar-Assisted
Single-Tree Forest Inventory. In collaboration with the BIA Yakama
Agency, this project utilizes lidar imaging and inventory plots to
create an accurate inventory database at a single-tree level.
Implementing this ground-breaking approach assists us in making better
forest management decisions and is currently being used to modernize
Yakama Nation's updated forest management plan. Furthermore, the Tribal
Forestry Program has used the lidar inventory to complete a fire risk
analysis across our landscape. That analysis is assisting in
prioritizing fuels and forest health treatments that will provide more
resilience to insects, disease, and catastrophic fire.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify about the many
opportunities and challenges ahead with respect to tribal forest
management and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Tiffany. Thank you, Mr. Rigdon, and thank you to all
our panelists for your testimony. Now I will turn to the
Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee, Mr. Westerman, for
his questioning.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Tiffany. And, again,
thank you to the witnesses for your testimony today.
Councilman Rice, as I discussed in my opening statement, I
had the good pleasure to visit the Mescalero Tribe in the past
couple of years, and it was astonishing the difference between
the management on the tribal land versus the adjacent Lincoln
National Forest.
And I can see behind your shoulder there the real force
behind that: Ms. Thora Padilla, the forester who showed me
around that day. If you had the authority, if we gave you the
authority to manage the Lincoln National Forest and you could
unleash Ms. Padilla and her workforce, what difference could we
expect to see?
What would you do on the Lincoln National Forest that is
not being done now?
Mr. Rice. We would like to do some logging. Also, more
hazardous fuels reduction. And to conduct more projects
throughout the forest, not just on the border, and to require
Federal land managers to adopt the tribal forestry practices in
their management plans.
Mr. Westerman. I am guessing everybody would probably be
happy with that. There would be more elk on the Lincoln
National Forest, as well.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Rigdon, it is good to see you back here
again. And you talked about in your testimony how Yakama has
invested in mill infrastructure, and how you have created
markets for the timber that comes off.
But you also said that tribes are only harvesting about 50
percent of the allowable timber harvest under the Tribal Forest
Management Plans. What tools can Congress provide that would
increase the sustainable timber harvesting among tribes so you
could start meeting your timber targets?
Mr. Rigdon. Thank you. First of all, I think we have the
capability. It is resource-driven. But one of the biggest
things I think that we really face throughout the West is
having viable foresters, silviculturists, and leadership, and
having bodies to be able to go out and do the work. I think
that is one of our biggest challenges that we all face right
now.
So, really putting things into place so that we can build a
workforce that is able to go out and do the necessary work to
lead in the silviculture, and I do think to look how the
Menominees, the Mescaleros, the Yakamas, the Colvilles, and the
Yuroks, each of us have a unique place on how we approach. And
I think getting forestry folks out there and allowing us to do
that, but also having the resources to be able to support the
type of forest infrastructure that is necessary. So, I think
there is that investment.
But also, people don't understand. Tribes follow all the
Federal rules, the NEPA, we follow NHPA, we follow ESA, we do
all of that and jump through all of those hoops. How do you
streamline some of that to allow us to be able to achieve that
landscape-level kind of approach? Come and see what we are
doing throughout our reservations, and help us build the tools
that are necessary.
And I think it is a resource-driven thing, and also looking
at how do you get that next generation of youth really
interested in being foresters, and really interested in being
or working in the woods.
And the other part that I think is critical that people
don't talk about is our forest infrastructure. If we don't have
a million infrastructure, it is going to hurt our ability to do
the type of management that we want. So, I think there needs to
be a group that needs to really discuss and put the resources
there, because from log truck drivers, to the loggers, to all
the aspects of it, I think, is a critical need across not just
us, but throughout the whole interior West.
Mr. Westerman. Would you care to make a prediction on the
UW Texas football game on the record?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Rigdon. Go Dawgs.
Mr. Westerman. Mr. Desautel, I had the chance to spend time
with you touring the Colville. And you have also talked about
tribal capacity is one of the primary impediments to increasing
the pace and scale of management practices, like Mr. Rigdon was
talking about.
How could Congress help address this challenge and promote
careers in forestry among tribal members?
Mr. Desautel. Well, I think the easiest first step is to
increase funding for BIA. Most of the funding that goes to
tribes for forest management comes from the Bureau of Indian
Affairs. And if you look at the most recent IFMAT report, and
again, the past three had similar findings, they are vastly
underfunded compared to other Federal agencies.
If BIA had three times as much funding, presumably much of
that funding would be passed down through 638 contracts to
tribes. And much of the funding that we get now is competitive,
so it makes it very difficult for us to grow a workforce that
is needed to do the type of work that is needed to accomplish
our forest management goals and, as I noted in my testimony,
not just accomplish our management goals at home, but have
extra capacity to do that cross-boundary work with our partners
across the fence, whether that be the Forest Service, BLM, or
State.
Mr. Westerman. And you have also talked about the
difference between fires on tribal land and Federal land, and I
saw some examples of that when I was out visiting. Can you
elaborate on some of the key differences between the wildfire
management and suppression practices on tribal versus Forest
Service property?
Mr. Desautel. Well, I can speak for Colville, but I think
this holds true across most of Indian Country, that tribes
understand the value of fire and what place it has in the
ecosystem. So, we are much more likely to do prescribed burning
in the spring and fall, we are much more aggressive at initial
attack in the summer when fire shouldn't be burning.
So, what you see for post-fire effects on reservations
tends to be better post-fire conditions than what you would see
on adjacent Federal land. I think that Mr. Rice had a good
example, where fires didn't get attacked in the initial attack,
and ultimately you had that bad wind.
What we have experienced over the last 5 to 10 years at
Colville is that we are seeing the vast majority of the acres
burning under those absolute worst burning conditions, those
hottest, driest, windiest days. So, what you are seeing for
post-fire conditions is something much more severe, much worse
than what we would experience historically, particularly if you
look at fire use by tribes pre-contact, where much of that
burning happened on the shoulders of fire season where you had
beneficial resource impacts from fire use at that point.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentleman yields. I recognize Ms. Leger
Fernandez for 5 minutes for questioning.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Thank you very much, and it is always
difficult to come after a forester when we are talking about
forests, except for the fact that I always learn so much from
our Chair and his knowledge of good forest practices.
Thank you so very much for coming and sharing your
experiences, and I always really find it interesting. I mean,
you are talking about forests across many different states,
many different tribes, but some of the same themes keep
emerging. And that is the benefit of this hearing, and I thank
you for pulling it together, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member.
I want to go to a favorite place. I love the Mescalero
Apache Reservation, loved being there this summer, looking
forward to being there in a couple of months once again. If you
could share with us some of the 638 expansion programs, Mr.
Rice, that you have done, because your recommendation is that
we make this permanent. And we just heard about the importance
of providing the funding to the BIA so that when you 638 those
programs there is enough funding to actually carry out the
intended purpose.
So, Mr. Rice, could you share a little bit about what you
have been able to do with that 638 funding?
And then I would love to hop on over to Colville and get a
sense from them, as well.
Mr. Rice. Thank you for that question. Unfortunately, I am
not prepared for that question right now, but I will get back
with you as soon as I can.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. OK, thank you very much. Well, let me
talk a little bit about the mill then, you raised what happened
when the mill had to shut down. Do you think that it is
possible to bring a mill back? And what would it take to do
that? Because you see that as key for the forest, is that
right, Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Yes. Thank you. The sawmills, looking at bringing
it back again, there is other potential as far as biomass and
the sawmill just breaks even.
So, there are other potential areas as far as biomass and
other value-added processing to get it reopened.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. I think there is, yes. I really
appreciate the fact that technology has evolved, and there are
lots of different opportunities about being able to use the
resources from your forests.
Mr. Rice. Yes.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Is that kind of what you are getting
at?
Mr. Rice. Yes. Also, just going back to the pellets, like,
pellets you could use the whole tree, where there is no waste.
We use everything. And that is where the biomass would come in.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Yes, thank you for that.
Mr. Desautel, do you want to add a little bit to the 638?
And then I do want to hear from Miss Dawn. I have about a
minute, 36.
Mr. Desautel. I will be brief. Additional 638 funding, or
just the additional forestry funding that would come to tribes
through 638 contracts in the BIA would be a great help in
growing that workforce.
But that funding doesn't have to come just from the BIA. If
that 638 contract authority that we have for TFPA is expanded
to just the Department of Agriculture in general, that gives us
even more flexibility to continue to build that workforce, to
continue to build that partnership with the Forest Service or
BLM.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. Right, and I think that is the whole
benefit of the expansion, right, and we need to make sure that
we, across so many different fields, not just this one, that we
expand beyond BIA. Sorry if I limited it, but I did intend to
have it as expansion.
Ms. Blake, the importance of looking at how we look at
prescribed burns and how we protect things, could you expand a
little bit more on how you are looking at these problems that
we face with regards to both pursuing prescribed burns and then
fighting them?
As you know, or you might not know, but we had a huge
problem in my place that I am from with regards to prescribed
burns that got out of control. So, we always want to be
learning lessons.
Ms. Blake. We have been trying to develop capacity in this
arena for decades, and trying to navigate the system so that
this prescribed burning can come back into tribal hands, and to
be able to put fire on the landscape at a larger scale.
At this point, we want to do prescribed burning on
watersheds, not just a few acres at a time. It is the most
efficient way to reduce fuel. And where we are, it is really
expensive work to do mechanical treatments and other types of
treatments to reduce fuel. So, that ability to do prescribed
fire is extraordinarily important.
We have to rely too much on other jurisdictions in order
for us to be able to implement fire, and in the meantime we are
not developing our local expertise in order to do that. And
where prescribed fires happen, you have to rely on local
expertise because a burn boss can come from anywhere throughout
the country, but in order for the prescribed fire to consume
properly or to not burn at too high intensity, you really have
to depend on the expertise in that area and the local fuels and
conditions.
So, as tribes, we would really like that to come back into
our own hands. And as you know, so many members of this
Committee have said, we have done this for millennia, but now
we are not able to implement this on our own. And I would
really appreciate having that back.
Ms. Leger Fernandez. OK, thank you so very much.
And my time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. The gentlelady yields. I will recognize the
Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neguse. Well, I thank the Chairman. It is tough
following the Chairman of the Full Committee, but it is even
more difficult following the Subcommittee Chairwoman, Ms. Leger
Fernandez. So, I want to just echo her remarks and associate
myself with my colleague's sentiments.
And she asked the question of you, Ms. Blake, that I had
intended to ask, and I thought your answer was very revealing
and, I think, instructive in terms of some of the
considerations that this Committee and the other committees of
jurisdiction need to make as we consider funding decisions.
And I would just simply say I appreciate every witness,
your testimony today, both the written testimony you submitted
and your oral testimony.
And I would also say that I think, for me, the takeaway
among many takeaways is that it is not as though we don't know
the challenges. It is very, very clear. You all have
articulated them. They have been well documented in the 2023
Indian Forest Management Assessment. The challenges are very
clearly stated. The question is will the Congress have the
political will to do what is necessary to help you resolve and
ameliorate those challenges.
And that starts principally, as one of our witnesses
testified, I think, with making very specific, intentional
decisions as it relates to BIA funding, and certainly something
I support, and plussing up of various accounts that we know
will ultimately be distributed to the tribes.
It also means, I think, redoubling some of the investments
that we made in the Inflation Reduction Act and in the IIJA,
which have inured to the benefit of Americans, of tribal
communities, of everyone. And, of course, it means continuing
to be collaborative and looking to all of you as partners as we
continue this important work. So, I thank you for being here. I
have no questions and want to again thank the Chairman for
holding this hearing, and I yield back.
Mr. Tiffany. Thank you very much, and the gentleman yields.
I am going to conclude questioning here. First of all, I would
like to ask a couple of questions of Mr. Skenadore.
It is great to have you here. When I was in the State
Senate, I represented Menominee County, and it is always a
privilege to be able to work with the Menominee Tribe.
Menominee Tribal Enterprises has been in business for a
long time and producing wood for America. What would forest
management look like on Menominee tribal lands if you didn't
have that mill?
Mr. Skenadore. Thank you for the question. We would have a
much more densely populated forest. We would have much older
trees than we do. We would also have a lot more fuel on the
forest floors. I believe our wildfire risk would have grown
exponentially.
I like to say Menominee Tribal Enterprise is in the
business of forest management. But as a result, we get logs to
turn into boards. So, those decisions to thin the forest, to
selectively harvest, to try to make the forest better, all
really relate to the quality of the forest that we have right
now today.
Mr. Tiffany. How many tribal members have jobs currently at
MTE?
Mr. Skenadore. We employ about 240 employees. We try really
hard to have living-wage jobs for all of them, but that
includes sawmill employees, forestry employees, and it also
includes our contractors who are out in the forest, taking down
trees.
Mr. Tiffany. Well, thank you so much for the work you do.
And MTE is always recognized as a fine mill that we have in
northern Wisconsin amongst so many. And they are vital, aren't
they, for us to be able to do proper forest management?
Mr. Rigdon, I think you said something about, I am not sure
I caught it clearly, but that you had a lack of wood at a time.
Could you explain that a little bit more? I didn't catch all of
that.
Mr. Rigdon. Yes. During the last 10 years, due to the lack
of forestry staff and filling positions within the Bureau of
Indian Affairs, we have seen a significant decrease in the
amount of timber sales that have been created for our active
logging on the reservation. So, this last year we actually
received more wood from John Crockett and the Forest Service
than we did from our own mill on the reservation, which is
trust income that goes back into our community that supports
many governmental programs, and it plays an important role into
that.
But the fact is that we don't have enough silviculturists
and enough timber sale planners to implement what we need to
support our facilities. And it becomes an important part
because, as you don't have as much wood but your cost to run a
mill stays the same, the amount of board feet plays a key role
in making that economical, and you get to this place where it
costs you more than what you have to cut. And that becomes
problematic.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you really need staff to be able to
complete those projects. Is that correct? To be able to get the
wood to your mills?
Mr. Rigdon. Yes, staffing plays a key role, and also the
resources. And it falls in line with the IFMAT report into
what----
Mr. Tiffany. And I am hearing a little bit about that, the
regulatory side of it can be challenging at times also. Are you
supportive of some NEPA changes that would make sense to be
able to perhaps streamline the process to be able to get wood
to the mills?
Mr. Rigdon. I think there are conversations to that. I am
very proud that we, and most of the tribes, when we go into our
conversation, it is within our internal community. We get
feedback right away if our membership doesn't like it, they
tell us right away.
And it is some of the other things, the outside drivers,
when Endangered Species Act and these things play a role that
we aren't managing our forests for the benefit of our people,
we are being dictated for spotted owl or for some other species
that doesn't always have the same resource values. And we put
our forests at risk on some of those things. So, that to me,
becomes one of our challenges.
Mr. Tiffany. Did we end up with better forest management in
the Pacific Northwest as a result of the spotted owl scare?
Mr. Rigdon. I want to say it this way. Especially in the
Northwest, we ended up and we put every acre into these
different models that were not sustainable. And I really think,
when you look on the eastern side of the Cascades and fire-
prone communities trying to maintain that type of habitat, it
is actually a destructive thing that has helped entice and
enhance the type of catastrophic fires that we have seen.
I think there needs to be a conversation. I think you can
silviculturally achieve some of the same goals, and we need to
do that to reduce the risk and the resilience of our forests.
And I think that plays a role. I think the model that we used
isn't achieving the goals that we want, and you could see that
through what has come out of the Northwest Forest Plan and the
survivability of the spotted owl.
Mr. Tiffany. I want to ask just one other quick question.
Mr. Desautel, there was a lawsuit filed by an environmental
group to stop a forest management project. Could you tell us a
little bit more about that lawsuit and the benefits that would
have accrued to the tribe as a result of doing that project,
and the health of the tribe and the health of the forest?
Mr. Desautel. So, that project had about 15 miles of
adjacent boundary with the Colville National Forest. The
intention was to do a lot of forest health, forest restoration
work, along with about 15,000 acres of prescribed burning. And
really, the issue that the litigant had was some roadside fuels
treatments that we wanted to do that were directly adjacent to
the reservation boundary because it is tough ground. And that
was really one of our opportunities to stop a wildfire.
And subsequently, in 2021, we had a wildfire on the
reservation side just south of that, and it burned 50,000 acres
in at least a couple of hundred million board feet of timber.
So, it did exactly what we were scared it would do. But because
of the work that we did on the reservation, we thankfully held
it on the reservation, and it didn't go on to the north half.
But it was really driven by a very distinct recreational
special interest. So, it is unfortunate that it stopped all of
that good potential natural resource work because of one
particular group.
Mr. Tiffany. So, you are saying that lawsuit cost thousands
of acres of forest to be burned?
Mr. Desautel. No, the fire started on the reservation side,
but that potential still exists on the Forest Service side.
Their forest health issues are worse than what we had on our
side. So, if we can burn 50,000 acres, they can definitely do
that. And we would have lost the opportunity to do some work
ahead of time that could have minimized the footprint of a
future fire if we don't do that work now.
Mr. Tiffany. Well, we have heard that many times here
throughout the course of the last year.
I would like to thank all the witnesses for your testimony,
and our Members for their questions. We really appreciate that
you would take the time and effort to come here to Washington,
DC to share your thoughts.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for our witnesses today. We will ask that they
respond to those in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of
the Subcommittee must submit questions to the Subcommittee
Clerk by 5 p.m. on Friday, December 8, 2023. The hearing record
will be held open for 10 business days for these questions.
And if there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee on Federal Lands stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 4:40 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
