- OVERSIGHT HEARING ON BIDEN'S BORDER CRISIS: EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF INTERNATIONAL CARTELS TARGETING INDIAN COUNTRY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BIDEN'S BORDER CRISIS:
EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF
INTERNATIONAL CARTELS
TARGETING INDIAN COUNTRY

=======================================================================

OVERSIGHT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

Wednesday, April 10, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-108
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

55-380 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA                     CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                       Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                   Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                     Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                     Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                   Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                      Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                       Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                   Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                      Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                       Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

PAUL GOSAR, AZ, Chairman
MIKE COLLINS, GA, Vice Chair
MELANIE A. STANSBURY, NM, Ranking Member

Matt Rosendale, MT                   Ed Case, HI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                   Ruben Gallego, AZ
Mike Collins, GA                     Susie Lee, NV
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, April 10, 2024........................     1

Statement of Members:

Gosar, Hon. Paul, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Arizona.................................................     1
Stansbury, Hon. Melanie A., a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Mexico....................................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................    29

Statement of Witnesses:

Kirk, Bryce, Tribal Executive Board Member, Fort Peck Tribes,
Poplar, Montana............................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Vaughan, Jessica, Director of Policy Studies, Center for
Immigration Studies, St. Helena Island, South Carolina.....    10
Prepared statement of....................................    11
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16

Jose, Verlon M., Chairman, Tohono O'odham Nation, Sell,
Arizona....................................................    17
Prepared statement of....................................    18
Questions submitted for the record.......................    23
Stiffarm, Jeffrey, President, Fort Belknap Indian Community,
Harlem, Montana............................................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Gosar

Zack Smith, The Heritage Foundation, Statement for the
Record.................................................    52

Harlan Baker, Chippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boy's
Indian Reservation, Statement for the Record...........    55

Submissions for the Record by Representative Stansbury

Southern Poverty Law Center, Statement for the Record....    56

OVERSIGHT HEARING ON BIDEN'S BORDER
CRISIS: EXAMINING THE IMPACTS OF
INTERNATIONAL CARTELS TARGETING
INDIAN COUNTRY

----------

Wednesday, April 10, 2024
U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
Committee on Natural Resources
Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:19 a.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Paul Gosar
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gosar, Rosendale, Collins,
Westerman; and Stansbury.
Also present: Representatives Wittman, Carl, Hageman,
Crane, Zinke; Garcia, and Ramirez.

Dr. Gosar. The Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
The Subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on
Biden's border crisis, examining the impacts of international
cartels targeting Indian Country.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
the hearing are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking
Minority Member. I therefore ask unanimous consent that all
other Members' statements be made part of the hearing record if
they are submitted in accordance with the Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the following Members be
allowed to sit and participate in today's hearing: the
gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Carl; the gentlewoman from Wyoming,
Ms. Hageman; the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane; the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Garcia; the gentlewoman from
Illinois, Mrs. Ramirez; and the gentleman from Montana, Mr.
Zinke.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PAUL GOSAR, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Dr. Gosar. Good morning, everyone. I would like to take a
moment to give a special thanks to our witnesses for coming
before the Committee today. The topic, ``Biden's Border Crisis:
Examining the Impacts of International Cartels Targeting Indian
Country,'' is not an easy one, and we know that the
ramifications of discussing this issue publicly can be
difficult. So, again, thank you for being here.
In addition, I would also like to take a moment to reflect
on someone who cannot be here with us today who would be, given
the gravity of this topic. I know that the Full Committee
Ranking Member Grijalva would want to be here. However, given
his recent diagnosis, he needs to be at home to receive
treatments and recover. We welcome the witnesses from his
district, and wish him all the best for a speedy recovery.
It is no secret that the international criminal cartels
have taken advantage of President Biden's open border policies
to traffic massive amounts of drugs and humans into the United
States. It was just a matter of time before they turned their
sights to Indian Country, which is now experiencing the impacts
of the cartel's illicit drug trade through increased crime,
overdosing, deaths, and more.
President Biden has repeatedly failed to address the influx
of illegal immigration since taking office, and undermined
numerous efforts to strengthen our border. He immediately
issued directives and Executive Orders ending the policies of
the Trump administration which had been successful in
curtailing illegal immigration. Because of these actions and
more, illegal immigration into the United States has reached an
all-time high, embroiling the nation into an unprecedented
crisis.
Customs and Border Patrol Protection reports more than 9.4
million encounters with illegal immigrants since President
Biden took office, including more than 7.7 million illegal
crossings along the Southern border. The Biden border policies
have allowed criminal cartels to reap massive profits from
their human trafficking and drug trade, amounting to tens of
billions of dollars of revenue.
Despite what my friends across the aisle may say,
Republicans have been working to address the crisis at the
border since we were given the Majority. We passed H.R. 2, the
Secure the Border Act, back in 2023, and have been waiting for
the Democratic Senate to finally act on this legislation.
This Administration's carelessness at the Southern border
has enabled dangerous criminal cartels to establish extensive
distribution networks for the trafficking of dangerous and
illegal substances into rural Indian communities, many located
thousands of miles from the Southern border. This has led to an
increase in violence, crime, and drug overdoses that have been
ravaging communities across Indian Country.
These cartels actively target rural communities in Indian
Country due to the vast expanses of the often-unpatrolled
lands, ongoing jurisdictional complications with law
enforcement, and higher prices illegal drugs in rural areas can
command, particularly those located far from our Southern
border in Indian Country. They exploit this situation to become
entrenched in Indian communities, particularly those out West.
Unfortunately, law enforcement is not well equipped on most
Indian reservations to deal with the threat of the cartels. The
Northern Cheyenne Tribe in Montana rely on only two federally
funded Bureau of Indian Affairs tribal police officers per
shift to patrol more than 440,000 acres of land, home to
roughly 6,000 residents. Similarly, the Crow Reservation has
only two police officers patrolling 2.5 million acres at any
time.
The tribes in the region are suffering. The Fort Peck
Reservation in Montana has dealt with these devastating effects
of the cartel activity in their region for years, including
fentanyl addiction and associated crimes and violence.
Tragically, their youth are most exposed to the dangers
presented by the cartels, and unless something is done quickly
an entire generation could be lost to fentanyl addiction.
In Wyoming, the Northern Arapaho and Eastern Shoshone
Tribes on the Wind River Reservation have repeatedly struggled
with incursions from the cartels. At first, meth was thrust
upon the Wind River Tribe, but now fentanyl has taken over.
With minimal resources to stop the cartels and to solve the
drug crisis, the cartels continue to plague the Wind River
Reservation. That is my home area.
It is unacceptable that anyone is forced to live under the
threat of these dangerous criminal cartels right in the heart
of America. With this hearing, I hope to raise the alarm to
Congress on the cartels' invasion into Indian Country and the
terrible impacts on Indian communities.
Despite the policy differences we may have from time to
time, I know that everyone here in this room recognizes the
severity and the urgency of this issue. I appreciate my
Democratic colleagues' engagement today, and I hope we can all
build upon this hearing in order to protect Indian communities
and the cartels' presence on the Indian lands, and to stem the
flow of drug and human trafficking across our Southern border.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Stansbury, for her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF  THE HON. MELANIE A. STANSBURY, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF
NEW MEXICO

Ms. Stansbury. Good morning. I want to first start, Mr.
Chairman, by welcoming our witnesses.
Thank you for traveling many, many miles to come here today
and to share what is happening in your communities and to share
about these difficult issues.
For me, this is a very personal issue. The fentanyl crisis
is not a partisan issue. Opioid addiction, the ways in which it
is touching down in our communities, does not know any
political party. In 2019, my life was personally changed
forever when one of my oldest friends died of a fentanyl
overdose. And I was serving in the State Legislature at the
time, and I will never forget the morning that I got the call.
For a lot of people who haven't experienced it personally,
they don't know what it looks like. The crisis began, we know,
in this country with general drug addiction. It increased
dramatically with over-prescription of opioid drugs in our
communities. And now, with the vast numbers of opioids and
fentanyl coming into our communities, it means that fathers,
grandfathers, mothers, aunties, and dear friends are dying
every single day in our communities. And nowhere is this more
apparent than in New Mexico, where the fentanyl crisis is
literally ravaging our communities.
I know these are difficult issues to talk about, and I
deeply appreciate our tribal leaders who came here today to
share those stories.
And I implore my colleagues across the aisle to not turn
this hearing into a partisan hearing. This is not about
partisan politics. This is about the lives of our people. It is
part of why, as this hearing was announced, we actually reached
out to staff on the Majority to say, please, let's do this in a
bipartisan way. This is not a time for showmanship.
We have proposed real solutions. President Biden has put
together a task force and various asks. He has transmitted them
to Congress. The Senate has already worked in good faith to
negotiate a bipartisan solution to increase border security
funding, to bring more technology to the border, to try to help
address interdiction issues.
In New Mexico alone, we have had 574 deaths just over the
last couple of years from the fentanyl crisis, and those are
just the ones that are reported. When I am home, every single
day I hear stories from our law enforcement, our first
responders, our tribal leaders, our mayors, and our health care
providers who are seeing the firsthand effects of these issues
every single day on the ground.
We know that these issues are affecting our tribal
communities disproportionately, whether it is the lack of
health care infrastructure or the lack of funding that has been
provided through BIA law enforcement and other tribal services.
We know that Congress has to act, and I implore my colleagues
to help address this issue.
But I also think it is important that we talk factually
about how fentanyl is coming into the United States and how we
are actually seeing this surge happen. We know the facts are
very clear on this, that 90 percent of fentanyl is coming into
the United States across legal ports of entry. It is being
trafficked by the cartels, but it is mostly American citizens
who are being recruited to transport those drugs. We know that
once it comes into our communities, it is being distributed
largely through existing drug networks, and we know that many
of our family members are ending up in dire consequences as a
result of that.
We know the solutions. The solutions require that we do
address the flow of drugs and raw materials coming into this
country. That means more border patrol, more support to catch
fentanyl at our ports of entry. It means interdiction in our
communities, partnerships with our tribal, Federal, local law
enforcement to actually get drugs and those who are trafficking
them off the streets. And the third is recovery, because our
communities are struggling, especially in our lowest-income
communities. And if we do not have the behavioral health
infrastructure to help people who are struggling with
addiction, they will die because we see it every single day.
We have been working across the aisle to try to create a
fentanyl prevention caucus, to try to pass legislation, to try
to get funding into the budget to do that. And one of the
things I would love to ask the Chairman and my friends across
the aisle is to join me in asking Speaker Johnson to put
forward emergency funding for Border Patrol to help address the
flow of drugs into the United States. It is something that we
have tried through the emergency supplemental that is still
stalled out on the House Floor. I implore my colleagues to help
address this question.
Finally, I want to hear from our guests who are here today
about what you think that we need to be doing here in Congress
to address this issue. We know it is serious. We take the lives
of your communities very seriously, and we deeply appreciate
you being here today to testify.
With that, I yield back.

Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlewoman. We also have to have
accountability, and that is part of the thing that we never see
aspect, is that if you are part of this process and you
actually endanger your fellow man, that you have to face the
responsibilities of that. And until we get to that point, I
think everything else is moot.
Now, I am going to introduce our witnesses. First of all,
we have Mr. Bryce Kirk, Tribal Executive Board Member, Fort
Peck Tribes, Poplar, Montana; Ms. Jessica Vaughan, Director of
Policy Studies, Center for Immigration Studies, Washington, DC;
Mr. Verlon Jose, Chairman, Tohono O'odham Nation, Sell,
Arizona; and Mr. Jeffrey Stiffarm, President, Fort Belknap
Indian Community, Harlem, Montana.
Let me remind the witnesses that under the Committee Rules,
you must limit your oral statements to 5 minutes, but your
entire statement will be placed into the record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button so
we can all hear you, and you will see that the timing light
turns green. When you see yellow, try to summarize it, and when
it hits red, you need to start to stop.
I would like to now recognize Mr. Kirk for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRYCE KIRK, TRIBAL EXECUTIVE BOARD
MEMBER, FORT PECK TRIBES, POPLAR, MONTANA

Mr. Kirk. Thank you so much. I am Bryce Kirk, Councilman
for the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes on the Fort Peck Indian
Reservation. As you have my testimony, I would like to put it
into record.
I will kind of go off script. I guess I am good at that.
One of the biggest things that we are dealing with in the
past month, in the mail we have 5 pounds of meth and, just last
week, 5,000 fentanyl pills. If those fentanyl pills would have
hit the streets, that is a half-million dollars in Indian
Country just alone in Fort Peck.
The biggest thing that it is, it costs $0.30, the farther
you go south to $0.10 to get a fentanyl pill, $0.70 in
Washington. So, you think about the issues that we are having
because there are only two postal inspectors in the state of
Montana for everything that we have to cover. So, you think
about the ones that are getting away. You think about the
things that are happening.
My biggest stance, and I testified in public safety and
justice, is right now this issue is an everyone issue, it is
hitting everybody.
Over and over again in Indian Country, we see these
billion-dollar packages trying to get sent overseas. My biggest
fight is why don't we start right here? When are we going to
start worrying about Indian Country? We have treaties. We have
obligations to tribes to start fighting for us.
Mr. Rosendale, Mr. Zinke, you guys are from Montana. You
understand that, too. The biggest thing that we need is
everybody to come together. Are we always going to get along?
No, we are not. But the biggest thing, it is hurting the United
States of America. It is hurting Indian Country.
And the biggest thing is, once we work together for the
betterment of the people, and once we start making headway when
it comes to that, we can truly make a difference.
I myself was addicted for about 14 years, clean and sober
now 12 years. But the biggest thing is that we can come out. We
are stronger together. We can make a difference when it comes
to that.
Talking to our people as I was flying here yesterday, the
biggest thing that we are having is 14-year-old girls getting
trafficked to Williston, North Dakota. Thinking that it is OK
that I am going to go there and make money and do these things
because of how bad it is on the reservations, the lack of cops,
the lack of services, the lack of juvenile detention centers,
our own adult correctional facility, and everything that is up
in arms right now, we do need help.
With this, I hope it is not just to check a box off to say,
hey, we worked with Indian Country, because we get that a lot.
And we will continue to come. And like I shared, we will
continue to make a difference in our communities with the
scraps that we are given. We will continue to fight to save our
people. We will continue to fight to do what we need to do what
is right for our people because we have always been resilient
when it came to that. We always know how to stand with each
other. We always know how to stand and back each other and help
each other up.
But we need your help, your help for more funding when it
comes to BIA, more funding when it comes to IHS, more funding
when it comes to these things that help Indian Country. That is
what we need, those services to help mental health facilities.
We have already lost a generation when it came to that.
But one thing is that you can help us now. The past is the
past. We can't live on the past, but if we move forward in a
better way to be able to help our people when it comes to that,
we are able to make a difference. We are all elected. We are
all here to make a difference. And that is the biggest thing.
Truly, if you want to make a difference, give direct
funding to tribes. Let us, as tribes, finally sit there and do
our own stuff, help our own people, give our own people the
services and everything that they deserve, not having a
middleman like the BIA and the IHS dictate with all the
bureaucratic red tape to tell us how it is going to be done.
We need to work together. We need your help. We are here,
and we will continue to come here and testify, if that is what
it takes to sit there and share our stories. But people
shouldn't be trafficked. Fentanyl shouldn't reach up in
northeastern Montana 50 miles away from the Northern border. It
shouldn't reach those places. But with your help and working
together, we can truly make a difference and make America what
it once was. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Kirk follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bryce Kirk, Councilman, Assiniboine and Sioux
Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation

I am Bryce Kirk, Councilman for the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of
the Fort Peck Reservation. I would like to thank the Subcommittee for
the invitation to testify before you today.
The Fort Peck Reservation is in northeast Montana, forty miles west
of the North Dakota border, and fifty miles south of the Canadian
border, with the Missouri River defining its southern border. The
Reservation encompasses over two million acres of land. We have
approximately 12,000 enrolled tribal members, with approximately 7,000
tribal members living on the Reservation. We have a total Reservation
population of approximately 11,000 people.
As I will discuss in greater detail, there is no greater crisis we
must address on the Fort Peck Reservation than the trade and
trafficking of drugs, in particular fentanyl, on the Reservation. I
think the Fort Peck Tribes are as capable a Tribe as any in the country
to combat this crisis, but we need the support of our federal partners.
We stand ready to work with our partners from law enforcement, social
service agencies and health care agencies to do this necessary work.
At Fort Peck, we have long believed that a strong tribal government
is the way to best keep our community safe. So, we have taken action to
maximize our authorities to protect everyone living within our
boundaries. In this regard, the Fort Peck Tribes have provided law
enforcement and correction services on our Reservation since 1996 under
an Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act contract. We
were also one of the first Indian tribes in the nation to enter into a
cross-deputization agreement with state, county and city law
enforcement agencies. Under this agreement, first ratified more than
twenty years ago, tribal officers are deputized to enforce state and
local law on the Reservation and state and local officers are
authorized to enforce tribal law.
For more than fifty years, the Fort Peck Tribes have had an
independent judicial system, including an appellate court. It is
through this system that we provide justice to our victims and our
defendants. Currently, our judicial system includes law-trained judges,
law-trained prosecutors, law-trained public defenders, probation
officers, a published tribal code, and experienced court clerks and
court reporters. Our court's opinions are published and available to
the public. Notwithstanding a strong Tribal government and strong
governmental institutions, we still are facing a crisis of fentanyl use
in our community that threatens every aspect of our Reservation.
This drug has infested every corner of our community, from the
young to the old and without regard to gender or any other demographic.
What we as tribal leaders are the most worried about is our youth. We
fear this drug is robbing us of an entire generation: our very future.
This crisis happened almost overnight. According to the Montana
Attorney General's Office, since 2019, fentanyl seizures in the state
have risen 11,000 percent. See, https://www.kfyrtv.com/2023/02/24/ag-
reports-skyrocketing-fentanyl-crisis-montana. In 2022, the State Task
Force agencies seized 206,955 dosage units of fentanyl, triple the
amount recorded in 2021. Id. Throughout the entire state of Montana,
the fentanyl-related overdose deaths increased by 167 percent from 2016
to 2020. See, https://leg.mt.gov/content/publications/fiscal/2023-
Interim/IBC-D/MT_Fentanyl_Trends_2021.pdf. The largest percentage of
these deaths is adults between the ages of 24 and 44. Id.
These are the people who should be the most productive in our
communities. These people are our future leaders. Instead, they are
dying. The Montana Department of Justice Division of Criminal
Investigation reports that 10 percent of all high school students in
Montana had taken a prescription drug without a prescription. Id. These
children are not taking Lipitor. They are taking painkillers--opioids.
Tragically for the Tribes in Montana, the opioid overdose death rate
for Indian people is twice that of non-Indians. See, https://
www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2022/06/01/1101799174/tribal-leaders-
sound-the-alarm-after-fentanyl-overdoses-spike-at-blackfeet-nation.
On the Fort Peck Reservation, what our law enforcement officers
report is that an average opioid user's daily dosage is between 10-20
pills. In an urban area, the average cost per pill is $1. On the Fort
Peck Reservation, the average cost per pill is $120. So how does a user
support this habit? He deals. According to our law enforcement, the
average user is selling at least 50 pills a day to pay for his 20-pill
habit.
To put these numbers in context, a single illicit fentanyl pill can
contain a potentially lethal dose. See, Facts about Fentanyl (dea.gov).
In fact, DEA analysis of counterfeit pills found that 42% of pills
tested for fentanyl contained a potentially lethal dose. Id. This means
that many in our community--and especially many of our young people--
are gambling their lives 10 or 20 times a day.
There is no doubt that the Mexican drug cartels are playing a major
role in this crisis. They have found their way to the Fort Peck Indian
Reservation and embedded themselves in our communities and our
families. In February of this year, NBC News did an investigative story
on the drug cartels in Montana and their targeting of the Reservations
in Montana. I would ask that the printed story be included in the
record of this hearing. In this story, America learned about Ricardo
Ramos Medina, a former Mexican police officer who became a Sinaloa
cartel associate.
Mr. Medina was stopped on the Fort Peck Reservation. In the story,
we learn that Mr. Medina was a key part of expanding the cartel's
presence in Montana as he had a valid U.S. visa and was former law
enforcement. So, he could travel freely in the United States. After he
was arrested, he said he traveled to the Fort Peck Reservation to
expand the drug cartel's operations on the Reservation.
Between 2019 and 2202 the federal drug agencies have seized more
than 2,000 fentanyl laced pills, 3 pounds of heroin, and 65 pounds of
methamphetamine that these cartels had slated to go to Montana Indian
Reservations. As the NBC story documents, the drug cartels know Montana
is large and law enforcement is almost non-existent. They also know
that the profit margin for the sale of these drugs is high. Thus, the
reward is high and there is almost no risk for targeting and expanding
their markets to the Reservations.
What we have learned is that the cartels will target people in
treatment facilities, including one in Arizona where our tribal members
have been targeted while seeking treatment. Too often, we have tribal
members, in particular vulnerable women, who return to the Reservation
after seeking treatment still addicted to drugs, and now engaged with
cartel associate members. This is how these people become imbedded in
our communities and begin to take hold of entire families.
The toll that this amount of drug trafficking is having on our
community is devastating. I lost two men I considered my brothers this
last year. Now their children will grow up without a father. We have
children as young as middle school taking fentanyl. Suicide remains
extremely high on our Reservation. Unfortunately, suicide remains a
leading cause of death across all the Reservations in Montana. The
crimes against our children--our babies--are unspeakable.
This drug affects all families from all walks of life on the
Reservation, including fathers, mothers, grandmothers, and
grandfathers. I battled with addiction myself. But for a man who
mentored me and is still very much like a father to me, I would not be
here today. My children would not have a dad. I never would have been
elected to serve my people. I am thankful every day for my life that I
have now.
In March 2023, we had to close our Tribal Court because someone
chose to smoke fentanyl in one of the bathrooms. An officer was
poisoned simply by entering the bathroom in question. The cleaning of
the Court facility and its air systems took time and was costly.
Another indicator of the fentanyl crisis is the increased crime
rate on the Reservation. In September, the Tribal Executive Board
issued a state of emergency due to the severe increase in juvenile
crime. The increase in crime is across all sectors of crime from
property crimes to violent crimes, including sexual assaults,
kidnapping and murders. Men, women and juveniles are the perpetrators.
And virtually every crime can be attributed to fentanyl: Either a
person was high when they perpetrated the crime, or they committed the
crime to secure money to buy drugs, or they committed an act of
violence in retaliation for something related to fentanyl use or
distribution.
While this crisis is daunting, it is not hopeless, and we must
continue to take action to combat it. This is why I appreciate the
Subcommittee's attention to this issue. There is no single solution. We
must look at this problem from every angle. It is a law enforcement
problem, a mental health problem, a social services problem, an
economic development problem and a community development problem. Thus,
we must craft solutions in all these areas so that we are responding to
the cause of the whole sickness and not just the individual symptoms.
In the area of law enforcement, we need the Department of Justice
and Drug Enforcement Agency to remain strong partners in the
investigation and prosecution of drug crimes on the Reservation. I want
to commend our U.S. Attorney's Office for the hard work they do. One
area where we would like more attention is the level at which a U.S.
Attorney is prosecuting a drug trafficking case. It is our
understanding that a person must be in possession of more than fifty
pills to be prosecuted for possession with the intent to distribute. As
I stated above, many people are possessing 50 to 100 pills simply to
fund their own drug habit--and this is true especially of the young
people. We must stop these transactions before these people become much
larger dealers.
In this regard, we need our federal partners to be true partners.
In one instance, the DEA knew there was a known high level drug dealer
traveling through Fort Belknap, Rocky Boys and Fort Peck and at no time
did DEA share this information with the Tribal law enforcement
agencies. It seems like to us there is a turf battle related to who is
going to bust who, and no one cares about the ultimate victims of these
crimes. They just care about who is going to get the major bust.
One area of concern that I have recently become familiar with is
the lack of accurate data collection and reporting by the relevant
federal agencies. We know on our Reservation there is a rise in crime.
We know it from the reports of our law enforcement agencies, and we
know it by what our tribal members tell us they are experiencing. But
if you ask the Bureau of Indian Affairs, they will report that crime
rates are down across Indian country. This may be true if you take all
of the numbers in the aggregate on a national level, but it is not true
at Fort Peck and I am certain it not true across Montana and Wyoming.
This impacts the ability of federal agencies to justify providing the
resources that we need to combat this crisis. I would ask this
Committee to request from GAO a study on the crime rates on
Reservations in Montana and Wyoming.
In this regard, our law enforcement officers need greater support.
Like every law enforcement agency in the country, we are having
difficulty recruiting and retaining officers. There are several reasons
this problem is exacerbated in Indian country. These jobs are
dangerous. They frequently involve dealing with the heaviest--even
traumatic--situations and events, which would be difficult to witness
for anyone but may be especially so for officers who are from our
community. Yet, these officers do not have access to adequate benefits
and resources to manage the stress of the job. They must, at the very
least, receive the same benefits--in particular pensions--as other
federal officers. Thus, we would ask that Congress take up the Tribal
Law Enforcement Parity Act, H.R. 4524, which would ensure that Tribal
Officers operating pursuant to a Self-Determination Act contract, like
ours at Fort Peck, would have access to the federal pension program as
they would if they were BIA officers.
We also support expanding the recognition for Tribal law
enforcement agencies to arrest and prosecute non-Indians who choose to
come on to our Reservation with the intention of selling and
distributing these illegal drugs. This way the drug dealers will begin
to understand that it is not a free pass when you enter a Reservation.
We will arrest and prosecute these offenders.
Another area of greater support is the need for additional K-9
Units in Indian country. We had one K-9 unit from Northern Cheyenne for
a week and it shut down drug trafficking on the Reservation for that
week. We need greater support for the technology that can assist in
this work, whether it is additional cameras and monitoring equipment or
drones. We have too few officers and they cannot be everywhere they
need to be. These tools will help our officers see what is happening on
the Reservation.
In the area of mental health: We need more mental health and
substance abuse treatment services. We remain thankful that Montana
adopted Medicaid expansion as this has allowed for greater access to
mental health services. We are thankful for the Veterans Administration
and its work to provide mental health and treatment services to Native
Veterans. As I said, when people go off the Reservation and seek
treatment they are targeted by the cartels. We need treatment on our
Reservation. Right now, we only have an outpatient treatment facility
on our Reservation. While I acknowledge this is more than many
Reservations have, it is not enough--we do not have the capacity to
provide services to all who need it, and many people on our Reservation
need inpatient treatment. Thus, we need additional facilities to
provide inpatient treatment to people within our communities.
In the area of economic development: We need jobs and job training
for our people. A job gives a person the means to support their family;
it also gives them a sense of purpose and fulfillment, which helps
their mental health, as well as the physical and mental health of those
in their household. My wife operates a coffee shop on the Reservation.
She has made it her mission to provide hope through employment for our
youth and now adults are coming to her asking for the opportunity to
work. She is making a difference for our people and is an important
asset in battling this crisis on the Reservation. Thus, supporting more
job training and workforce development programs and entrepreneurs like
my wife is critical to this effort. The Department of Labor's Indian
Employment and Training Program must be better funded and streamlined
to provide better services throughout Indian country.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the vitally important
issue of addressing this crisis that is facing our communities. I would
be pleased to answer any questions and to provide any additional
information that may assist the Committee.

______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much, Mr. Kirk. I now recognize
Ms. Vaughan for her 5 minutes.

STATEMENT  OF JESSICA  VAUGHAN,  DIRECTOR  OF  POLICY
STUDIES, CENTER FOR IMMIGRATION STUDIES, ST. HELENA
ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA

Ms. Vaughan. Thank you so much for the opportunity to
testify.
Even as the Biden administration's irresponsible border
policies have caused an incalculable cost to American
communities, including those in Indian Country, there are those
who have profited enormously from them. Yes, the employers of
illegal workers, the huge network of NGOs and government
contractors, but most notably the foreign criminal cartels who
have monetized the border policies and this situation to almost
unfathomable gain, not just Mexican cartels, but also Chinese
drug cartels, Central and South American gangs, and others.
As a result, Americans have been exposed to new national
security and public safety threats, not least the trafficking
and distribution of illicit drugs. American communities,
including and especially those in Indian Country, have
experienced a huge spike in deaths, overdoses, and poisonings
from dangerous drugs distributed by the foreign cartels and
their accomplices. These transnational criminal enterprises now
represent a profound threat to civil society and the rule of
law throughout the Western Hemisphere.
Specifically, the policies most responsible are the
cessation of barrier construction that allows not only the
drugs, but the cartel operatives to enter the United States;
the catch-and-release policies where 85 percent of the people
who are arriving at the border illegally are allowed into the
country without meaningful vetting; and through the improper
use of the parole authority. So far, there have been at least
3.3 million people who crossed the border illegally who have
been allowed to enter this way. And that is not counting nearly
2 million gotaways who are able to evade the Border Patrol
because the Border Patrol has to prioritize the processing of
people through parole.
There is also the lack of enforcement in the interior. ICE
is removing half of the criminal aliens that it once was
removing in prior times, and we have seen specifically the
erosion of partnerships with local law enforcement agencies and
especially diminished detention capacity that have hampered
ICE. And now they are stretched to respond to the burgeoning
gang and cartel problems created by the insecure border.
So, the cartels are earning about $30 million a day, or
nearly $1 billion a month. They are using this revenue to
expand their operations within the United States. This problem
is going to be difficult to eradicate from this point on, and
it is going to persist years into the future.
The answer is a lot of improvements could be made. A lot of
this could be addressed through executive action using the
President's bona fide authorities to control the border. But
Congress also needs to get into the act to address the threat
from the cartels. And the longer we wait, the harder they are
going to be to dismantle.
Yes, there are good provisions in H.R. 2, the House border
security bill, that would help. But in addition, Congress needs
to create a new type of designation for the cartels, similar to
how law enforcement is able to approach international terrorist
group threats. This would enable, among other things, ICE to
target the financial assets of the cartels using their
immigration and customs authorities.
We need to look at interrupting the vast flow of
remittances out of the United States. That is not just migrants
sending money home to their families, but it also includes
direct payments to smugglers of drugs and people, and huge sums
of money that are being laundered by the cartels and disguised
as remittances. So, we need to enact better know-your-customer
laws to get a handle on the huge flow of remittances that is
enriching the cartels.
Finally, because of the policing issues that are unique to
Indian Country, Congress also should facilitate the creation of
partnerships between Federal immigration authorities and tribal
authorities, such as an expansion of task forces and 287(g)
programs that would be especially helpful in places with
significant cartel activity.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Vaughan follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jessica M. Vaughan, Center for Immigration Studies

Thank you, Chairman Gosar, for the opportunity to testify today.
The mass migration crisis instigated by the Biden administration's
irresponsible immigration policies has caused incalculable harm to
American communities, including those in Indian Country, even those far
from the border. The mass catch and release policies have led to the
release of more than three million illegal migrants, damaged the
integrity of our immigration system, and exposed Americans to new
national security and public safety threats--especially threats related
to the trafficking and distribution of illicit drugs. Further, the huge
influx of migrants taking advantage of the opportunity to be released
into the United States has so overwhelmed the Border Patrol and its
local partners that it can no longer control vast stretches of the
border, enabling the illegal crossers who want to avoid apprehension to
violate the border with impunity. These policies have facilitated the
entry of illegal drugs and also the cartel operatives who distribute
them. The result has been a huge spike in deaths, overdoses, and
poisonings from dangerous drugs distributed by the cartels and their
accomplices. In addition, the Biden policies have enriched certain
transnational criminal organizations, including Mexican and Chinese
cartels and Central and South American gangs, to the point where these
organizations represent a threat to civil society and the rule of law
throughout the Western Hemisphere.

Biden Policies Set Off Flood of Illegal Migrants, Overwhelming
Federal Agencies, Border Communities, and NGOs. When President Biden
took office, he inherited the most secure land borders in U.S. history,
with expanded and improved barriers, updated technology, and more
personnel, all of which was backed up by policies that deterred
migrants from crossing illegally and discouraged illegal aliens from
remaining. As smuggling organizations and migrants became aware of the
new policies, and as the processing and transportation networks were
established within the country, the southern border was transformed
into a chaotic, dangerous, and seemingly lawless frontier. It remains
so today, except in the parts of Texas that have been secured by state
authorities.
From the first day of his presidency, Joe Biden and his appointees
began dismantling a laundry list of policies that had succeeded in
controlling the years-long wave of illegal migrants hoping to take
advantage of our dysfunctional asylum system and court rulings that
require minors and those arriving with minors to be released into the
country. He ended construction of the border wall system; terminated
the Migrant Protection Protocols that sent tens of thousands of alleged
asylum seekers to wait in Mexico; canceled agreements with transit
nations to offer safe haven to migrants and enforce their borders;
relaxed application of Title 42 pandemic controls so that minors and
families could enter; began awarding immigration parole to tens of
thousands of illegal crossers, in defiance of the intent of Congress;
extended Temporary Protected Status (TPS) to citizens of more nations
and more recent arrivals; established strict limitations on interior
enforcement to suppress deportations of all but the most egregious
criminals; and launched plans for a new asylum system designed to
expedite the legalization of illegal border crossers.
Not surprisingly, the number of illegal border crossers has
exploded, in response to what the migrants call Biden's ``invitacion.''
It was well understood around the globe that a large share of migrants
who crossed the border illegally, especially those from certain
countries, minors, and those bringing minors, would be apprehended by
the Border Patrol, and would soon be released and transported to their
destination in the United States, despite low expectations that they
will comply with immigration proceedings or ever qualify to remain
legally.
According to the latest CBP data, the Border Patrol apprehended
176,294 illegal migrants in January 2024 and more than 140,000 more in
February--more than the prior January and February, but significantly
less than the number caught in December 2023 (302,034), which had been
the highest number ever apprehended in one month. So far this fiscal
year (since October 1, 2023), 962,000 illegal migrants have been
apprehended.
While apprehensions are a good metric for assessing the number of
migrants who have attempted to enter illegally, the more important
statistic is the number of migrants who were released into the country.
According to DHS Secretary Mayorkas, more than 85 percent of these
illegal migrants have been allowed to enter country--in defiance of
federal laws stating that, with few exceptions, they should be held in
custody for expedited due process and removal (https://www.foxnews.com/
politics/mayorkas-tells-border-patrol-agents-illegal-immigrants-
released-into-us-sources).
The House Judiciary Committee has estimated that at least 3.3
million illegal aliens have been released into the country since
President Biden took office. Only about 10,000 of those released have
completed their immigration proceedings and been removed. (https://
judiciary.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/republicans-judiciary.house.gov/
files/evo-media-document/2024-01-18-new-data-reveal-worsening-
magnitude-of-the-biden-border-crisis-and-lack-of-interior-immigration-
enforcement.pdf.)
In addition, it is estimated that nearly two million aliens have
entered without apprehension. FACTSHEET: Record-Breaking Border
Encounters Underscore Secretary Mayorkas' Refusal to Comply With the
Law, Breach of Public Trust--Committee on Homeland Security
(house.gov).

Catch and Release Policies Undermine Public Safety. Besides the
enormous fiscal costs of providing transportation, shelter, medical
care, schooling, and other services to the illegal migrants, the Biden
catch and release policies at the border also have created new public
safety problems, with a human cost that is incalculable. Proponents of
mass immigration often claim (without evidence) that illegal immigrants
are less likely to commit crimes than Americans, and therefore concerns
about crimes committed by illegal immigrants are exaggerated,
misplaced, or motivated by racial animus. These assertions are
unproven, usually based on faulty interpretations of crime or Census
data, and defy common sense and experience. They are profoundly
demeaning to the victims of crimes committed by released illegal
migrants who by law should have been detained and removed to their home
country after apprehension. These are victimizations that are directly
attributable to the Biden border catch and release policies.
Millions have seen the video of a shocking attack on police
officers in Times Square by a group of migrants in New York City, most
of whom have thus far escaped authorities (https://www.foxnews.com/us/
migrants-stomped-kicked-nypd-officers-vicious-times-square-attack-yet-
arrested). In another disturbing case, New York City authorities
recently arrested eight members of a ring of Venezuelan illegal
migrants who were living in the city's shelters, and who are accused of
stealing scooters to cruise through city streets and snatch phones and
handbags, sometimes violently. The phones were then hacked to gain
access to financial information, and the victim's back accounts were
drained. (https://www.foxnews.com/us/illegal-masterminds-nyc-robbery-
ring-hacked-bank-apps-resold-stolen-phones-overseas).
Reportedly, the suspects are associated with the violent Venezuelan
gang Tren de Aragua. Gang members and hundreds of other criminals are
believed to have escaped through tunnels from a Venezuela prison last
year, and dozens have been arrested after illegally crossing our
southern border. There is no way to know how many may have been caught
and released, because immigration agents have no way to access records
in Venezuela, and no diplomatic or law enforcement relationships to
assist in the vetting of these migrants (https://www.ktsm.com/news/fbi-
agent-others-warn-of-venezuelan-gang-entering-into-us/).
Migrants arriving at the border now receive only the most cursory
screening before they are released into the country, which includes a
fingerprint check of U.S. security, criminal justice, and immigration
databases, a brief interview, and little other screening. Border
officials generally cannot access criminal records in other countries,
or do extensive background checks. Even worse, since the number of
illegal crossings has reached crisis levels, border officials have
sometimes been too overwhelmed to read and act on the results of
security checks that indicate that an alien they have apprehended might
be a threat. In at least three cases that we know of, a Lebanese-born
Venezuelan citizen, a Colombian, and a Pakistani, border patrol agents
released men who were watchlisted as known or suspected terrorists
(https://cis.org/Bensman/Report-ICE-Releases-BorderCrossing-Terrorist-
Suspect-Venezuela-Despite-FBI-Recommendation, https://www.oig.dhs.gov/
sites/default/files/assets/2023-07/OIG-23-31-Jun23-Redacted.pdf,
EXCLUSIVE: Pakistani Illegal Immigrant On Terror Watchlist Given Free
Day Of Release In US/The Daily Caller).

Cartels Are Thriving and Expanding Into the United States. Thanks
to unprecedented opportunities to move people and drugs across our
border, the Mexican cartels and other transnational criminal
organizations are reaping unprecedented profits, to the tune of $30
million a day, or nearly $1 Billion a month, according to a House
Budget Committee report. They use the funds to acquire more
sophisticated weapons and technology to solidify control over their
territories in Mexico and beyond. More worrisome for the long term,
however, is the way the cartels are using this cash cow to underwrite
an expansion of their operations within the United States. This
expansion presents profound implications for public safety that will
persist for years into the future.
According to Border Patrol testimony to Congress, the smuggling fee
is currently about $8,000 for passage to America. Many migrants make
only a down payment up front of about $500, and agree to work off the
rest when they get to their destination. The remainder is typically
paid through debt bondage accomplished by wage garnishment, fees for
housing and food, and other forms of exploitation and outright threats
and extortion. Long-haul migrants from other continents pay more,
sometimes up to $50,000. It is Biden's catch and release policy that
entices these migrants to put themselves into the hands of a criminal
organization, risking their own safety to journey here, and then being
subject to exploitation, abuse and trafficking for labor and other
purposes.
The migrant-moving business is lucrative enough, but it also helps
further another critical illicit cartel activity--drug smuggling. The
cartels routinely send large groups of migrants over the border in
certain areas to bog down the Border Patrol while they move drug loads
through the other unguarded areas, along with high-value clients, such
as criminals and watch-listed individuals, who don't want to be caught
by the Border Patrol.
In the last three years, the amount of illicit drugs flowing into
American communities has exploded, with deadly, tragic consequences,
and the cartels are behind nearly all of it, according to a recent
exhaustive report by the House Homeland Security Committee. It's
happening not just in southwest border states, not just in cities, but
also in rural areas, including Montana, Kansas, Kentucky, and many
others.
With the profits from cross-border trafficking so enormous, the
stakes for control of the plazas, or spheres of control along the
border, have risen as well, increasing instances of deadly violence.
For example, one night in mid-December, a shoot-out broke out among
rival cartels for control of several areas along the Arizona border
with large gaps in the border fencing giving easy access. Responding to
the melee, Border Patrol agents arrested one man on a private ranch on
the U.S. side who was carrying an AK-47, two AK magazines, a handgun,
and ammunition. Mexican authorities found 10 improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) on the other side of the line. Obviously, the cartels
are not humanitarian actors seeking only to help asylum seekers; nor
are they young, impetuous gang-bangers. They behave like terrorists,
and they have a plan, which they hire well-trained and well-armed
violent thugs to carry out. Given the porous border, moving their
operatives into this country to manage the business has not been
difficult lately.
The cartels are not humanitarian actors seeking to help asylum
seekers; nor are they young, impetuous gang-bangers. They behave like
terrorists, and they have a plan, for which they hire well-trained and
well-armed violent thugs to carry out. The porous border and catch and
release policies have made it easy to move their operatives into this
country as well.
Many American observers, including some in law enforcement, have
been in denial of the threat that the drug cartels pose to America,
insisting that the narco-bosses are too afraid of U.S. law enforcement
agencies to try to replicate their violent tactics here. That theory
has always been naive, and has been discredited by events. Among the
acts of violence attributed to the cartels was an incident in January
2023 described by authorities as an ``early morning massacre,'' where
six people, including a recently bailed-out Surenos member, but also a
baby and his teenage mother, were executed in a quiet residential
street in Goshen, Calif. Reportedly, the surviving family members
afterwards refused all offers of help from local authorities
[California sheriff rips border crisis as details emerge on massacre of
6 (nypost.com)].
In 2022 federal authorities alone made more than 300 arrests for
Mexican cartel-related crimes, according to one analysis [Map: Tracking
drug cartel arrests across the United States (newsnationnow.com)]. The
cartels are sophisticated business people, and nimble at adapting to
emerging opportunities. The have evolved horizontally to branch out
into new ventures, for example human trafficking as well as drug
trafficking, in fentanyl trafficking as well as heroin and marijuana
trafficking, and stealing oil as well as automobiles. Noticing the
trend in some jurisdictions away from imposing stiff consequences for
shoplifting and burglary, some cartels have branched out into the $70
billion organized retail theft industry, creating squads of operatives
to steal goods on a major scale, even roping in recent illegal migrants
as a way to pay off their smuggling debt, according to Immigration and
Customs Enforcement investigators [HSI, ACAMS take aim at organized
retail crime/ICE].
The Sinaloa and Cartel Jalisco Nueva Generacion (CJNG) cartels have
capitalized on the legalization of marijuana in some states, opening
tens of thousands of illegal weed, or ``blood cannabis'' grows in
northern California, Oregon and other states, where they undercut
lawful growers and use trafficked labor, managed violently. [`Narco
slaves': Migrant workers face abuse on Oregon's cartel-run, illegal pot
farms--ABC News and Cartel-backed pot grows linked to California,
Oregon human trafficking (usatoday.com)]. Local sheriffs lament that
they are woefully out-manned and out-gunned, and can't keep up with the
body count. ``We're a very short amount of time away from having heads
in the square like they do down in Mexico,'' said Mendocino County
Sheriff Matt Kendall in December 2021.
Expanded cartel operations in the United States is good for their
local criminal partners, too, who help distribute and sell the illicit
products. This is how they have infiltrated Indian Country crime
networks. The cartels have relationships with different partners in
different locales, working everyone from MS-13, to the Bloods, Crips,
Latin Kings, and Aryan Brotherhood. In eastern Massachusetts, for
example, they work mostly with distributors from the Dominican
Republic, who dominate the local drug trade. In December, a 42-year old
Dominican woman living in Massachusetts was sentenced to 11 years in
prison for receiving huge amounts of fentanyl and laundered cash for
the Sinaloa Cartel. She hid some of the product in her young daughter's
bedroom closet. The Dominican drug traffickers in particular are known
to use the stolen identities of U.S. citizens from Puerto Rico to
conceal their illegal presence from authorities and fraudulently obtain
driver's licenses and welfare benefits.
Not all of the cartels operating here are from Latin America.
According to a federal law enforcement memo leaked to the Daily Caller,
Chinese transnational crime groups have established about 750 illegal
marijuana grow operations in rural areas in the states of Maine and
Washington, often in collaboration with Mexican cartels.
Chinese foreign nationals purchased and operated the grow houses
with financing obtained from a handful of mortgage companies. According
to Derek Maltz, a retired DEA agent, the Chinese groups ``take the cash
from the [Mexican] cartels in America, and they buy these properties
and they do these investments with cash from the Mexican cartels in our
own country. This is part of their laundering scheme.''
Reporters from the Maine Wire tracked down more than 100 of the
unlicensed operations, located in unassuming houses with boarded-up
windows and outfitted with commercial grade electrical systems, and a
few low-profile workers lurking around, all very conspicuous to the
neighbors. One such operation was located across the street from a
daycare, where the children and workers, along with the other
neighbors, were regularly subjected to the unmistakable fumes polluting
the air. Federal authorities believe that the operations generate
profits of more than $4.37 billion per year, much of which likely goes
back to China.
This business model requires creating a ``safe'' environment in
which to operate. The cartels often create their safe space through
violence, extortion, and even corruption of public officials. In Texas,
large swaths of two counties have been literally taken over with what
may be the largest settlement of illegal migrants in the country (Texas
Massacre Happened in America's Largest Illegal Immigrant ``Colonia''--
and Major U.S. Media Won't Say So (cis.org)), in Liberty County, a two-
hour drive east of Austin, the state capital. The Gulf and Sinaloa
cartels originally established enclaves in this area for stash houses
for smuggled drugs and aliens. Now, with the help of unscrupulous real
estate developers, political patrons, and the open border policies,
this area is a massive and nearly unpoliced-able haven for the cartels,
their employees, and their trafficked clients that has driven out most
long-time American residents and spawned crime and violence on a Third
World scale.

Congress Must Act Boldly To Address Cartel Threat: Secure the
Border, Block the Money Flow, and Use Immigration Authorities to Remove
Operatives. Catch and release of illegal migrants on the massive scale,
together with the dismantling of interior enforcement under Biden
policies has overwhelmed every part of our immigration system. Both the
Border Patrol and legal ports of entry are inundated every day in
nearly every sector, including the northern border, which has seen
triple-digit increases in illegal entries. Releasing illegal migrants
instead of promptly removing them has swamped ICE's dockets and the
already-dysfunctional immigration courts. As of the end of FY2023,
there were 6.2 million cases on ICE's non-detained docket, of whom more
than 617,000 have criminal convictions or pending criminal charges.
(https://judiciary.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/republicans-
judiciary.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/2024-01-18-new-data-
reveal-worsening-magnitude-of-the-biden-border-crisis-and-lack-of-
interior-immigration-enforcement.pdf).
This situation is not sustainable. Americans and legal immigrants
are losing faith in our federal immigration agencies, and increasingly
viewing immigration as a burden more than a benefit to our nation.
Congress will have to act both to restore border security and
immigration enforcement, and to address the profound consequences of
the Biden policies that have enriched the cartels and brought their
havoc into the United States. This will require lawmakers to make bold
and substantial changes to our laws and give new authorities and tools
to the law enforcement agencies that will have to confront and
dismantle them.
Obviously, the best defense against the foreign cartel threat is a
secure border, and lawmakers must start there, although it will take
more than tweaks to the asylum system to shut down the cash cow of
migrant smuggling. Tough new enforcement measures such as those in H.R.
2, the House border security bill are essential to this effort.
In addition, Congress should create a new type of ``designation''
for the cartels similar to the approach to international terrorist
groups, which would enable authorities to target the financial assets
of the cartels, to utilize other government resources, including the
military and intelligence agencies, and to bar or deport foreign
citizen operatives from our country.
Federal and state governments should act against the infrastructure
that supports cartel-sponsored illegal immigration and trafficking,
especially the money transmission networks. A grand jury investigation
in Florida recently outlined how the vast flow of remittances of money
from the United States to foreign countries includes within it a flow
of money to the cartels. A significant share of this outflow of funds
is not a transfer of funds from migrants to their families in their
home countries, or even payments directly from the migrants to their
smugglers, but actually huge sums of money that are being laundered by
the cartels and disguised as remittances.
To help disrupt this flow of money, Congress should pass a new
``know your customer'' law that require money transmitters to collect
secure identification from anyone sending funds abroad, in addition to
levying a tax or fee on the funds that are sent.
Since so many of the cartel operatives are not U.S. citizens,
immigration laws can effectively be used against them, as long as
immigration officers and special agents are not limited to pursuing
convicted criminal alien felons, as has been the case under Biden. ICE
should be empowered to launch a new program focusing exclusively on
using immigration and customs authorities to attack the cartels, their
businesses, and their revenue, much as it did to address the MS-13
problem nearly 20 years ago. In addition, worksite enforcement must be
expanded to uncover the widespread debt bondage, forced labor, and
exploitation that was enabled by the recent laissez-faire policies.
Finally, critical to the success of the cartel eradication program
will be a concerted effort to rebuild the necessary partnerships
between federal, state, and local agencies that have been eroded by the
sanctuary city movement and the recent neglect of routine public
safety-oriented immigration enforcement. Restoring the popular 287(g)
delegation of authority programs--specifically, the investigative
versions--in locations that have cartel activity and launching task
forces to unite jurisdictions to counter this threat will help.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Jessica M. Vaughan, Director,
Center for Immigration Studies

Questions Submitted by Representative Grijalva

Question 1. I was pleased to hear you say at the hearing that you
do not subscribe to the Great Replacement Theory. The theory and the
language that supports its promotion is dangerous, having been cited in
the manifestos of mass murderers and used as justification to commit
acts of violence. During the exchange between you and Representative
Ramirez, you said that you do not use the word, ``invasion,'' which is
a central theme of the Great Replacement Theory. However, I am aware of
a number of times in which you have used the term. Some examples are
included below. I also note that these examples are a few years old
now. Is it fair to say that you no longer use the term, ``invasion'' in
the context of a discussion about immigration?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Answer. Mr. Grijalva, I am afraid you are mistaken. The
language that you are attributing to me is in fact the language of
others. In each of the four examples you provided, the word
``invasion'' occurs within the headlines of articles that were written
by various news media journalists, which I had re-posted on Twitter/X.
Specifically, the authors of those quotes were from Conservative
Review, Washington Post, and Breitbart. If you click on the links to
those articles, you will see that what appears in my post is actually
the exact language of the author or the headline writer of the news
media outlet, not me.
Let me explain how this works: When a social media user shares an
article that appears on a news media outlet's website, this is done by
clicking on the logo of a particular social media platform such as
Twitter/X or Facebook. A selection of sharing options/logos usually
appears near the author's byline. If the reader clicks on the Twitter/X
logo, as occurred in the examples you provided, then this automatically
generates a post formatted specifically for Twitter/X. In the case of
Twitter/X, this takes the form of a new window with text that is
generated automatically. This text typically matches the headline of
the article. It also includes a link to the article and photograph
(which is in blue-colored text in the image you provided), and this is
true in the case of the posts that you provided in your question. The
name of the original source of the article also appears in the social
media post that is shared.
Once again, I would like to express my disappointment that you and
Ms. Ramirez have chosen to focus on trivia such as these social media
posts rather than the important topic of the hearing, namely the
disturbing spread of transnational criminal organization activity into
tribal communities, and what can be done to help the leaders of these
communities address this problem.
______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you, Ms. Vaughan. I am now going to
recognize Chairman Jose for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF VERLON M. JOSE, CHAIRMAN, TOHONO
O'ODHAM NATION, SELL, ARIZONA

Mr. Jose. [Speaking Native language.] Good morning,
Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, and distinguished
members of the Subcommittee. I am Verlon Jose, Chairman of the
Tohono O'odham Nation of Arizona. It is an honor to testify
before you today on behalf of my Nation and our more than
36,000 enrolled members.
The O'odham have lived in what is now Arizona and northern
Mexico since time immemorial. In 1854, the international
boundary was drawn through the middle of our ancestral
territory. Today, the Tohono O'odham Nation shares a 62-mile
border with Mexico.
The Nation has long been at the forefront of border issues.
Working in concert with the Customs and Border Protection and
the FBI, the Tohono O'odham police department has combated drug
traffickers for many years. In addition, since the 1970s, the
Nation's Shadow Wolves have applied traditional tracking
methods and apprehended countless smugglers and seized
thousands of pounds of illegal drugs. The Shadow Wolves are the
only Native American tracking unit in the country.
We also have supported CBP efforts on our reservation by
authorizing a CBP checkpoint, forward operating bases, and
integrated fixed towers to facilitate electronic surveillance
efforts. The Nation spends an annual average of $3 million of
our own tribal funds to help meet the United States' border
security responsibilities. Our police force spends about half
its time on border issues, including the investigation of
immigrant deaths, illegal drug seizures, and human smuggling.
While most illegal drugs are smuggled through legal ports
of entry, criminal cartel activity has made the effect of drug
and migrant smuggling on the Nation worse. Smugglers have held
tribal families hostage, damaged and stolen property, and
recruited tribal youth to engage in smuggling activity.
The Nation is not alone when it comes to Indian Country
public safety concerns. Existing Federal funding is wholly
inadequate to meet the public safety and justice needs of
Indian Country and to support tribal law enforcement generally.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs has estimated that billions of
dollars in funding are needed for tribal law enforcement and
court services, but these funding goals have never been met.
Further, the epidemic of the drug trafficking facing the
Nation and the rest of the country is just that, an epidemic,
and one that requires a sustained public health response.
Alongside the increase in drug trafficking over the past
decade, the Nation has witnessed a steady rise in addiction and
drug-related deaths. Unfortunately, this public health response
has been subject to the same chronic underfunding as Indian
Country public safety services.
Most notoriously, the Federal Government has repeatedly
failed to adequately fund the Indian Health Service, including
behavioral health, mental health, and substance abuse services.
This has left our most vulnerable members without reliable
access to care and treatment they need.
As has been documented, border wall construction came at
great cost to the American taxpayer. Thanks to the no-bid
contracts, diversions of drug interdiction, and defense
resources we may never know the true cost. Despite the
environmental cost of the border wall, studies have shown that
it does not deter drug smuggling. In addition, the Nation and
others have warned for years the border wall is particularly
ineffective in remote geographic areas like our homelands,
where it can easily be circumvented by climbing over, tunneling
under, or sawing through it. CBP records prove that this is
precisely what has taken place.
Rather than constructing ineffective barriers, the data
clearly shows that Federal funds would be put to much better
use supporting tribal and Federal law enforcement, border
security services, and public health services.
The Nation genuinely appreciates this Subcommittee's
interest in the impact of cartels in Indian Country. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[Speaking Native language.] Together, we are stronger.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Jose follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Verlon Jose, Chairman, Tohono O'odham
Nation of Arizona

Introduction & Historical Background

Good morning Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. I am Verlon Jose, the
Chairman of the Tohono O'odham Nation of Arizona. It is an honor to
have the opportunity to testify before you today on behalf of my Nation
and our more than 36,000 enrolled Tribal members.
The O'odham have lived in what is now Arizona and northern Mexico
since time immemorial. In 1854, the international boundary between the
United States and Mexico was drawn through the middle of our ancestral
territory. As a result, today the Tohono O'odham Nation shares a 62-
mile border with Mexico--the second-longest international border of any
tribe in the United States, and the longest on the southern border.
Seventeen O'odham communities with approximately 2,000 members are
still located in our historical homelands in Mexico. O'odham on both
sides of the border share the same language, culture, religion and
history, and we continue to cross the border for sacred pilgrimages and
ceremonies at important religious and cultural sites.

Map of Tohono O'odham Ancestral Territory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Nation has long been at the forefront on border issues.
Over the years we have developed a long-standing cooperative
relationship with U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and other federal law enforcement
agencies. Working in concert with CBP, our own Tohono O'odham law
enforcement officers are regularly involved in drug interdiction and
immigrant apprehension actions, which have been made more challenging
due to international criminal cartel activity. Every year, the Tohono
O'odham Nation spends its own funds to help meet the federal
government's border security responsibilities. We have supported CBP
efforts on our Reservation by providing lands for a checkpoint, forward
operating bases, and integrated fixed towers to facilitate critical
electronic surveillance efforts.

The Nation's Unique Border Security and Law Enforcement Challenges

The Nation faces major, unique law enforcement and public safety
challenges due to its shared border with Mexico and the large size of
its main Reservation. The Tohono O'odham Police Department (TOPD) must
police a huge geographic area with limited resources, including remote
and isolated areas and land along the border. The Nation also devotes
significant resources to these efforts, spending an annual average of
$3 million of its own tribal funds on border security and enforcement
to help meet the United States' border security obligations. The Tohono
O'odham Police Department (TOPD) responded to over 100,000 incidents in
2023, some of which are of a general non-border criminal nature but
many of which are related to drug seizures, illegal immigration,
border-related criminal activity.
Further, the Nation is responsible for the recovery and disposition
of immigrants who have perished on our Reservation. Since 2003, our
Nation's law enforcement has spent nearly $6 million dollars on over
1,500 migrant death investigations and recoveries without any federal
financial assistance. The Nation's police force typically spends about
half of its time on border issues, including the investigation of
immigrant deaths, illegal drug seizures, and human smuggling.\1\ In
addition, the Nation has incurred hundreds of thousands of dollars and
hundreds of hours of police investigative time to address the impacts
of drug trafficking, including overdose investigations, criminal
evidence analysis, and Narcan (Naloxone HCL) training. Criminal cartel
activity has exacerbated the negative effect of drug and migrant
smuggling on the Nation. As the Government Accountability Office has
reported, smugglers have held tribal families hostage, damaged and
stolen property, and recruited tribal youth to engage in smuggling
activity.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Government Accountability Office, GAO-24-106385, U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement: Improvements Needed to Workforce
and Expansion Plans for Unit of Native American Law Enforcement
Personnel 2 (January 30, 2024).
\2\ Id.

Despite strained resources, the Nation has initiated innovative law
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
enforcement solutions to meet these challenges:

High Intensity Drug Trafficking (HIDTA) Task Force

o
Studies show that most illicit drug seizures
occur at legal ports of entry (i.e., outside the Nation's
Reservation). Nevertheless, the Nation's is not immune from
illicit drug activity and its location creates unique drug
interdiction challenges. To address these challenges, in 2013,
the Nation formed and now leads a multi-agency anti-drug
smuggling task force staffed by Tohono O'odham Police
Department detectives, ICE special agents, Border Patrol
agents, and the FBI. This is the only tribally-led High
Intensity Drug Trafficking (HIDTA) Task Force in the United
States. In 2018, the Nation's Task Force Commander W. Rodney
Irby received an award recognizing him as the National
Outstanding HIDTA Task Force Commander.

o
In 2020, the Nation's HIDTA Task Force
partnered with two other task forces to conduct a year-long
investigation into a major cell of the Sinaloa Cartel that was
smuggling drugs through the Tohono O'odham Nation. That single
investigation resulted in the seizure of 575,000 counterfeit
Oxycodone pills, 140 pounds of heroin and 9 kilograms of pure
fentanyl powder. The seized fentanyl powder had the capacity to
kill every person in Arizona eight times over. As of the first
quarter of this year, the Nation's HIDTA Task Force has seized
or assisted in the seizure of 727.9 pounds of methamphetamine,
97.5 kilograms of heroin, 626,303 illicit Oxycodone pills, 10
kilograms of fentanyl powder, and nearly 2 million dose units
of fentanyl.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Figures provided by the Tohono O'odham Department of Public
Safety, 2015-2024.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shadow Wolves, an ICE tactical patrol unit

o
The Nation has officers that are part of the
Shadow Wolves, a tactical patrol unit based on our Reservation
that the Nation helped create in 1974. Thanks to recent
bipartisan legislation championed by Congressman John Katko in
the House and enacted in the 117th Congress, the Shadow Wolves
are now reclassified as ICE Special Agents.

o
The Shadow Wolves are the only Native
American tracking unit in the country, and its officers are
known for their ability to track and apprehend immigrants and
drug smugglers using traditional tracking methods, including
``cutting for sign,'' which involves identifying physical
evidence left behind by smugglers, such as footprints, tire
tracks, or clothing. The Shadow Wolves have apprehended
countless smugglers and seized thousands of pounds of illegal
drugs. To better combat cartel activity, the Shadow Wolves have
increased investigative efforts in recent years, including
plainclothes actions to blend in with the population.

In addition, the Nation has entered into several cooperative
agreements with CBP and ICE, and pursuant to numerous Tohono O'odham
Legislative Council resolutions has authorized a number of border
security measures on its sovereign lands to assist CBP. Some examples
include:

ICE office and CBP forward operating bases: Since 1974,
the Nation has authorized a long-term lease for an on-
Reservation ICE office. The Nation also approved leases for
two CBP forward operating bases that operate on the
Nation's lands 24 hours, 7 days a week. One of these
forward operating bases (at Papago Farms) was recently
renovated and upgraded with state-of-the-art improvements
and technology, including an expanded perimeter fence,
helipad, and new officer living quarters and administrative
facilities.

Vehicle barriers on our lands: CBP has constructed
extensive vehicle barriers that run the entire length of
the Tribal border and a patrol road that runs parallel to
the border.

CBP checkpoint on our lands: The Nation has authorized a
CBP checkpoint on the major highway that runs through the
Nation.

Integrated Fixed Towers: The Nation approved a lease of
its lands to allow CBP to build an Integrated Fixed Tower
(IFT) system that includes surveillance and sensor towers
with associated access roads on the Nation's southern and
eastern boundaries to detect and help interdict illegal
entries.

Additional Federal Resources are Desperately Needed to Address These
Challenges

While the Nation is unique in the nature of its law enforcement and
border security needs, it is not alone when it comes to Indian Country
public safety concerns. Existing federal funding is wholly inadequate
to meet the public safety and justice needs of Indian Country and to
support tribal law enforcement generally. In 2018, the Bureau of Indian
Affairs provided a report to Congress that estimated that $1 billion
was needed for tribal law enforcement, with another $1 billion needed
for tribal courts,\4\ just to provide a minimum base level of service
to all federally recognized tribes. The estimated need has only grown
since that time as federal appropriations levels are nowhere near the
amounts needed.\5\ This failure to fund tribal justice systems
undermines public safety in Indian Country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Justice Services,
Report to the Congress on Spending, Staffing, and Estimated Funding
Costs for Public Safety and Justice Programs in Indian Country, 2018 at
1 (July 2020).
\5\ See National Congress of American Indians, U.S. Senate
Committee on Indian Affairs, Oversight Hearing on the President's FY
2020 Budget Request at 4 (May 8, 2019).

Drug Treatment Funding Deficits Exacerbate Public Safety Funding
Deficits. The epidemic of drug trafficking facing the Nation and the
rest of the country is just that--an epidemic, and one that requires a
sustained public health response. Unfortunately, this public health
response has been subject to the same chronic underfunding as Indian
Country public safety services. Most notoriously, the federal
government has repeatedly failed to adequately fund the Indian Health
Service (IHS), including behavioral health, mental health, and
substance abuse services. Alongside the increase in drug trafficking
over the past decade, the Nation has witnessed a steady rise in
addiction, and in drug-related deaths. Unfortunately, the same rural
environment that imposes significant challenges for drug interdiction
efforts also imposes barriers to tribal members seeking treatment. Due
to a lack of funding, there is no dedicated facility to address
addiction recovery on the Nation, and while the Nation contracts for
these services off-Reservation, a lack of public transportation
infrastructure means that Tribal members must drive several hours
(sometimes 100 miles or more) to obtain these services. Moreover, as in
any culture, Tribal members are most comfortable (a threshold
behavioral health requirement for treatment) seeking recovery in their
own communities, with access to traditional healing and other
culturally appropriate methods.
At the same time, aging IHS infrastructure is inadequate to meet
these needs. The Nation's 50-year-old hospital in Sells, Arizona is one
of the oldest IHS facilities. Due to its age and lack of updated
equipment and facilities, the Nation's Sells Hospital can only address
minor medical issues and is entirely inadequate to serve the healthcare
needs of the Nation's members. The Sells Replacement Hospital has been
on the IHS facilities construction priority list for over thirty years,
since 1993. Although the Nation, beginning in FY 2018, has begun to
receive funding for the Sells Replacement Hospital, construction has
not yet begun, and it will be several years before construction of the
new facility will be complete (assuming it continues to receive the
funding that is projected in the IHS budget).

Border Security Goals Are Better Met With Public Health And Safety
Funding Than Border Barrier Construction. As we know, border wall
construction came at great cost to the American taxpayer. Thanks to the
no-bid contracts, diversion of badly needed drug interdiction and
defense resources, and the massive environmental mitigation efforts
required to address construction, we may never know the true cost. The
Government Accountability Office found that by the end of 2020, the
Army Corps of Engineers had obligated more than $10 billion to border
wall construction alone.\6\ Billions more have and will continue to be
needed to mitigate the environmental and cultural harms caused by
construction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Government Accountability Office, Southwest Border: Award and
Management of Border Barrier Construction Contracts, GAO-23-106893, at
6 (July 23, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the Nation and others have warned for years, the border wall is
particularly ineffective in remote geographic areas like our homelands,
where it can easily be circumvented by climbing over, tunneling under,
or sawing through it. And that is precisely what has taken place. As
noted by the Cato Institute:

Immigrants used cheap ladders to climb over it, or they free
climb it. They used cheap power tools to cut through it. They
cut through small pieces and squeezed through, and they cut
through big sections and drove through. In one small section in
2020, they sawed through at least 18 times that Border Patrol
knew about in a month. They also made tunnels. Some tunnels
were long, including the longest one ever discovered, but some
were short enough just to get past the barrier.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id.

CBP records have revealed that the border wall is breached with
staggering (but unsurprising) regularity--between more than 2,000 times
and more than 4,000 times per year between 2017 and 2022.\8\ These
breaches typically are performed with ``inexpensive power tools widely
available at retail hardware stores,'' \9\ or with five dollar
ladders.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ David J. Bier, ``Border Wall Was Breached 11 Times Per Day in
2022,'' Cato Institute (December 30, 2022), available at https://
www.cato.org/blog/border-wall-was-breached-11-times-day-2022-2.
\9\ Nick Miroff, ``Trump's border wall has been breached more than
3,000 times by smugglers, CBP records show,'' The Washington Post
(March, 2, 2002), available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-
security/2022/03/02/trump-border-wall-breached/.
\10\ Jenna Romaine, ``Trump's $15 billion border wall is being
easily defeated by $5 ladders,'' The Hill, April 22, 2021), available
at https://thehill.com/changing-america/resilience/refugees/549758-
trumps-15-billion-border-wall-is-being-easily-defeated/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unsurprisingly, the border wall does not effectively deter illegal
immigration and drug trafficking. CBP data shows that most illegal
drugs (including the vast majority--90%--of illegal fentanyl) are
smuggled through ports of entry rather than in between them.\11\
Moreover, the drug couriers (known as mules) who ferry these drugs
through ports of entry are predominantly U.S. citizens, not
migrants.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See, e.g., Joel Rose, ``Who is sneaking fentanyl across the
southern border? Hint: it's not the migrants,'' NPR (August 9, 2023),
https://www.npr.org/2023/08/09/1191638114/fentanyl-smuggling-migrants-
mexico-border-drugs; Christian Penichet-Paul, ``Illicit Fentanyl and
Drug Smuggling at the U.S.-Mexico Border: An Overview,'' National
Immigration Forum (October 25, 2023) https://immigrationforum.org/
article/illicit-fentanyl-and-drug-smuggling-at-the-u-s-mexico-border-
an-overview/.
\12\ NPR, supra n.11.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: NPR analysis of U.S. Customs and Border Protection
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
data, October 2022-June 2023.

Rather than constructing ineffective barriers, the data clearly
shows that federal funds would be put to much better use supporting
tribal and federal law enforcement and border security services and
public health services.

Conclusion

The Nation genuinely appreciates the Subcommittee's interest in the
impact of cartels in Indian Country. We welcome a continued dialogue
with you on these issues.
______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Hon. Verlon Jose, Chairman, Tohono
O'odham Nation of Arizona

Questions Submitted by Representative Gosar

Question 1. If the Tohono O'odham Nation did not have to divert so
many resources and time to dealing with cartel activity, drug
trafficking, and increased illegal immigration, how else could that
funding be utilized by the Nation?

Answer. The Nation's efforts to help meet the United States' border
security responsibilities have come at a significant cost, and have
contributed to the resource strain on other basic government functions
and programs. As detailed below, funding is critically needed for
public safety (including law enforcement and infrastructure) and public
health.

Public Safety

The Tohono O'odham Police Department (TOPD) polices a huge
geographic area (2.8 million acres)--our Reservation is one of the
largest in the United States, roughly the size of the State of
Connecticut. In many isolated areas on the Nation's reservation, tribal
law enforcement personnel are the first and only responders to criminal
activity on tribal lands. Our tribal police already face a severe lack
of resources and staffing; added border security responsibilities
significantly exacerbate these deficits.
Funds currently dedicated to border security could be allocated to
address, for example, critical infrastructure and technology needs of
the Nation's police force and detention services. TOPD currently is
housed in a converted 1950s-era Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) jail
that is not equipped to handle modern law enforcement responsibilities.
Further, the Nation's detention center is entirely inadequate to meet
our public safety needs, forcing the Nation to house detainees in
facilities out of state. Federal funds for correctional facilities are
extremely limited--it takes years to advance on the BIA list of
facilities scheduled to receive these funds. Making matters worse, TOPD
has difficulty communicating effectively with other law enforcement
because of a lack of interoperability throughout the Reservation.
Upgraded information technology and equipment is desperately needed to
improve collaboration among the Nation's emergency responders, and to
facilitate coordinated provision of fire, law enforcement, and
emergency response services.

Public Health

Because the Nation spends so much of its resources securing the
border, we have been limited in our ability to address other pressing
issues, including the epidemic of drug trafficking. As I noted in my
testimony, the Nation has witnessed a steady rise in addiction and in
drug-related deaths. Unfortunately, behavioral health, mental health,
and substance abuse services through the Indian Health Service (IHS)
are badly underfunded. Funding and resources currently dedicated to
border security would be much better dedicated to the construction of a
facility to address addiction recovery on the Nation. In addition,
while there are three behavioral health outpatient operational sites on
the Reservation that provide outpatient counseling/case management,
psychiatry, and administration, the buildings are old and need to be
updated and/or replaced to meet the needs of the clients and personnel.
These buildings lack adequate space for client privacy, personnel, and
storage.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See National Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup's Request for
the Indian Health Service Fiscal Year 2025 Budget at 206 (April 2023)
https://www.nihb.org/resources/FY2025%20
IHS%20National%20Tribal%20Budget%20Formulation%20Workgroup%20Requests.pd
f.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. In your opinion, how can the federal government stem
the flow of fentanyl coming across the Southern Border and into Indian
communities across the U.S.?

Answer. As I noted in my testimony, Customs and Border Patrol (CBP)
data shows that most illegal drugs (including the vast majority--90%--
of illegal fentanyl) are seized through ports of entry--not along the
border between them. It is also important to note that the fentanyl
that ends up on the Nation is predominantly purchased elsewhere, such
as in Phoenix and Tucson. To address this crisis, the federal
government must increase border enforcement staffing at ports of entry
and provide funding for the deployment of advanced technology to aid in
drug interdiction.
Federal funding shortfalls have severely impacted not only the
Nation's law enforcement efforts, but CBP as well. CBP officials
continue to experience challenges in recruiting and retaining law
enforcement personnel.\2\ In his FY 2025 budget the President has
requested funding to hire an additional 150 CBP Officers and 250 Border
Patrol Agents.\3\ We support this request, as it would help address
this shortfall. Additional funding for advanced technology systems,
such as robust investment in Non-Intrusive Inspection (NII)
technologies like large-scale x-ray and gamma-ray imaging systems,
radiation detection equipment, small-scale baggage x-ray systems, and
portable hand-held devices, would also support the detection and
interdiction of fentanyl and other opioids. Officers may perform manual
inspections of vehicles when NII technology is not available, but it
can be less effective.\4\ The President's FY 2025 budget request also
calls for additional funding to build out and maintain existing and new
Forward Operating Laboratories, which are permanent onsite labs co-
located at ports of entry and Border Patrol stations.\5\ The labs
provide support for presumptive field testing, and were created to
assist with conducting confirmatory testing during the opioid crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See U.S. Government Accountability Office Report, GAO 21-356,
Southwest Border Security: Actions Are Needed to Address the Cost and
Readiness Implications of Continued DOD Support to U.S. Customs and
Border Protection (Feb. 2021) at 41, https://www.gao.gov/assets/
d21356.pdf.
\3\ U.S. Department of Homeland Security, FY 2025 Budget in Brief,
at 30, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2024-03/
2024_0311_fy_2025_budget_in_brief.pdf
\4\ See U.S. Government Accountability Office Report, GAO-19-534,
Border Infrastructure: Actions Needed to Improve Information on
Facilities and Capital Planning at Land Border Crossings (July 2019) at
25-26, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-19-534.pdf.
\5\ FY 2025 Budget in Brief, supra n.4, at 32.

Question 3. Given the Tohono O'odham Nation's location on both
sides of the Southern Border, how have the cartels specifically
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
targeted the Tohono O'odham Nation communities in Mexico?

3a) What has the impact been on these communities?

Answer. Unfortunately, on the Mexican side of the border there are
few governmental entities advocating on behalf of the approximately
2,000 O'odham living there, leaving many of these communities
vulnerable and without recourse when smugglers move into communities to
use them as staging areas, or when armed conflict erupts between
warring cartels. The response from local police authorities in Mexico
has been limited and can take several days, with the only real relief
coming from the military. When cartels move into these communities or
when conflicts flare up, O'odham become casualties of these wars--
victims of terrifying levels of violence that sometimes leave our
members tortured and beaten. As a result, many O'odham flee their
communities until the smuggling cycle is over (i.e. when shipments dry
up).
This conflict also disrupts our traditional pilgrimages and hampers
the ability of O'odham on both sides of the border to practice our
shared culture with and among one another. This impacts all of our
people, resulting in long-term and incalculable damage to our customs
and traditions.

Question 4. Your written testimony referenced a number of methods
that the Tohono O'odham Nation is currently working with USCBP, ICE,
and others to patrol the border, including the use of towers, special
agents, and a road built on your tribal land. Please explain how you
are able to utilize these resources while also respecting the cultural
and environmental sensitivities of the Nation.

Answer. The Nation has entered into several cooperative agreements
with CBP and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), and has
authorized numerous border security measures on its sovereign lands to
assist CBP.\6\ The success of these border security measures is the
result of extensive education about the need to conduct government-to-
government consultation before decisions are made that will impact the
Nation's cultural and environmental resources, the need to meaningfully
consider information and recommendations provided by the Nation, and
the need to recognize and consider the unique history and relationship
that the Nation has with its sovereign lands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See generally Tohono O'odham Legislative Council Resolution No.
04-095, Supporting Vehicle Barriers and All-weather Road Project Along
the International Boundary Within the Tohono O'odham Nation (March 8,
2004) https://www.tolc-nsn.gov/docs/Actions04/04095.pdf; No. 07-679,
Supporting the United States Department of Homeland Security, Customs
and Border Protection to Gain Control of the International Border
Within the Tohono O'odham Nation with a Trial Tactical Checkpoint (Oct.
17, 2007) https://tolc-nsn.gov/docs/Actions07/07679.pdf; No. 07-129,
Supporting United States Department of Homeland Security, Customs and
Border Protection Secure Border Initiative (March 14, 2007) https://
tolc-nsn.gov/docs/Actions07/07129.pdf; No. 16-560, Approving the FY
2017 Department of Public Safety, Tohono O'odham Police Department,
United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland Security
Investigations Budget (Nov. 21, 2016) https://www.tolc-nsn.gov/docs/
Actions16/16560.pdf; No. 21-400, Approval of the Memorandum of
Understanding between the Tohono O'odham Nation and the U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Homeland Security Investigations
(Oct. 18, 2021) https://www.tolc-nsn.gov/docs/Actions21/21400.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Agency respect for tribal sovereignty allows for better
coordination with our local districts and Tribal Historic Preservation
Office, which in turn ensures that border security activities are
carried out in a manner that minimizes impacts on sacred sites and
other significant environmental and cultural resources. For example,
after environmental study \7\ and extensive and meaningful engagement
from CBP, the Nation consented to easements for rights-of-way over its
lands to allow CBP to build an Integrated Fixed Tower (IFT) system that
includes ten surveillance and sensor towers and associated roads on the
Nation.\8\ The intent of utilizing the IFT system was to reduce the
environmental footprint of CBP and the corresponding impact on the
Nation's resources, while simultaneously enhancing CBP surveillance
capabilities. The IFT system has been largely successful in detecting
and identifying items of interest and so has enabled Border Patrol
agents to respond more efficiently and effectively to border
incursions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Final Environmental
Assessment for Integrated Fixed Towers on the Tohono O'odham Nation in
the Ajo and Casa Grande Stations (March 2017) https://www.cbp.gov/
sites/default/files/assets/documents/2017-Apr/TON%20IFT%20FINAL%20EA
%20FONSI%202017%2003%20Part%20I.pdf.
\8\ Tohono O'odham Legislative Council Resolution No. 19-088,
Consenting to Grants of Easement for Rights-of-Way across Nation's
lands for the United States Customs and Border Protection's Integrated
Fixed Tower Project (March 25, 2019) https://www.tolc-nsn.gov/docs/
Actions19/19088.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The installation of the IFT system, in combination with dedicated
funding for road maintenance, also has reduced the negative
environmental, cultural, and public safety impacts that border security
imposes on the Nation and its members. The Nation, like most of Indian
Country, faces overwhelming road maintenance and safety issues. BIA's
FY 2025 budget justification acknowledges that there is a ``rising
deferred maintenance backlog'' and that only 13 percent of BIA roads
are in acceptable condition.\9\ CBP uses about 350 miles of the
Nation's roads for their border-related activities, which has added
significantly to the level of wear and disrepair. As a result, many of
our roads have sink holes, potholes, broken and cracked pavement, and
washed-out bridges, making these roads dangerous for our members and
for tribal and federal law enforcement and agency personnel, including
CBP. During monsoon season, flooding completely washes out roads,
stranding our members, including children on school buses, preventing
access for emergency vehicles and isolating communities. Tribal members
have been killed by flooding while traveling on these roads. With the
deployment of IFTs, CBP is able to be more deliberate in its deployment
of patrols and the use of tribal roads. In addition, after
consultation, and by agreement with BIA (which has legal responsibility
for road maintenance) and the Nation's Chukut Kuk District (the tribal
district with the majority of our borderland), CBP has dedicated
resources to provide road maintenance and repair on the
Reservation.\10\ We have been appreciative of Congress' provision of
crucial legislative language that made this financial cooperation
between CBP and BIA possible. In sum, this respect for and attention to
the Nation's sovereignty and community is a win both for border
security and environmental and cultural protection.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ BIA FY 2025 Budget Justifications and Performance Information
at IA-TG-3 and IA-TG-7, available at https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/
files/media_document/fy2025-508-bia-greenbook. pdf.
\10\ See Tohono O'odham Legislative Council Resolution No. 20-422,
Approving the Bureau of Indian Affairs to Conduct Road Repairs of
Specific Roads on the Tohono O'odham Nation Using Funding Transferred
from the United States Department of Homeland Security Customs and
Border Protection (Dec. 8, 2020) https://www.tolc-nsn.gov/docs/
Actions20/20422.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conversely, there are numerous other examples where the federal
government has not respected tribal sovereignty. The Nation repeatedly
attempted to engage and consult with the prior Administration regarding
border wall construction and potential damage to the Nation's sacred
sites and other resources, but our efforts were generally rebuffed, met
with extremely limited responses and no meaningful consultation. As a
result, CBP rushed ahead with border wall construction in our ancestral
homelands and proceeded to destroy the Nation's culturally significant
sites and cultural resources, tribal archeological resources, sacred
sites and even human remains. The construction also negatively impacted
plants and animals of importance to the Nation including some
endangered species like the jaguar that are sacred to American Indian
tribes, preventing them from moving freely within their habitat and
interfering in their migration patterns. The border wall construction
was expedited by using authority under Section 102(c) of the Illegal
Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act to waive laws that
would otherwise have helped to protect sacred sites and culturally
significant areas, the environment, and property rights. The Nation
repeatedly expressed grave concerns about these harms,\11\ requested
meaningful dialogue,\12\ and urged caution in testimony before Congress
\13\ and in multiple letters \14\ and court filings.\15\ Unfortunately,
these concerns were entirely ignored.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See, e.g., Tohono O'odham Legislative Council Resolution No.
17-053, Border Security and Immigration Enforcement on the Tohono
O'odham Nation (Feb. 7, 2017) http://www.tonation-nsn.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2017/02/17-053-Border-Security-and-Immigration-Enforcement-on-
the-Tohono-Oodham-Nation.pdf; No. 18-032, Opposing Federal Legislation
that Promotes Construction of Border Wall, Waives Laws, and Undermines
Tribal Jurisdiction (Jan. 2018) https://tolc-nsn.gov/docs/actions18/
18032.pdf.
\12\ See Tohono O'odham Comments on DHS Consultation Policy (May
25, 2021).
\13\ See Tohono O'odham Testimony, House Natural Resources
Subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples Hearing on the border wall's impact
on tribal sacred sites (Feb. 26, 2020) https://www.congress.gov/116/
meeting/house/110587/witnesses/HMTG-116-II24-Wstate-NorrisJrN-2020
0226.pdf; Tohono O'odham Testimony, House Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Border Security, Facilitation and Operations Hearing on
the border wall's impact on tribal landowners (Feb. 27, 2020) https://
www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110571/witnesses/HHRG-116-HM11-
Wstate-NorrisN-20200227.pdf.
\14\ See Letter from BIA Regional Director Bryan Bowker to the
Nation requesting information on the border wall's impacts (May 2021);
Tohono O'odham Response to Regional Director Bowker's May 2021 letter
(June 3, 2021)
\15\ See, e.g., Sierra Club and Southern Border Communities
Coalition v. Donald J. Trump, No. 4:19-cv-00892-HSG, Amicus Curiae
Brief of Tohono O'odham Nation in Support of Plaintiff's Motion for
Supplemental Preliminary Injunction (June 18, 2019, N.D. Ca.) (Dkt. No.
172); Amicus Curiae Brief of Tohono O'odham Nation in Support of
Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (October 18, 2019)
(Dkt. No. 215).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

The Nation shares the federal government's dedication to border
security. We believe that the measures we have taken to assist CBP and
the conduct our own law enforcement efforts are necessary to protect
the Nation specifically and the United States generally. We remain
committed to border security and enforcement with the intent that the
Nation's sovereignty be respected and preserved.
______

Mr. Caldwell. Thank you, Chairman Jose. I now recognize
President Stiffarm for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY STIFFARM, PRESIDENT, FORT
BELKNAP INDIAN COMMUNITY, HARLEM, MONTANA

Mr. Stiffarm. Good morning, everyone. First of all, I would
like to start off by thanking Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member
Stansbury, Congressman Rosendale, and Congressman Zinke. I
appreciate your time. I appreciate you listening to us and our
concerns on what we have to address in Indian Country.
First and foremost, I would like to, if I am allowed,
submit on behalf of the Rocky Boy's Reservation in Montana, our
neighbors, our relatives to the west of us, written testimony,
what happened to them, how ironic it was. A couple of weeks
ago, they had a cartel killing in Rocky Boy that killed two
tribal members. And I would like to submit their testimony on
their behalf of Chairman Harlan Gopher, if I am allowed to do
that, sir.
Dr. Gosar. Without objection.
Mr. Stiffarm. Thank you. First of all, I would like to
start off by addressing the cartels in Indian Country. You
know, this ain't new. This has been going on for decades. I can
say it is a little bit too late, but it is not. At least we are
addressing it today. At least we are going to bring these
issues to the forefront of what is happening to our people back
home in Montana and other Indian reservations across this
country.
They target Indian reservations because they blend in,
because of the lack of law enforcement and because of the lack
of law enforcement we have. It is a lack of money, lack of
funds, lack of officers. Our reservations about 700,000 acres,
and most of the time we have one officer to cover our
reservation. And I have 20 years of being a police officer back
home, so I know the history and the concerns that we have.
What I have piled up here right now are studies, things
that were done by Congress in the Law and Order Commission Act
of 2013. Broken promises. Not invisible. These were things done
years and years ago, studies, things looked at about Indian
Country, but nothing has ever been done to fix these problems
that have already been addressed and looked at, pushed by the
wayside, like my brother said. We will talk about it today and
forget it tomorrow. That is what I learned about being a
politician and coming here to DC and speaking. This is probably
about my sixth or seventh time testifying in hearings. I have
seen no results yet to this day.
So, this is true to where it stands, on your broken
promises, our broken treaties. That is how our people feel back
home. We are left alone to fight this battle against some
hundreds of thousands of cartel members coming into this
country, coming onto our reservation, our homes, raping and
murdering our people, using that place as a hideout.
But what really irks me is we don't have help from the FBI,
the Border Patrol, the DEA that has jurisdiction on Federal
land, which are reservations.
Our FBI, we meet with them once a year, and they come to
our tribal chambers and they visit with us. And I ask them, I
ask those FBI agents, ``What tribes are you serving here?''
They don't even know that. That tells me they don't care.
Reservations are a stepping stone for agents to move up. Same
with the Border Patrol. They don't come to Fort Belknap. They
don't go to Fort Peck. They don't go to Rocky Boy, Blackfeet
Reservation to patrol, to look for illegal aliens. They don't.
I know that from personal experience. Same with the FBI. They
come there when the serious crime happens. They take their
pictures, they write their reports, and they are gone. That is
about it.
That is one thing you guys really need to look at besides
the lack of funding in Indian Country, is the FBI and the
Border Patrol doing their jobs in Indian Country, and helping
us protect and serve our own people.
One last thing to add is, we send billions of dollars
overseas for wars. You can't even send millions to the tribes
to save our people. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Stiffarm follows:]

Prepared Statement of President Jeffrey Stiffarm, on behalf of the
Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes of the Fort Belknap Indian Community

Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, Montana Congressman
Rosendale, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Jeffrey
Stiffarm, President of the Assiniboine (Nakoda) and Gros Ventre
(Aaniih) Nations of the Fort Belknap Indian Community. I have over 20
years of Law Enforcement experience serving our Indian Communities. I
appreciate the opportunity to be invited to this important hearing
today which is examining the impacts of Drug Cartels Targeting Indian
Country--and specifically the Fort Belknap Indian Community.
The Fort Belknap Reservation is located in north central Montana
and is comprised of 652,000 acres (1,014 square miles) almost as large
as the State of Rhode Island, and has nearly 7,000 members living on or
near our Reservation. Fort Belknap is 40 miles south of the Canadian
Border. Fort Belknap Law Enforcement is comprised of 9 Officers to
protect and serve our entire reservation 24/7. Similarly, Montana is
147,040 square miles--Montana is slightly larger than Japan. It is the
4th largest State in the United States behind, Texas, Alaska and
California. In 2024, it is reported that only 20 DEA Agents cover the
entire State of Montana. The cartels know this--so it is easy for them
to take over reservations.
These Drug Cartels are specifically targeting Indian Country
because of a dangerous combination of rural terrain, history of
addiction, under-resourced law enforcement, legal loopholes, sparsely
populated communities, and exorbitant profits, and it is devastating
Tribal reservations. Profits for these cartels soar the farther they
get from the southern border. A fentanyl pill that costs less than
$1.00 Mexico and southern states, can go for over $100 on our
Reservation.
It is repeatedly reported to our Tribal Government that drug
cartels are targeting our Native women and using homes on reservations
as safe houses and distribution hubs. They are able to operate with
impunity because of complex jurisdictional rules and the fact that
Tribal law enforcement agencies, such as our's, have been under-
resourced and under-staffed for decades. This problem is also directly
connected to the ongoing Missing and Murdered Indigenous People (MMIP)
crisis, as communities are reporting more instances of sexual abuse,
human trafficking, child abuse and domestic violence. And it creates at
least a perception of a Reservations as being a scary place of
lawlessness.
This hearing today stresses the importance of the ongoing work
Congress has in its important role in combatting drug trafficking in
Indian Country. Congress funds Foreign Countries to Protect Themselves:
we need Congress to provide funds to our First Nations to Protect
Ourselves. Our Own Homeland should be the TOP Priority for Safety.
United States Citizens need to feel and be protected throughout the
United States. Why should we be afraid in our own Country? As Congress
funds billions in federal aid to foreign countries to protect its
borders and to kill. Indian Country needs the funding to protect our
Borders in order to save Lives. Cartels threaten and kill our people.
Yet nothing is ever done about it. Especially by the FBI.
I put the blame on the drug and cartel crisis squarely on the
shoulders of the Federal Government. The FBI doesn't do anything on the
reservation unless we have a death or serious crime. If that happens
then they are only here for a short period collecting evidence! They
are reactive--not proactive. The FBI has jurisdiction over non-tribal
members, our tribal officers' hands are tied because they only have
jurisdiction over tribal members. The government knew that cartels were
moving onto the reservations but did nothing. The other government
jurisdiction that failed us is the Border Patrol. They know Mexican or
other illegal aliens are on reservations but do nothing. Our People get
harassed when they cross the Border with sacred objects even though our
border-crossing rights are supposed to be protected by the Jay-Treaty,
yet the cartel seem to be able to go right through.
Tribal law enforcement is seriously underfunded by the federal
government and by BIA. Officers lack equipment and are untrained to
handle this crisis and most importantly underfunded. In the 638-
contracting process, the federal government offered $1.2 Million
dollars to Fort Belknap to administer our own Law Enforcement in 1997,
and 27 years later in 2023 offers $1.3 Million. Other similar Tribes to
Fort Belknap, have been awarded over $5 million for Law Enforcement
Services. Due to this incredible disparity, the Fort Belknap Community
has a pending federal lawsuit against the U.S. Government due to its
breach of contract and trust responsibilities owed to our People. The
United States has trust responsibilities that is not being met in
particular FBI and border patrol.

As recent as November 2023, the Not Invisible Act Commission
Congressional Report, the Commission reported an estimate of $1.4
Billion Dollars to adequately fund Public Safety and Justice in Indian
Country. Similarly, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (USCCR)
released a report in 2018 finding that:

Federal funding for Native American programs across the
government remains grossly inadequate to meet the most basic
needs the federal government is obligated to provide. Native
American program budgets generally remain a barely perceptible
and decreasing percentage of agency budgets. Since 2003,
funding for Native American programs has mostly remained flat,
and in the few cases where there have been increases, they have
barely kept up with inflation or have actually resulted in
decreased spending power. In its annual, statutorily required
report, the BIA acknowledges that tribal police, courts, and
detention facilities are currently funded at a fraction of the
estimated need. It is further noted that: despite this
recognition, the BIA has never requested funding at levels
sufficient to meet these needs. The DOJ, meanwhile, was unable
to provide an estimate to the Commission of the need for its
programs and services.

Tribal Nations should have the authority to address crime on their
lands. Congress must take decisive action to overturn the Oliphant
decision and address the sentencing limitations of the Indian Civil
Rights Act, so that Tribes have the authority to prosecute non-Indians
who commit crimes within their jurisdiction and appropriately hold
offenders accountable for their crimes. We cannot continue to allow
cartels to take advantage of the holes in our justice system. I
encourage you to do everything possible to ensure we have the tools and
resources we need to keep our communities safe.

We need funding to protect our Homeland, require federal agency
coordination and cooperation, tightening of international borders, and
lastly we need Congress to fully restore Tribal Criminal Jurisdiction
in Indian Country. Congress has several Commission reports that all
seem to say the same thing: Fund Indian Country and Effectively
Coordinate Federal Resources. See:

November 1, 2023, Not One More Findings & Recommendations
of the Not Invisible Act Commission

November 2018, Broken Promises: Continuing Federal
Shortfall for Native Americans, Briefing Report to
President Trump, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights

November 2013, A Road Map for Making Native America Safer,
Indian Law and Order Commission Report to the President and
Congress of the United States

I thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions.
______

Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much. I am going to recognize the
Chairman for the Full Committee, Mr. Westerman, for his 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REP-
RESENTATIVE IN  CONGRESS FROM  THE STATE OF
ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, and thank you to
the witnesses today.
This is a hearing I didn't expect we would ever have,
talking about cartels operating in Indian Country. But just
recently we did a field hearing down in Southern Arizona, in
Cochise County, and Sheriff Mark Daniels made a statement that
was, I think, the takeaway message from that hearing when he
said that we are no longer dealing with an illegal immigration
problem, we are dealing with an organized crime problem, and an
organized crime problem that reaches from sea to shining sea,
which includes Indian Country.
I know in some other trips I have made to the border, I was
appalled to fly the Southern border in a helicopter and have
the Border Patrol point out hideouts up in the mountains where
the cartels operated with radio equipment to tell the mules or
the coyotes where the Border Patrol was operating and radioing
to them, tell them how to avoid being caught. And I thought
that is crazy that this is happening on the U.S. side of the
border, that these Mexican cartels are setting up camp on U.S.
land to run human trafficking and drug trafficking into our
country.
And it is not getting better from anything that I have
seen. As a matter of fact, Sheriff Daniels also said that the
cartels not only control the southern side of the U.S. border,
they also control the northern side of the U.S. border. So, I
think this is a very fitting hearing that we are having.
And when I ask a question, if you want to elaborate on the
extent of cartels operating in the United States, I would be
glad to hear that, as well. But President Stiffarm, your
testimony bravely depicts the ongoing threats that your tribe
experiences from the dangerous cartels that operate in your
communities. Many Americans may not be aware of the extent of
cartel presence right here in the heart of America. Can you
please describe just how devastating this problem has become
across Indian Country, and particularly in Fort Belknap
Reservation?
Mr. Stiffarm. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Westerman, and we deal with it on a daily basis, whether it is
an overdose, mental health, domestic violence, or serious
assaults.
And one thing that we really seem to overlook all the time
are the death threats we get from the cartel members. We had
the tribal leader from Montana that declined to testify here
today because he received death threats that he was going to
testify.
Why would we be afraid to live in our own country when we
are getting threats from foreign nationals from across the
border? How strong their reach is. How are they are allowed to
come into this country and to threaten and kill us in our own
backyard? That is a huge issue, not only for our tribal
membership, whether it is here or Fort Peck or Rocky Boy, but
it is you all's backyard. It is your family, your relatives,
your neighbors.
But in Fort Belknap, what little officers we do have, they
have been trying to be proactive without any help from the BIA,
without any help from the FBI, without any help from the Border
Patrol or the DEA. And we receive grant money, we have two drug
dogs, two canines that are trying to help us curb the flow of
fentanyl, methamphetamines, and we had some pretty good
seizures.
One of our biggest issues is we don't have jurisdiction
over----
Mr. Westerman. President Stiffarm, I am sorry to cut you
off, but I am on limited time here.
Mr. Stiffarm. OK.
Mr. Westerman. But you said something very profound that I
just want to make sure to get it on the record that you
testified before Congress that there are tribal members who
have been threatened with death if they come to Congress and
testify against the cartels.
Mr. Stiffarm. Yes.
Mr. Westerman. The cartels have threatened them with death
in this country.
Mr. Stiffarm. Yes, yes.
Mr. Westerman. My goodness, that might be enough just to
end the hearing right there. That is horrible, to think that an
American citizen has been threatened by a foreign cartel if
they come to Congress and testify about what that cartel is
doing on American soil.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman, and I now recognize the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Garcia, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Chairman Gosar, for the opportunity
to join this hearing, and thank you to all the witnesses,
especially the elected representatives of their Nations. I
would like to begin with my first question to Chairman Jose.
Chairman, what sort of programs and services does the
Tohono O'odham Nation currently have to help your community
deal with the addiction to illicit substances like fentanyl?
What is available? And I am referring to things like
treatment centers, outpatient centers, and those types of
services.
Mr. Jose. Well, Chairman, members of the Committee, thank
you for the question.
We have a Tohono O'odham health department. And in that
department, we have a behavioral health program. It is very
limited, in terms of maybe a clinical director and some staff
in terms of counselors and so forth. We do not have a treatment
center. We would like a treatment center. So, basically, it is
just some counseling.
Most of the stuff is referred out to Tucson or other areas,
where they are able to provide more adequate substance abuse
training or go into a treatment center because we do not have
any. So, it is very limited. We want to build, we are hoping to
build a more robust behavioral health program so we can offer
those things. Most of the time it is either culturally related
or just peer counseling to try to address the needs of our
members.
Thank you for the question.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you for that. And there isn't a treatment
center. Are there other obstacles that you currently are facing
that prevent members of the Nation from accessing these
services?
Mr. Jose. Chairman of the Committee, members of the
Committee, thank you for the question.
Yes, in a perfect world, if we had all those things that we
could, like a treatment center and so forth, you have to look
at the overall picture. Even currently in just domestic
services, we can't go down our roads. Our roads,
transportation, we have 2.8 million acres of land there. It
takes about 2 hours to drive from one end to the other, north
or south, east or west. So, we are limited on transportation,
we are limited on housing.
There are a lot of impacts that face our members there. So,
as we are attempting to address those issues, it isn't just one
thing that is needed. We are faced with various challenges to
address the behavioral health needs of the Tohono O'odham
Nation.
Mr. Garcia. Chairman, it is a vast area of land populated
with 36,000 people. And if you could, once again, because I
think you did it in your testimony, emphasize what Federal
Government support to the tribe in responding to the various
treatment needs in the community, what would that be?
Mr. Jose. Thank you for the question. And I will echo, as
well as some of the other tribal leaders here, it is that I
believe there needs to be more direct funding with tribes.
Sometimes, we get caught up in the bureaucracies, the red tape
of funding. And if there is Federal funding available, it is
usually, OK, here is a grant opportunity, you have 30 days to
apply for it, and you have to get back, and then the tribal
processes are a little bit difficult.
So, No. 1, I believe true consultation with tribes to
address those needs. Because who is better to address the needs
than the people themselves? So, when we have that consultation
and we have that direct funding, we are able to really put the
money where it works, because you can build something but if it
is not designed to address the local community, I mean, I
wouldn't come in and rearrange your house for you. I would work
with you, or I would have you rearrange your house yourself, or
build your house yourself.
So, what we need, what tribes need, again, is true
consultation, direct funding to cut out all the red tape and
the limitations that we have with the Federal challenges that
we have in expenditures and so forth. We are not asking for a
full rein. Tribes are accountable. So, with that, we want to
work together with the government.
Mr. Garcia. And in the 5 seconds I have, Chairman, does the
Nation have the capacity to deliver those services if funded
directly?
Yes, sir.
Mr. Jose. We do.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman from Illinois. The
gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Carl, is recognized for his 5
minutes.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
panel that come to speak to us. I appreciate it. I know how
valuable your time is. Let's address a pressing issue that has
been affecting our national communities as a whole.
The crisis at the border is not just about illegal
immigrants anymore. It is about the influx of dangerous
substance like fentanyl, which is creating havoc on American
lives. I know in my community I get tired of hearing of the
deaths of people that I know, or their families that I know.
Our President's failed immigration policy has turned every
community into a border community, allowing international
criminal cartels to target illegal drugs, including fentanyl,
into our nation. Most people don't realize, but this little
pack of Sweet'N Low here, that is enough fentanyl, if it was
pure fentanyl, to kill 250 grown men. It doesn't take much. And
when you start talking about seizing a pound of fentanyl, that
is a lot of death, a lot of death.
Today, we have the opportunity to hear from folks who
experience these challenges firsthand. President Biden's policy
has benefited these criminal cartels, allowing them to target
Indian Country with easy-access drug-distributing networks. The
result has been a surge in violence, crime, and drug overdose.
Mr. Stiffarm, as President of, is it Fort Belknap? Did I
pronounce that correctly? Thank you sir. Belknap Indian
community. Could you share how the crisis at the border and the
influx of dangerous drugs has specifically impacted your
community?
Mr. Stiffarm. Well, because of the lack of funding for law
enforcement, we don't have the officers to adequately patrol,
protect, and serve our community members. Our officers are
getting burnt out. Our hospitals are getting over-run with
patients that have either overdosed on fentanyl or drug
addiction or alcohol addiction. So, we are running out of
resources to combat the problem.
And with the lack of assistance from, I would say the
Federal Government, FBI and the Border Patrol, the DEA, even
the Bureau of Indian Affairs to come in and assist us in
fighting these issues that we have, we are fighting a losing
battle, and the cartels are winning, the drug dealers are
winning, and they are over-running our reservations.
And I am sure you know, Councilman Bryce Kirk has the same
issues in Fort Peck. They are our relatives and we have family
there.
So, the cartels, they either come in from Billings or they
come in from Yakima, the drugs. And they will go into the
Blackfeet Reservation, then over into Rocky Boy, into Fort
Belknap, and then over to Fort Peck. We call it along the High
Line. That is how they bring in their drugs. Each drug dealer
knows one another and each reservation. And they switch up
vehicles, they switch up places where they distribute.
And in Fort Belknap, when we know there is a drug shipment
coming in, there is a call that comes in and says somebody
jumped in a river, or says there is a car crash in a remote
part of the reservation. So, all our resources are directed to
that issue. Then in the back door, the drugs come in. And we
don't have enough manpower to fight that problem, and it is a
lack of money, a lack of resources, and a lack of help.
Mr. Carl. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Stiffarm. Thank you.
Mr. Carl. Mr. Chairman, what I am hearing here is a lack of
resources from our FBI, from all the government agencies
supporting this. Have we ever asked them to come and talk to us
and tell us what they do and how they do it? How much money is
allotted towards that?
I mean, can we not hold them responsible for actually doing
this? And if it is more money, we can focus on the money
portion, but we can't make an agency go out and do their job
unless we know what they are doing.
Dr. Gosar. Well, these are some of the reasons why I wanted
to have some type of a hearing process, particularly on the
tribes and sovereignty, to elicit what is proper that should be
given to them, how it should be accountable, and how they can
be working together with the tribes.
Mr. Carl. Well, I highly encourage that we bring them to
the table and start asking these questions.
Ms. Stansbury. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Carl. I do, I yield.
Ms. Stansbury. So, just to answer this last question, both
the Homeland Security and the Oversight Committee have held
extensive investigations and recorded interviews with Border
Patrol, FBI, and others to help answer these questions. And
those records are available.
And what we have heard over and over again, including from
all five chiefs of Border Patrol, is they need more resources,
which is why the supplemental that was put before the Senate
and is sitting here in the House waiting to be passed is asking
for more Border Patrol agents.
Mr. Carl. But they are asking more for processing people,
not for actually, the enforcement side.
Ms. Stansbury. But to answer the specific question,
numerous committees have actually spoken directly to the law
enforcement agencies. So, yes.
Mr. Carl. I would like to ask them those questions myself,
though.
Thank you. I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. OK, I thank the gentleman from Alabama. The
gentlewoman from Illinois, Mrs. Ramirez, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Ramirez. Good morning, and I thank the Subcommittee
for allowing me to participate in today's hearing.
Ms. Vaughan, I know we have met in Homeland Security
before, so it is good to see you again. I want to start with
you, and I wanted to ask you a question. Do you believe in the
great replacement theory? Yes or no.
Ms. Vaughan. I don't know what that is. Can you explain it?
Mrs. Ramirez. Yes, sure. The great replacement theory is a
White supremacist conspiracy theory that perpetrates the
racist, xenophobic, nativist, Islamophobic, and anti-Semitic
falsehood that non-White immigrants are being brought into the
United States and other Western countries to repopulate
majority White countries and disempower White voters to achieve
a political agenda, and to specifically bring upon the genocide
of White people. Central to that theory is the idea that non-
White people are invading the United States.
Ms. Vaughan, you have used----
Ms. Vaughan. No, I do not believe in that.
Mrs. Ramirez. OK, well, thank you for your response.
Ms. Vaughan. I would reject that.
Mrs. Ramirez. You have used invasion rhetoric in discussing
immigration multiple times.
Ms. Vaughan. Excuse me? Can you give me an example of when
I have done that?
Mrs. Ramirez. I am speaking. When I ask you a question, you
can go ahead and answer. I am actually speaking now.
Ms. Vaughan. OK, I just----
Mrs. Ramirez. Ma'am, I am going to continue with my
remarks. A number of times I have heard you use the words
``invasion,'' and----
Ms. Vaughan. When? I don't use that term. That is not
appropriate to the discussion.
Mrs. Ramirez. It is not appropriate. It is not appropriate
but it has been used.
Ms. Vaughan. I don't see how you can attribute that to me--
--
Mrs. Ramirez. Ma'am, I am going to reclaim my time. This is
my time.
Ms. Vaughan. Well, you are putting words in my mouth.
Mrs. Ramirez. I am reclaiming my time.
Dr. Gosar. Let's get back to the decorum of the House,
please.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you. You may be aware that there is
considerable evidence linking great replacement theory rhetoric
with mass murders, including the targeting of the Latino
community.
Ms. Vaughan. I am not aware of that evidence.
Mrs. Ramirez. Ma'am, I am now talking to all of us.
Ms. Vaughan. Well, you are talking to me.
Mrs. Ramirez. I am going to reclaim my time.
Sir?
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Vaughan, if you will, just let her finish
her questions. We will make sure you get ample time to rebut.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you. We have heard, including the
targeting of the Latino community in El Paso, Black Americans
in Buffalo, and Jews in Pittsburgh and in Poway, California,
for example. Shooters have cited this in their manifestos, and
I believe that words matter and their great replacement
rhetoric is harmful. It dehumanizes millions of people seeking
safety, protection, and refuge. It dehumanizes people like my
mother, Maria Ramirez, who crossed the border pregnant with me,
and it dehumanizes me. A dehumanizing rhetoric endangers us
all, and we must categorically condemn it.
I want to pivot, now that I have been able to give the
definition and talk a little bit more about it, to focus on our
time together here, which is addressing the needs of Indigenous
and tribal communities. I would like to direct my next question
to Chairman Jose.
Chairman Jose, how can the Federal Government improve
access to critical services such as health care, counseling,
shelters, and legal advocacy for individuals impacted by drug
trafficking crimes predominantly perpetrated by U.S. citizens
on tribal lands?
Mr. Jose. Thank you for the question.
How we can work, again, is like the resources that lack not
only on the Nation but in Indian Country are valuable resources
that we could utilize to build these things that are going to
help our communities.
We need to become not so much dependent on the overall
government, but we also need to do some of that work. And if we
are provided the right resources, we can build some of those
things. We can manage some of those treatment centers, to be
proactive rather than reactive.
We need to spend more funding in building schools,
libraries, and treatment centers than spending money on
building prisons, jails, and all that, because that is after
the fact. So, when we have true consultation and direct funding
resources, we can do those things. Those are the things that we
need.
And it is not just building a building. We are talking
about access in terms of housing, in terms of roads, in terms
of just basic infrastructure that we can do. It is different on
reservations because of the lack of infrastructure. So, I
believe that, in order to address those issues, we need to work
together. We need to figure out a system that is not going to
block tribal communities from advancing and addressing the
issues that it has.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman. I, for one, hope that we
don't pit migrants seeking asylum and tribal communities in our
nation. We have an obligation for both communities to ensure
that our words build instead of break, and that our actions
affirm the self-determination, safe, healthy, and vibrant
community. So, thank you for your response.
I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Vaughan, would you like some time to
respond? I know you were attacked, so I will let you respond.
Ms. Vaughan. Yes. The implications about me and my
organization and our work are completely wrong. We reject the
ideas that she was attributing to us, and I find this to be a
distraction in a discussion of a really serious public policy
problem, public safety problem that certainly is very serious
to the representatives of Indian Country here and a distraction
from that.
We need to be able to face these issues without name-
calling or maligning of motives.
Dr. Gosar. I thank you. I am going to now yield to Mr.
Collins, the Vice Chair of the Committee, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Vaughan, in my district, the 10th District of Georgia,
we had a very horrific murder a few weeks ago at the University
of Georgia with Laken Riley, and it was committed. Ibarra is
the one that they have arrested for it. He actually started out
crossing the border illegally, was processed, let go, went to
New York City, a sanctuary city, committed a few crimes, and
decided to pack up his enterprise and come to Athens, Georgia,
where he continued that, and it escalated.
He was actually arrested for shoplifting a few days before
he committed the murder, and went from just being released on
that to being accused of committing a very heinous murder,
which is why we had the Laken Riley Act, and it passed the
House here with bipartisan support. It is sitting in the
Senate, where it should pass the Senate. It is a great bill. It
is going to give tools to law enforcement to help them contact
ICE to do their job and to give them one more tool where they
can just come in and detain and deport these people.
And I know you are an expert on immigration issues, and you
support the people that come here legally, but not the violent
criminals who want to come in and do our country and our people
harm and take advantage of this Administration's lack of
securing that border. What, in your opinion, can we do to help
stop the flow of these violent criminal cartels that are coming
in and increasing drug dependency and literally murdering and
harming American citizens?
Ms. Vaughan. Thank you for the question.
There are a number of things that can be done to address
this problem, and many of them are within the realm of the
President's authorities for executive action, for example, to
resume construction of the border barriers which do help in
areas where they can be patrolled. It is not appropriate all
across the border, but it is very helpful at preventing, for
example, cartels from moving huge packages of illicit drugs or
other contraband through with impunity, and it adds response
time for the Border Patrol.
Mr. Collins. Thank you.
Ms. Vaughan. But, really, the biggest factor is ending the
catch-and-release policies that are providing the motivation
for people around the world to turn themselves and their life
savings over to a criminal smuggling organization because they
know that the chances are huge that they are going to be
released and allowed to stay here indefinitely. That is what is
enriching the cartels.
Mr. Collins. I think you hit the nail on the head.
Immediately what could be done is the Administration could
reinstate those eight Executive Orders that they rescinded, and
that would secure that border.
Mr. Kirk, Mr. President, Chairman, I can see it in your
face. I mean, you can see the concern, the disgust, the
determination that you have to be here to try to get something
done.
Mr. Chairman, I tell you, the Federal Government, in their
infinite wisdom, think that they can control and do everything
for everybody, when in fact the people on the side of this
aisle, we agree with local control and pushing things back down
to the local level where you make the decisions.
Mr. Kirk, I wanted to just go real quickly because I am
running out of time. While the Laken Riley Act is not going to
prevent and solve the immigration problem, it is going to help
with tools. I have small counties in my district, and we are
facing the same thing, over a death a month, less than 15,000
people, while it is not as vast as your area.
And I was also at Cochise County. CBP does a great job.
Where the failure is is at the top of the ticket, and that is
Mayorkas. Somebody needs to be held accountable, Mr. Chairman.
That is why we impeached the man, and that is why he needs to
be held on trial over in the Senate so that the American people
will understand exactly what is happening in that Department.
Because you have people that really want to do their job, but
he is holding them back.
Mr. Kirk, in your opinion, could you explain what is
happening to the youth in Fort Peck Reservation, and what could
be done to help protect those youth?
Mr. Kirk. Thank you for the question. What can be done more
right now, suicide is at a high rate. We have kids that don't
have anything to turn to. What else do they turn to besides
seeing generations before them turn to drugs?
I like what you said. That Act contacts ICE to do their
job. You said that perfectly. But when is somebody going to
contact FBI, BIA, and IHS, and tell them to do their job also?
Like you said, you are going to have them sit in front of
you. And I guarantee you what we are saying to you and what
they are going to say are two totally different things, because
they truly don't know what is going on in the ground when it
comes to Indian Country. Mental health services, things for our
kids need to happen. And if we want to save this generation of
youth, we need help with behavioral health services, mental
health services, better education, better things to do in our
communities. And we just need help.
Mr. Collins. Amen, brother.
Mr. Kirk. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. Mr. Chairman, before I yield back, he is
making our case for why we need to get rid of Alejandro
Mayorkas. He is the head of that ticket, and that agency is not
doing their job. With that, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman from Georgia. The
gentleman from Montana, Mr. Rosendale, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Chairman Gosar, and
thank you very much for holding this hearing.
The impact of international cartels on my home state,
particularly the tribes in my district, is immeasurable. We are
witnessing a distressing surge in addiction and crime reaching
unprecedented levels in the Treasure State.
I want to acknowledge President Stiffarm and Mr. Kirk for
making this long journey here to our nation's capital to share
their insights and firsthand experiences regarding this
alarming trend.
The escalation of addiction, crime, and the loss of lives
in recent years is intolerable, and I hope that this hearing
will light a fire under our Federal agencies to take meaningful
action against the cartels which continue to inflict harm in
our state and in our reservations.
Moreover, I hope this hearing will be a wake-up call to my
colleagues across the aisle, helping them to recognize the
unconscionable effects of President Biden's open border
policies. These policies have clearly not only impacted border
communities, but are felt across the entire nation.
President Stiffarm, it is great to see you again, and thank
you very much for attending.
And Mr. Kirk, congratulations on 12 years of sobriety. I am
very proud of you.
President Stiffarm, could you provide your insights into
the number of drug-related incidents your officers and Federal
agencies encountered in Fort Belknap in 2023?
Mr. Stiffarm. Thank you for the question. And I don't have
the exact numbers in front of me, but these officers, they
encounter pretty much on a daily basis. And the remoteness of
our Reservation and the access to get into the remote areas is
pretty easy for these cartels to come through. There are back
roads from the Rocky Boy Reservation to Fort Belknap, and that
is one of the routes they take, and that is why I am so
disappointed in the FBI and the Border Patrol for not assisting
the tribes and trying to combat these drug issues that we have.
And, more importantly, one of the issues that we really
address is we don't have criminal jurisdiction over any of
these people that bring in these drugs over non-members, even
cartel members. We don't have criminal jurisdiction over them,
so our hands are tied. If we do catch any of these people and
we call for the Border Patrol or the FBI, officers have to sit
there probably a few hours for them to get on the scene to even
do anything.
And the cartel knows this. That is why they come here. That
is why they come to our home.
Mr. Rosendale. So, if you don't have those numbers, do you
have any kind of estimate on what type of increase that you
have seen on this type of activity over the last couple, 3
years?
Mr. Stiffarm. Well, the increase is mostly in the fentanyl.
And we had methamphetamine there for quite a while, and then
they are bringing in fentanyl, which is a lot easier and a lot
more expensive. Like Councilman Kirk said, down in the Southern
border, it is pennies on a dollar, but you get up into Montana,
it is $100 a pill sometimes, but they bring it in for the
money. They bring it in because they can hide, they blend in
easily. So, they bring in a lot of that fentanyl.
We almost had an overdose on an employee right on a work
site, so they are bringing it in to our staff. And if you are
not a user, and they want you to be a user, they will spike
your drink with it and get you hooked that way also.
Mr. Rosendale. Recently, a Lodge Grass woman was sentenced
to 24 years in prison for intent to distribute meth and
conspiracy to commit money laundering involving activities in
both the Crow Reservation and Fort Belknap, among other areas.
What steps is the Tribe taking to prevent tribal members from
being exploited by these dangerous cartels for the drug
trafficking operations?
Mr. Stiffarm. Well, we didn't really have any opportunity
to take any steps because of the lack of funding. We are trying
to just enforce it and prevent it.
The only steps that we probably would have is, we have the
CDC, which is always underfunded, and the social services
program is always underfunded. It is basically the lack of
funding that is preventing us from doing anything in our Indian
Country.
And our law enforcement is a 638 contract with the BIA. We
took that over in 1997, and the base funding is $1.2 million.
In 2023, our base funding is $1.3 million. It increased
$100,000 in 20-plus years.
Mr. Rosendale. I want to squeeze one more question in,
President Stiffarm, before I lose my time. Do you believe the
FBI is adequately prioritizing efforts to prevent and prosecute
such illicit activities on our reservations and the surrounding
areas?
Mr. Stiffarm. No, they don't.
Mr. Rosendale. OK. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I yield
back. And, again, thank you so much for attending.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman from Montana. The
gentlewoman from Wyoming is now recognized for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. First of all, I want to acknowledge your
bravery in coming here today. And Mr. Stiffarm, it is truly
stunning to hear that our tribal members are being threatened
by the cartels for testifying before Congress. That is
something that needs to be addressed. And I think one of the
things that should come out of this hearing is that we contact
the FBI and find out exactly what they are doing to make sure
that we can protect our tribal members from such unlawful
conduct.
Mr. Kirk and Mr. Stiffarm, Chairman Jose, thank you for
being here. As the Representative of the state of Wyoming with
the Northern Arapaho and Eastern Shoshone Tribes, listening to
your testimony is sadly all too familiar. Our two tribes both
reside on the Wind River Reservation. And much like your
situations in Montana, our reservation covers 2.2 million acres
that are very remote with a dispersed population. The
Reservation relies on the BIA Wind River Agency for law
enforcement, which has just 32 officers dedicated to the
region.
While the drug crisis is unfortunately not new to Wind
River, dating back to at least the early 2000s, the situation
has only worsened with the crisis at the Southern border and
the presence of cartels and new drugs in our communities. I
have now visited the border three times. I have been to the
Yuma sector, I have been to Eagle Pass, Texas, and I have been
in the area around Tucson. And to say that this is a crisis is
actually an understatement of what we are seeing. It is a
catastrophe that we are going to suffer and struggle through
for decades to come, not only because of what we are dealing
with right now, but what our children and our grandchildren are
going to deal with with the cartels, the human trafficking, the
drug smuggling that is coming into our country.
I also have the honor of serving as the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Indian and Insular Affairs. And in this
position, we have held hearings on the barriers tribal law
enforcement face in promoting safe tribal communities and
stories which are similar to the challenges we have heard here
today. I appreciate your passion for protecting your
communities.
The facts are that the FBI, the BIA, and the IHS have
failed your communities. They continue to fail your
communities, and the crisis on the border is only making it
worse. Something has to change, and someone needs to be held
accountable for what they are doing to our tribal communities,
what they are doing to our youth, what they are doing to our
citizens, what they are doing to everyone in this country.
Mr. Kirk, in your testimony you stated that, ``There is no
doubt that the Mexican drug cartels are playing a major role in
this crisis.'' You speak with such certainty because this is
something that is well known in Indian Country. Would you
please describe what you have personally witnessed in terms of
cartel activity on your reservation?
Mr. Kirk. So, the things that happen that get sent in the
mail. I go back to that. No longer is it people transporting
anything when it comes. A lot do get transported, a lot does
come on the trains.
When you say the effects, you just see the families, you
see the brokenness, you see everything, the loss of happiness
anymore. You see the lack of excitedness to actually go out and
make a dollar, to actually go out and feed your family, to
actually go out and do those things that we are accustomed to.
One of the biggest things that you see is once somebody has
100 pills, people have a habit of 25 pills a day. And you think
about that. How do you get $2,500 a day to pick up that habit?
They are a front man, and that is all they have is front people
over and over and over again. And they utilize these guys and
get deeper and deeper in debt. And if nothing happens, then
they are held accountable.
One thing is that they come in and harm these people. They
come in and beat them because they have a debt with them. So, I
invite you to come out to the reservation in Fort Peck, and you
can see the boarded-up houses. You could see the things on
reservations that you won't see here in Washington, DC.
Ms. Hageman. I would like to do that.
Mr. Kirk. And you can see the ravaging that is going on on
our reservations because nobody should ever, ever have to do
that. And with your guys' help, we can get the right resources
to help our people.
Ms. Hageman. We want to help you. And I think that one of
the things that worries me the most about this and the crisis
that has been created over the last 3 years with the human
trafficking and the drug smuggling and the impact on our
reservations is the trauma for our young people and the trauma
that they are witnessing, watching their parents be consumed by
the addiction, and the slavery associated with that addiction,
and being beholden to the cartels because of those addictions.
I am horrified by what you have described today, and I am
absolutely furious with our Federal agencies for refusing to
acknowledge and address the crisis on the border and what it is
doing to the interior of our country, and most specifically,
what it is doing to Indian Country. I am sorry for their
failures. We are trying to hold them accountable. I will come
to your reservation. I want to see what you are talking about
because we have to fix it.
Mr. Kirk. If I may respond, last week we had a meeting, a
Rocky Mountain Tribal Leaders Council meeting. The IHS Regional
Director was there telling us they have $50 million in
carryover funds that they are just holding. So, we are asking
as tribes, ``Give them to us so we can start treatment centers,
give them to us so we can start helping our people. What are
they earmarked for? How many does each tribe have?''
Do you know what the Regional Director said? ``I don't
know.'' Fifty million dollars sitting there. They come and ask
you guys for more money for us, you guys turn us down. Why?
Because if you guys see somebody that can't spend $50 million,
how can you guys bipartisanly come together and say that we
need more money?
Every time we go to the region, every time we go to these
places, it falls on deaf ears, and we need help. We need you
guys to hold these people accountable. That is what it is going
to take, is for somebody to finally hold the government
accountable to their trust and treaty obligations to us as
tribes to finally get those funds that are sitting there, get
them out to the tribes so we can actually help our
reservations. Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentlewoman. That is one of my big
things, is that I think it is high time that we get all the
tribes together for a symposium with Congress, and talk about
sovereignty, and talk about what the treaty obligations are, so
that we come out with one voice. It seems like we are always
divided. So, that would be my case in point.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, everyone on
the panel, for showing up today.
I am proud to represent over half the tribes in Arizona.
When I come and I listen to your stories, and I apologize for
coming in late, I was at a Homeland Security hearing before
this hearing, it just illuminates to me the reality that this
wide-open border crisis that we have, it affects everybody,
whether you live in Tucson, Flagstaff, whether you live on a
reservation, it really doesn't matter.
Ms. Vaughan, you mentioned in your testimony the Biden
administration's irresponsible immigration policies have caused
incalculable harm to those in Indian Country. Can you please
elaborate on that a little bit?
Ms. Vaughan. Well, some parts of the country are saddled
with the burdens of sheltering and providing schooling and
health care to the migrants who have been allowed to come in
here. But the situation is different in Indian Country because
of the way that the Mexican cartels in particular have targeted
Indian Country to expand their drug distribution networks and
profit from it to an extent that is much greater than in other
parts of the country, where they are in competition with other
drug distributors and so on.
It is really horrifying to me to hear that the tribal
leaders have received death threats for even talking about
coming to speak to Congress about it.
And it is for the reasons that have been discussed today
because of some of the things unique to Indian Country with
jurisdiction of law enforcement, the remoteness of it, the
vulnerability of the population, and I think that is why these
issues deserve special attention from Congress. And there is a
lot that you can do about this. There is a lot the President
could do, too. But that is why this is so important to have
this hearing.
Mr. Crane. Ms. Vaughan, if the President was here today,
what would you tell him?
Ms. Vaughan. I would ask him what possible motivation
justifies the human tragedy that has been experienced in Indian
Country and other parts of the country, the cost to taxpayers,
the damage to the integrity of our legal immigration system and
our sovereignty. What possibly could be worth all that cost and
loss to our country?
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
President Stiffarm, have you noticed a difference in the
last couple of years with what you have experienced in your
community?
Mr. Stiffarm. As far as the drug cartels?
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Stiffarm. Yes, I have. Billings is probably about a
3\1/2\- or 3-hour drive south of us, and that is normally where
we go do our shopping. And you see them there and you see them
coming up into our area. I say it is, like, disguised as
construction workers or laborers, and they come to the border
towns of the reservation and set up shop, and then eventually
they will find a mate on the reservation and move in.
And it is pretty scary when we get threats when we are
going to speak about them. But we have to think of not my
future or anybody else's future, we have to think of our
children's future, our babies, and the ones that have not been
born yet, brought into this world. That is why we come and
speak in front of you all is to try to protect their future,
not ours. It is too late for ours because they are already
here. But we are looking down the road and how we want to raise
our babies in that type of atmosphere where they are allowed to
come in unchecked.
And then, most importantly, we don't have jurisdiction over
them. In the first place, if we do catch them, what are we
going to do, sit there and visit with them and shoot the
breeze, take them to the border, our reservation border, where
they are going to turn around and come right back on? Our hands
are tied, seriously tied with the jurisdictional issues and
lack of funding and training.
Thank you for the question.
Mr. Crane. What would you tell President Biden and
Secretary Mayorkas if they were here today, sir?
Mr. Stiffarm. I would tell them, to me it seems like they
are more concerned about the immigrants coming across our
border than concerned about what they are doing here once they
get here, concerned about their own citizens of this country.
And then, to me, more importantly, the first people of this
country where they are coming into.
Mr. Crane. Yes. What about you, Mr. Kirk? What would you
tell our leadership if they were sitting here today?
Mr. Kirk. Start looking inward instead of outward. Start
worrying about the fight here for us trying to save our people,
and stop looking to save others when all we are trying to do is
save our people, too. Start looking for direct funding, and
start fighting more on issues here in the United States than
you are fighting for issues that have nothing to do with us.
Thank you.
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Gosar. I thank the gentleman from Arizona. The
gentlewoman from New Mexico, our next-door neighbor, Ms.
Stansbury, the Ranking Member, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, thank
you all for testifying today.
President Stiffarm, I want to say thank you for bringing
that stack of reports that is sitting next to you. One of the
things that has been very frustrating for me during this
hearing and during my time serving in Congress, I have been
serving for the last 2\1/2\ years. I actually am a former
staffer, and I actually worked at OMB when the Broken Promises
report was being worked on by the Civil Rights Commission, and
tribal leaders from across the country weighed in through
consultation meetings.
That report that is sitting right next to the President is
one of the most extensive studies of what is happening around
behavioral health, the fentanyl crisis, the crisis around
policing in our tribes. And you know what that report reveals?
This is not a new crisis.
This is because of our history and the interactions between
the U.S. Government and Tribal Nations, and the failure to
recognize the sovereignty and the rights of our tribes. It is
the failure of the Federal Government to appropriately fund
agencies. It is the failure of the Federal Government to make
sure those funds are actually transferred once they are
appropriated. And it is the failure of our communities and
helping to support our Tribal Nations so that they can address
these issues on the ground in the manner in which each of these
Nations feel is appropriate for their own people. This is not a
new crisis. It is all right there in the report.
And I have to tell you that part of why I ran for Congress
as a former staffer is because I sat through hearings like this
in the Senate, and I sat watching hearings during the former
Administrations, and I watched as politician after politician
has gotten up on daises like this and held hearings like this
and said, oh, I am so sorry, we should address this crisis, but
then actually wouldn't do anything because it is just political
theater.
And I think it is important that we recognize that actually
what is happening in Congress this week, just to pull back the
curtain a little bit, is that the GOP is trying to impeach
Secretary Mayorkas.
I want to note that not a single one of our witnesses today
brought up Secretary Mayorkas. Right? They brought up the BIA,
they brought up funding, and they said, hey, we need resources
to address this crisis on the ground. It is generational. It
has been going on regardless of administration.
There is trauma in our communities. There are a lack of
resources in our communities. There is a growing cartel problem
in Mexico that is infiltrating our communities regardless of
administration. We do need accountability of these agencies,
but what we don't need is a bunch of political theater bringing
people into our chambers to tell their stories just so you can
go out there and talk to Fox News and make your point. These
are people's real lives. We have studied these issues for
years. We know what the solutions are.
And I don't mean to seem so strident about it, but I find
it disgusting. I find it frustrating. It is why I ran for
office, because I am sick of politicians just coming in front
of people and saying, oh, we will fix the problem, and then
they go and do their political theater.
So, you all came here to share your stories, and I want to
use the rest of my time to ask each of the three tribal leaders
who are here, please tell us what we can meaningfully do to
help address the law enforcement and the behavioral health
crises in your communities. And if we can start with Mr. Jose.
Mr. Jose. Chairman Gosar, Ranking Member Stansbury, members
of the Committee, what we can do is, you kind of hit on that. I
think we need to put aside all the differences between
political parties--race, color, creed, religion--and fix the
human problem, fix the human problem on how we are going to
address these issues. It isn't about color of skin. It isn't
about religion. It is about the epidemic that has been
generational.
The Tohono O'odham Nation has always been hospitable
people. We have always looked at welcoming people. We have been
doing this since time immemorial, and we need to work together.
We need to work together.
The Federal Government creates laws, but they don't follow
their own laws. They don't follow their own mandates, but yet
hold other people accountable to follow them. We need to follow
those laws. If that is the law of the country, then we should
follow it. We should be responsible for those things. How can
we fix it? Let's have true communication about addressing the
issue at hand.
On border issues? Those drugs, those things are coming
through the Tohono O'odham Nation. They are not intended for
the Tohono O'odham Nation. They are intended for the cities and
towns of America and other reservations, as well.
This migrant issue is bigger than the United States and
bigger than Mexico. This is a world issue. So, we really want
to talk about what can we do? Let's take a look at the issues
and find out that American's hands are in other places that we
can't even imagine. That is why we are facing these negative
impacts here in what they call the United States of America.
And the only way we are going to address those is a true
collaboration about building bridges of hope, building bridges
of opportunity, and not building walls. Thank you.
Ms. Stansbury. Absolutely, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, would you be open to allowing the other
leaders to use time?
Dr. Gosar. Go, yes.
Ms. Stansbury. Mr. Kirk?
Mr. Kirk. Most definitely. The biggest thing is working
together. You know, we are all voted into a place to work
together for the betterment of the United States of America,
for us, the betterment of our tribe. That is what we do.
What can you guys do? I will keep continuing to say it:
direct funding, direct funding to tribes. That is what we need.
Take the red tape out of everything and let us finally operate
how we know how to operate when it comes to our reservation and
our people. Money, I will keep saying it, gets sent overseas
with no red tape, with no nothing. Here, spend it the way you
want. Buy what you want to do. But yet here, as tribes, with
our treaties and our trust obligations, we have to follow all
the red tape in the world.
The biggest thing is whatever you believe in, no matter
what you do, you are all supposed to put that first. Whether it
is Creator, whether it is God, you put God first, you put
Creator first. You do it because it is for your people. And
that is what it is about. You know, I am thankful for where I
am at because if it wasn't for God putting me where I am at
today, I wouldn't be here today.
And I have an obligation to get along, to do my best for
the people, and that is what you have to do is work together,
set aside all the differences, because in the end, when we are
all gone and we are dust, what is it going to matter? What is
going to mean more today, listening to us and going out to
these doors and making a difference and giving the tribes
direct funding without this red tape to finally see tribes
succeed?
Stop putting us in bills with all these other people and
all these other things, and trying to throw us as a pawn in
these different kind of spaces. Just let us show you what we
can do. Hold to those trust and treaty responsibilities. Hold
to those that got signed. They are still there. Work together
for the betterment of what you guys are trying to do.
And, again, like the Chairman said, it is not about color.
It is not about race. It is not about nothing. It is about
working for the betterment of the people. And if you guys can
do something, direct funding to tribes, give us our
jurisdiction back, and let us show that we are not what people
think we are. We are strong, we are resilient, and we will
continue to be resilient moving forward. And we are going to
win, no matter what people say about us. Thank you.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you.
President?
Mr. Stiffarm. Thank you for your giving us the opportunity
to speak on what we need and what our issues are.
To me, we have all these Federal programs that are supposed
to oversee and protect the communities, reservations, the
people, which I am speaking about the FBI, the Border Patrol,
and the BIA. But what I see and I experience personally and I
saw with my own eyes is the lack of compassion of these people
that serve us. They don't care. It is just a job to them such
as, like, a construction worker building a house. They don't
put any love behind their work. Neither does the FBI. Neither
does even the BIA.
That is what is so frustrating with me is with the BIA.
They have tribal members running these programs, whether it is
from other tribes or not, but they still don't care about the
people that they serve. They don't. And we have a hard time
getting, they call it technical assistance, when we need help
from the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
We had an officer-involved shooting on Fort Belknap a
couple of years ago, and we asked for technical assistance with
the police officers because at that time we only had four
officers to cover. You know what they sent us? One officer for
3 days. What is wrong with that picture, that they are supposed
to be serving you and helping you, and they send one officer
for 3 days and then say that is all they can do.
And then they come in and they review your program. In
particular, what I know a lot about is the law enforcement.
They review your program, you fail your review, and we fail
year after year. And the reason why we fail is a lack of
funding. And like I explained to you all, our base funding
increased $100,000 in 20-plus years in law enforcement. They
don't care.
And I don't know how you can fix that problem. Like I said
before, I asked the FBI agents that cover Fort Belknap and
Rocky Boy, and I asked them, ``Do you know what tribes you are
serving?'' They don't know that. They don't even know that.
That is because they don't care.
That is a hard issue for me and a hard pill to swallow,
because I am watching our children grow up into this. I am
watching our babies and what it is going to be when they get to
our age, and what kind of life they are going to have. And that
is what we need to really think about is our children, and then
protecting our elders, our past, our stories. That is what our
elders are.
I thank you for your time. And I really hate talking about
the BIA, the FBI, and the Border Patrol that way, but I guess
the truth is the truth. And if I can't come in front of you and
tell you how it is and how we are living, then I shouldn't be
sitting in front of you all.
And the people that threatened us because of what we are
saying and how we are trying to protect our own people, so be
it. I would rather sacrifice myself than sacrifice the rest of
the people, and especially the unprotected back home. But I
want to thank you for your time.
Ms. Stansbury. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. You are certainly welcome.
Ms. Vaughan, would you agree with this comment? Good
process builds good policy builds good politics.
Let me say it slowly. Good process builds good policy
builds good politics.
Ms. Vaughan. I think, yes, that could happen. But I think
maybe what that statement means is that, if lawmakers do the
right thing using the right process, then they will be
successful politically because voters support that.
Dr. Gosar. Well, I think it is obvious. We have been
nibbling at this edge, and I am coming back to Mr. Kirk because
he keeps saying it over and over again: ``Give us control.''
I have lived with tribes my whole life, whether it be in
Wyoming, where I went to school at Creighton, and I have
represented Eli's district, as well, in Arizona, I have the
CRIT. And I see this fundamental aspect from the tribes of not
trusting the government. And why should you?
But once again, that good process gets you that policy that
you need. That is why I keep screaming this over and over
again. We have to get the tribes all together and have this
conversation about what is expected because what it does is it
draws everybody into that process. So, I think we are nibbling
at the edges. I think we just need to get to it, and I think
the tribal members have actually said it very clearly: ``Give
us that jurisdictional--give the money directly to us. Hold us
accountable. We will show you what we can do.''
And that is what we are debating about today, on this FISA
reform. We have an out-of-control FBI. We have no personal
space. It is all being taken up. It is wrong. That warrant is a
reason. There is a reason there is a warrant. There is a reason
why there is a warrant.
And I go back to what China, they were having this fight
in, what is the big city in China?
Voice. Beijing?
Dr. Gosar. No, no, Hong Kong. And this reporter looks at
this young Hong Kong resident and says, ``Listen, wouldn't you
want safety instead of freedom?''
She said, ``No, I want freedom.''
So, I also believe that you have to have the tools.
President Stiffarm, what is the prevalence of Narcan on your
reservation? Is it easily, readily available or not?
Mr. Stiffarm. It is not easily or readily available within
Fort Belknap, no.
Dr. Gosar. And can you tell me the presence of crank on
your reservation, as well?
Mr. Stiffarm. You can go into your local convenience store
and buy a pack of smokes. You can go on the street and buy
methamphetamine or fentanyl just as easily.
Dr. Gosar. Chairman Jose, I know a little bit about your
reservation. Part of your reservation is in Mexico, and it is
not even acknowledged by Mexico. What kind of a problem does
that create for you?
Mr. Jose. Chairman Gosar, members of the Committee, it
creates a really difficult situation because, as I mentioned,
our families are divided. I mean, I can't even publicly speak
about what is going on in Mexico that our members face, so
really addressing the issue at hand, like I mentioned before,
it is not only a U.S.-Mexico thing, but we are caught in the
middle of it. Our people are caught in the middle of it. And we
have to deal with not only in Mexico but in the United States,
as well.
But here is the concern, Chairman, we should be allies, we
should be working together, but it seems that the systems put
us against each other when we should really be working together
to address those issues. So, it is a really difficult situation
in Mexico. Right now, we can't even go to some of the
communities because of what is going on just south of the
border in terms of that. So, it is a very terrible situation,
Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. It is.
Mr. Kirk, I want you to address the targeting of the
cartels of young Indian women, because I think this is
atrocious in regards to the trafficking. And we have seen the
loss of these women, the unidentified Indian women that have
been lost. Can you address that for us, please?
Mr. Kirk. When it comes to cartels, you mean?
Dr. Gosar. Yes.
Mr. Kirk. The biggest thing is that, like I shared with
them getting trafficked to North Dakota, is they don't have
anything and they see these drugs and these people and
everything as, all right, I am going to make some money, or I
am going to finally have something. They look for a sense of
security in something that is wrong. And these guys bring a
false security. They bring false money.
But to the people that have nothing, and we haven't had
anything for years, that little bit means something to
somebody. When they see families and stuff that have nothing,
and these kids grow up in nothing, and they see somebody as a
cartel member, whoever it may be, that are bringing the drugs
in, they see those people as a security, and that is why they
hold on and latch on because of the money and the drugs that
are there.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Vaughan, I will come back to you. You made a
comment, and we had an exchange here a little bit, and I want
to ask you. Under this current Administration, it seems like we
have a hard time even taking care of our own people. You can't
take care of the world until you take care of your own. Tell me
why you see this illegal immigration aspect as being a big
problem.
Ms. Vaughan. Well, it is a big problem on so many levels.
Immigration law is not some obsolete law that doesn't deserve
to be enforced anymore. Very fundamentally, it takes away
opportunities for Americans and legal immigrants to support
themselves because the reason that most of these----
Ms. Stansbury. I am so sorry, Mr. Chairman, you are over
time, and this is outside the scope of this hearing. This
hearing is about the fentanyl crisis in Indian Country.
Dr. Gosar. Excuse me, I will strike that from the record
because I gave you plenty of time. I am just starting my second
time frame.
Ms. Stansbury. But what----
Dr. Gosar. You went through one and a whole other----
Ms. Stansbury. But what is the relevance?
Dr. Gosar. It is my time. It is my time.
Ms. Vaughan. I can explain the relevance.
Dr. Gosar. Yes, I can, too. Go ahead.
Ms. Vaughan. The main reason most of the people who are
crossing the border illegally are coming is because they
believe that they will be released into the country and allowed
to work here without facing any threat of enforcement for an
indefinite period.
One of the ways people have arrangements with the cartels
is to pay just a downpayment on their smuggling fee, which runs
into thousands of dollars. And then, after they are here, they
enter what is essentially a debt bondage arrangement with the
cartels to pay off their smuggling debt. So, people end up in,
essentially, labor trafficking situations, sometimes working
directly for the cartels either as drug mules or as employees
in some of their operations. And this is one of the ways that
the cartels enrich themselves through not only drug
trafficking, but also human smuggling and debt bondage.
And that is all enabled by the open border policies that
have been put in place under the Biden administration,
primarily by DHS Secretary Mayorkas. He has been the main
architect of accomplishing this agenda for the Administration.
And the costs are not just public safety, although that is
one of the most important, but also the distortion of labor
markets that denies opportunity to Americans and legal
immigrants, and cuts off opportunities for them to support
themselves. And it is just basically the trashing of our
immigration system and the loss of public confidence in our
legal immigration system.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you. I just want to note that 4:04 or 4:06
of the second minute, I am way behind the time of the Ranking
Member. So, I just want to make sure that is noted in the
books.
Typically, I ask what was a question that you wanted asked
but wasn't asked, and what is the answer?
Mr. Kirk, we will start with you, the question that was
never asked that you wanted asked, and what was its answer.
Mr. Kirk. How can we better work together? And no
disrespect to anybody or anything, we are here to talk about
issues when it comes to Indian Country. We flew out, we paid
money, we left our families. We put ourselves here in the
forefront of this issue. And it seems like, again, as the lady
said earlier, the gentleman, right now are we going to walk out
these doors and be, like, all right, what was this for?
How do we work together? That is the question that I didn't
get from you guys is how are we going to work together. Because
right now, sitting here, it is still divided. Sitting here, are
we going to walk out these doors and get the same thing that we
have gotten over and over again that my brother has over here,
broken promises?
Again, when I first started my testimony, is it something
just to check a box off? Are we going to hold people
accountable? And for me, my answer would be it is our
obligation to each other to work together to have a
relationship together with us.
On reservations, we don't care about this stuff here
because we are fighting a different battle. We are fighting a
different monster on our reservation, Chairman, and that is the
thing, is we are put in the middle of something right now that
once something gets brought up, it is just like, wow, it is not
even an issue that is going on in Indian Country. Because why?
Because our borders have been open for years, upon years, upon
years and had, like my brother said, people preying on our
people for year after year, crisis after crisis. And it is
something that we continue to fight.
But then again, what gets held up on our end is everybody
here working together across the aisle to give us the funding
that we need to better resource our people. But, again, no
disrespect to anybody, but it is working together. What can we
do to work together? Thank you.
Dr. Gosar. I will make you the commitment that we will stay
in touch, and we will try to make something happen. As you saw
me twice with Ms. Hageman, my colleague, I have wanted this
conversation because I have said over and over again, I think
the future of this country goes through Indian Country, because
you have that sovereignty, you have that ability to dictate.
And that is not what has happened.
Mr. Kirk. No.
Dr. Gosar. I think there are plenty of opportunities coming
up here. I will make that commitment to you.
Mr. Kirk. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Gosar. Chairman Jose?
Mr. Jose. Chairman, thank you for the question. Here is the
question that wasn't asked that I would have hoped to be asked.
Chairman Verlon Jose, what kind of Federal law would you create
that every single person would follow?
I wish that question was asked to me, and I would say I
would create a Federal law that every single person will
follow, and the law would be to do away with political parties,
to do away with discrimination, to do away with all those
indifferences, and let's address the issues at hand with a
human response. Get in a room and let's talk about these
things.
I said this, Homeland Security, when Homeland Security was
created, who created this? Who created Homeland Security? Well,
the experts did. The experts never once consulted with our
experts. That is the people that live there, that is the people
that see that happening all the time. And after all these
millions and billions of dollars spent, we could have told you
that it wasn't going to work, but we were never included.
So, if we could put aside all those differences, it is not
about what I am going to get out of it or what my party is
going to get out of it, or what my tribes can get out of it, it
is about what is this nation going to get out of it. If we
created a law and everybody would follow that, I think we would
be in a better place to address it.
Right now, everyone is for their own. There is too much
division, there is too much separation. And that is why we are
missing the solutions to address the issues that we have at
hand. That would be a start. All those other things will fall
into play, like direct funding and all those other things. But
if we don't work together, that is why [speaking Native
language], together, we are stronger. Isn't that what America
was built on? Isn't that what America talks about? So, let's
live up to that.
Thank you, Chairman.
Dr. Gosar. Ms. Vaughan?
Ms. Vaughan. The question I would like to be asked is who
should be served most by our immigration policies?
And quite simply, the answer is Americans. Our immigration
policies should serve our national interest and Americans
first.
Dr. Gosar. And President Stiffarm?
Mr. Stiffarm. Thank you. I guess I would like to have been
asked, what could you all do to curb our problems that we have
on reservations. The biggest one is quit tying our hands.
It seems like to me, when we need something or want
something, we have to come here to beg. We have to beg for what
we have and what we need. But you look at Ukraine and the war
that is going on over there, they ask and they shall receive.
They receive billions of dollars for a war to kill people. And
I have said this before. And when the tribes ask for maybe
thousands of dollars or maybe a few million to save our people,
we are usually told no. And then we can't even enforce our laws
over non-members in our own country and our own land, like you
said, our own sovereignty.
So, basically, our hands are tied no matter where we go, no
matter what we do. Untie our hands. Let us help our own people.
We are not asking for a handout. We are asking for a hand up.
Dr. Gosar. Thank you very much. I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony today and the Members
for their questions.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for you, and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the Committee must
submit their questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5 p.m. on
April 15. The hearing record will be held open for 10 business
days for these responses.
If there is no further business in this Subcommittee, we
are adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Gosar

Statement for the Record
Zack Smith, Senior Legal Fellow
Manager, Supreme Court and Appellate Advocacy Program
Edwin Meese III Center for Legal and Judicial Studies
The Heritage Foundation

Introduction

My name is Zack Smith, and I appreciate the opportunity to provide
written testimony to the subcommittee.\1\ The views I express in this
testimony are my own and should not be construed as representing any
official position of The Heritage Foundation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Heritage Foundation is a public policy, research, and
educational organization recognized as exempt under section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code. It is privately supported and receives no
funds from any government at any level, nor does it perform any
government or other contract work.

Members of The Heritage Foundation staff testify as individuals
discussing their own independent research. The views expressed here are
my own and do not reflect an institutional position for The Heritage
Foundation or its board of trustees.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I currently serve as a Senior Legal Fellow in The Heritage
Foundation's Edwin Meese III Center for Legal and Judicial Studies.
Before joining Heritage, I served as an Assistant United States
Attorney in the Northern District of Florida, worked at a large law
firm here in Washington, DC, and clerked for the Honorable Emmett R.
Cox on the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit.

Introduction

The Biden Border Crisis has been an unmitigated disaster. If
someone tried to design an ideal scenario to allow human trafficking,
drug trafficking, and other criminal activities to flourish, they would
have a hard time improving on the current situation at our Southern
Border. Rather than enforcing the law, the Biden Administration has
instead abdicated its duty to do so with sad and foreseeable
consequences following.
As the title of the subcommittee's hearing makes clear, the
consequences of this border crisis aren't confined only to the border
but have spread throughout the country from the biggest urban cities to
even the most rural Indian reservations. And in fact, it is often these
latter locations that suffer the most from the Biden Border Crisis
because of the lack of qualified law enforcement personnel to serve
these communities and the jurisdictional morass that entangles those
who do serve and who seek to arrest and prosecute offenders.\2\

\2\ Zack Smith, After the Supreme Court's Oklahoma Decision, the
Rights of Accused on Tribal Land Are Up in the Air. Congress Should
Make Things Clearer, Not Less So, The Daily Signal (Aug. 5, 2020),
https://www.dailysignal.com/2020/08/05/after-the-supreme-courts-
oklahoma-decision-the-rights-of-accused-on-tribal-land-are-up-in-the-
air-congress-should-make-things-clearer-not-less-so/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ever the savvy operators, organized crime--particularly many of the
Mexican cartels--have sought to capitalize on this sad situation.
Undoubtedly, the uncertainty surrounding who can be arrested by whom
for what crimes that will then be prosecuted by which authorities, who
may or may not have the power to do so, proves to be part of the
attraction for the cartels.
While drug use and organized crime have long been problems on
reservations, these problems today have been exacerbated by the
introduction of new, powerful, and even more deadly drugs such as
fentanyl and by efforts to reform and revise tribal jurisdiction over
certain issues, individuals, and cases in the wake of several recent
U.S. Supreme Court rulings.

The Scourge of Fentanyl

As my Heritage colleague, Paul Larkin, has made clear, ``the mass
production of illicitly produced and distributed fentanyl'' is
``killing thousands of Americans today.'' \3\ It's 50-100 times more
powerful than morphine, and as Larkin notes, ``[f]or perspective,
heroin is [only] five times as powerful as morphine.'' \4\ It's also
easier and cheaper to produce and ship because it's a synthetic opioid
rather than a plant-based one like cocaine. Receiving the necessary
precursor chemicals from China, ``[t]wo of the nine Mexican drug
cartels--the Sinaloa Cartel and the Jalisco New Generation Cartel
(CJNG)--are principally responsible for manufacturing the finished
product'' and smuggling it into the United States.\5\ From there, it
spreads death and destruction wherever it goes.

\3\ Paul J. Larkin, Twenty-First century Illicit Drugs and Their
Discontents: The Scourge of Illicit Fentanyl, Leg. Mem. No. 313, The
Heritage Foundation (Nov. 1, 2022), https://www.heritage.org/crime-and-
justice/report/twenty-first-century-illicit-drugs-and-their-
discontents-the-scourge.

\4\ Id.

\5\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As one Biden-appointed U.S. Attorney recently noted in her
testimony before a Senate committee, ``Fentanyl overdoses are the
leading cause of opioid-related deaths throughout the United States,
including Indian Country.'' \6\ She added that the Justice Department
``recognizes that the widespread availability and abuse of drugs in
Indian Country, coupled with drug trafficking groups operating in
Indian Country, contribute to the high rates of crimes on reservations,
including violent crime.'' \7\ To help combat these problems, President
Biden issued an executive order stating that the ``safety and well-
being of all Native Americans is a top priority for my
Administration,'' \8\ where he noted that criminal ``jurisdiction
complexities and resource constraints have left many injustices
unaddressed.'' \9\

\6\ Oversight Hearing, ``Fentanyl in Native Communities: Federal
Perspectives on Addressing the Growing Crisis'' Before the S. Comm. On
Indian Affairs, 118th Cong. (Dec. 6, 2023) (testimony of Vanessa R.
Waldref, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of
Washington), https://www.indian.senate.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023-12-
06-HRG-Testimony-Waldref.pdf; see also 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1151 (defining
Indian country).

\7\ Id.

\8\ Exec. Order No. 14,053, Executive Order on Improving Public
Safety and Criminal Justice for Native Americans and Addressing the
Crisis of Missing or Murdered Indigenous People (Nov. 15, 2021),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/11/
15/executive-order-on-improving-public-safety-and-criminal-justice-for-
native-americans-and-addressing-the-crisis-of-missing-or-murdered-
Indigenous-people/.

\9\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But put in the larger context of his other policies, Biden's
statements ring hollow. The recruitment and retention issues plaguing
police departments around the country are also plaguing police
departments charged with patrolling and enforcing the laws in Indian
Country. And it's no wonder. In addition to being responsible for
covering vast swaths of territory, these offices would also likely be
subjected to the onerous requirements of President Biden's problematic
executive order on policing, along with facing the long-hours and low
pay other officers face too.\10\

\10\ Zack Smith, Biden's Executive Order on Policing Misses Mark,
The Daily Signal (May 27, 2022), https://www.dailysignal.com/2022/05/
27/bidens-executive-order-on-policing-misses-mark/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jurisdictional Morass in Indian Country

On top of that, imagine being on patrol, pulling over a car or
truck late at night on a deserted reservation highway, and seeing
illegal contraband--like drugs and guns--in plain view. Can the tribal
police officer search and detain the suspect if he's not a tribal
member? He can, but that wasn't clear until the Supreme Court
definitively answered the question in a 2021 decision.\11\
Jurisdictional questions like this--with real world practical
consequences--often plague those who patrol Indian Country.

\11\ United States v. Cooley, 593 U.S. ____ (2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now that the U.S. Supreme Court has perplexingly declared half of
Oklahoma to be Indian Country--with the logic of this decision
potentially extending to other territories too--the morass is more
confusing than ever before.\12\ Take, for instance, the situation in
Tulsa, Oklahoma. On July 8, 2020, the citizens of Tulsa went to bed
with their entire city firmly within the state of Oklahoma and subject
to its laws. The following day, the Supreme Court issued its decision
in McGirt v. Oklahoma, and many citizens of Tulsa went to bed with
their homes now on reservation land--subject to some mixture of state,
federal, and tribal law depending on who they are and where they are
located.\13\ While the Supreme Court has slightly softened the impacts
of this problematic precedent,\14\ local police still struggle to
enforce even basic laws based on the jurisdictional mess that's been
created and left unresolved.\15\

\12\ Zack Smith, Supreme Court Decides Half of Oklahoma Has Been an
Indian Reservation for Past 113 Years, The Daily Signal (Jul. 10,
2020), https://www.dailysignal.com/2020/07/10/supreme-court-decides-
half-of-oklahoma-has-been-an-indian-reservation-the-past-113-years/.

\13\ McGirt v. Oklahoma, 591 U.S. ____ (2020).

\14\ Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta, 597 U.S. ____ (2022).

\15\ See City of Tulsa v. Hooper, 600 U.S. ____ (2023) (statement
of Kavanaugh, J., joined by Alito, J., respecting the denial of the
application for stay).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If local and tribal police struggle to enforce basic public safety
laws because of the jumbled jurisdictional provisions, it doesn't take
much imagination to see how these provisions give cover to the cartels
and hamper legitimate law enforcement investigations into cartel-driven
organized crime efforts like human and drug trafficking operations.\16\
The urgency of the matter is hammered home when one considers that
Tulsa's police chief has made clear that the ``fentanyl crisis is huge
for us. We can do interdictions and remove kilos of this stuff [where
even 2 milligrams can prove to be a fatal dose \17\], but it doesn't
stop. It just continues to plague the community.'' \18\

\16\ Kirk Siegler, Human Trafficking Crisis in Indian Country `Like
a Pandemic,' NPR (Mar. 12, 2021) (noting that according to a South
Dakota state representative ``too many crimes are going unsolved and
perpetrators are taking advantage of the gaps between multiple
jurisdictions'' and that sometimes ``the dots aren't connected that
this is a human trafficking issue''), https://www.npr.org/2021/03/12/
976053675/human-trafficking-crisis-in-indian-country-like-a-pandemic.;
see also Dan Harris, Brian Epstein, John Carlos Frey, Evan Simon, and
Pete Madden, On Tribal Land Along US-Mexico Border, Drug and Human
Smuggling Corrupts an Ancient Culture, ABC News (May 16, 2019), https:/
/abcnews.go.com/US/tribal-land-us-mexico-border-drug-human-smuggling/
story?id=63064992.

\17\ See Larkin, supra note 3.

\18\ Tim Landes, In Conversation with Wendell Franklin: Tulsa
Police Chief on the Challenges He and His Officers are Facing, Tulsa
People (updated Mar. 29, 2024), https://www.tulsapeople.com/city-desk/
in-conversation-with-wendell-franklin-tulsa-police-chief-on-the-
challenges-he-and-his-officers/article_0c164aee-eb8c-11ee-aba5-
d7fe200012dc.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Seized Fentanyl Accounts for Only a Small Portion Being Smuggled Into
Our Country

Of course it plagues Tulsa's community--and many others too.
Consider that ABC News reported ``[t]rafficking of fentanyl appears
largely to occur at the southwest border, where 90% of the drug seized
by [U.S. Customs and Border Protection] is found. Over the past year
[2023], the agency seized more than 850% fentanyl compared to 2019 and
seized nearly as much fentanyl in fiscal year 2023 compared to the
previous year,'' according to DHS data.\19\ Consider too that this only
accounts for fentanyl found and seized by CBP. At the end of December
2023, the Biden Administration encountered more than 12,000 people
crossing the border each day.\20\ To put this context, Obama-
Administration DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson previously said that 1,000
border crossings in a single day made for a ``bad day'' that
``overwhelms the system'' and described 4,000 crossings in a single day
as a ``crisis.'' \21\ During Fiscal Year 2023, which ended on Sept.
30th of that year, Department of Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro
Mayorkas admitted that over ``600,000 people illegally made their way
into the States without being apprehended by border agents.'' \22\ It's
no wonder that fentanyl and other harmful drugs continue to flow into
our nation's cities, towns, and tribal lands virtually unabated.

\19\ Quinn Owen, Border Officials Seizing A lot of Fentanyl, but
Say It's a Complicated Problem to Solve, ABC News (Dec. 1, 2023),
https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/border-officials-seizing-lot-fentanyl-
complicated-problem-solve/story?id=105255151.

\20\ @BillMelugin_, X (Dec. 6, 2023, 2:01 PM), https://twitter.com/
BillMelugin_/status/1732475304411886028.

\21\ Id.

\22\ Alex Oliveira, Alejandro Mayorkas Admits 600,000 Illegal
`Gotaways' Crossed Border in 2023, Calls Immigration System `Broken,'
NY Post (Oct. 31, 2023), https://nypost.com/2023/10/31/news/alejandro-
mayorkas-admits-600000-illegal-gotaways-in-2023/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

The sad reality is that this crisis was avoidable. If the Biden
Administration had done its duty, secured our borders, and held
offenders accountable for their actions, reservations and other
localities wouldn't be experiencing the fentanyl crisis they currently
face, and cartels would not feel emboldened to prey on these
communities. Until the administration begins enforcing the law, the
crisis will continue.
______

Statement for the Record

Harlan Baker
The Chippewa Cree Tribe of the Rocky Boy's Indian Reservation

Two weeks ago, two members of the Chippewa Cree Tribe were shot and
killed on the Rocky Boy Indian Reservation in North Central Montana by
associates of international drug cartels. The senseless loss of these
lives is a tragedy as well as a travesty of justice, but it was also
not entirely unexpected. The forces of evil have been at work for
several years, with drug cartels strategically praying on vulnerable
tribal members and targeting Indian Country in remote areas, such as
the Rocky Boy Reservation, where law enforcement is scarce. Drug
cartels use tribal members and homes to flood Montana with fentanyl and
methamphetamine, leaving death, addiction, and broken hearts and lives
in their wake. The Tribe is desperately trying to deal with this
complicated law enforcement issue with limited resources and limited
help.

This is a reservation border security issue of utmost importance.
The crisis is worsened by several factors, including unmet Rocky Boy
law enforcement needs, inadequate tribal police training for drug and
cartel investigations, inadequate funding and training of tribal
prosecutors' offices, insufficient monitoring of drug cartel
activities, insufficient resources to protect Indian Country and tribal
peoples, decreased BIA law enforcement funding, and outdated tribal
criminal codes to appropriately address drug cartel activity.

Montana's Indian Reservations are facing this epidemic unassisted.
Our requests for help from the federal government have been ignored.
Drug cartels have the advantage of unlimited resources from their evil
drug trade, but we can't walk away from the problem. We must consider
all available solutions, including cooperative tribal criminal
jurisdiction agreements, reservation-wide checkpoints to search for
drug dealers and gang/cartel members, and other community-based and
local/state/federal strategies to thwart the continued infiltration by
drug cartels onto reservations.

We are also at a crossroads where civil rights could be
compromised. Many of the available solutions could come at the expense
of individual civil rights, such as searches of known drug dealers,
routine checks on homes with suspected drug activity, reservation bans,
disenrollment of convicted drug dealers, reservation-wide sweeps of
suspected drug dealers, police stops for out-of-state license plates.
This risk requires a thoughtful and sensitive approach, or we will
create additional challenges. The recent murders on the Rocky Boy
Reservation are a symptom of a much larger disease. The time to act is
now to collectively and decisively rid Indian Country of the evil
scourge and tremendous suffering caused by international drug cartels.
______

Submission for the Record by Rep. Stansbury

Statement for the Record

Southern Poverty Law Center

Introduction

On behalf of the Southern Poverty Law Center, we write to provide
our insights on issues discussed during the U.S. House Committee on
Natural Resources, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations April
10, 2024, hearing entitled ``Biden's Border Crisis: Examining the
Impacts of International Cartels Targeting Indian Country.'' We
appreciate the opportunity to share our expertise on the issue and one
of the witnesses called to testify. We would ask that this statement be
included as part of the Subcommittee's formal hearing record.
Established in 1971, the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) is a
nonprofit organization founded in Montgomery, Alabama, to help ensure
the promise of the Civil Rights Movement became a reality for all,
particularly for Black communities in the South, who are all too often
the victims of discriminatory policies and who experience targeted
violence at the hands of white supremacists. We work in partnership
with communities of color to dismantle white supremacy, strengthen
intersectional movements through transformative policies and
initiatives, and advance the human rights of all people.

Background

SPLC works to track, monitor, and expose organized hate and
extremism in the U.S. As part of this mission, SPLC tracks anti-
immigrant hate groups and documented 17 of these groups in 2022. One
witness invited to testify at the hearing on April 10 was Jessica
Vaughan, director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration
Studies, (CIS). SPLC designates CIS as an anti-immigrant hate group.
Based in Washington, D.C., CIS serves as one of the leading anti-
immigrant think tanks in the country. The group is known for producing
reports warning of the dangers of mass immigration and making claims of
high levels of criminality of immigrants that have been debunked
elsewhere. The group has repeatedly circulated white nationalist and
antisemitic writers in its weekly newsletter and commissioned a policy
analyst who had previously been pushed out of the conservative Heritage
Foundation for embracing racist pseudoscience.
CIS was founded in 1985 by the late John Tanton, a white
nationalist and eugenicist who is credited as the architect of the
modern-day anti-immigrant movement. Tanton sought to limit immigration
to preserve a white majority in the U.S., as revealed by a cache of his
personal memos. He founded a network of organizations to carry out his
vision by pushing anti-immigrant policies and derailing meaningful
immigration reform. He established CIS as an independent think tank to
help give legitimacy to his network's agenda.
Vaughan is a longtime staffer with CIS and has contributed to the
group's misinformation and obfuscation of the immigration debate. For
example, Vaughan often decries the humanitarian Temporary Protected
Status program, which provides relief for thousands of individuals who
have fled war-torn nations and countries dealing with natural
disasters, and falsely blamed it for an increase in crime in the U.S.
She has previously discussed her work with The American Free Press, an
antisemitic newspaper founded by noted Holocaust denier Willis Carto.
Vaughan used her remarks on April 10 to suggest that, under the
Biden administration, the U.S. border has been turned into ``a chaotic,
dangerous and seemingly lawless frontier.'' She lamented the relaxing
of draconian immigration enforcement policies implemented during the
Trump administration, like enforcement of Title 42, which was put in
place during the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, and Migrant
Protection Protocols, or the ``Remain in Mexico'' policy, which has
sent over 70,000 people seeking asylum to face dangerous conditions and
potential abuses in Mexico while they wait for their immigration court
hearings. She advocated expanding problematic 287(g) programs, which
entangle local law enforcement and federal immigration enforcement and
have been riddled with abuse, discrimination, racial profiling, and
violations of many people's constitutional rights.
One of the other harms Vaughan said to be affecting American
communities, including ``Indian Country,'' is Biden administration
efforts seeking to halt construction of the U.S.-Mexico border wall.
Some Tribal nations and leaders, however, have joined the Borderlands
Advocates coalition , along with environmental groups like the Sierra
Club, in opposing a wall, calling it an ``affront to human and civil
rights and to our vibrant border communities and borderlands.'' Some
anti-immigrant groups seek to blame environmental issues on immigrants
and migration. But as noted by Borderlands Advocates, ``[t]hese
barriers block wildlife migration, cause flooding and damage pristine
wild lands, including wildlife refuges, wilderness areas, and national
forests.'' The coalition instead advocates for comprehensive
immigration reform with a pathway to citizenship as a real way of
addressing the complex issues at the border.
During the hearing on April 10, Rep. Delia Ramirez asked Vaughan if
she believes in the racist ``great replacement'' theory, a conspiracy
narrative which claims there is an active, ongoing, and covert effort
to displace and replace white people in western nations with people of
color and non-white immigrants. Mass murderers who have carried out
violence in places like El Paso, Texas, Christchurch, New Zealand,
Buffalo, New York, and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania have cited this
conspiracy theory as inspiration for their attacks. Vaughan responded
that she was unaware of the concept. Yet, groups that operate in the
same network as CIS have long pushed anti-immigration ideas akin to the
great replacement.
Rep. Ramirez also pressed Vaughan about her repeated peddling ideas
of there being a migrant ``invasion'' happening at the U.S.-Mexico
border. This rhetoric aligns with great replacement ideas by framing
migrants and asylum seekers, most of whom are from Central and South
America, as being some kind of violent enemy which must be met with
militaristic force. Vaughan responded, ``I don't use that term, it's
not appropriate.'' But as reported by the immigration advocacy group
America's Voice, Vaughan is documented using the term ``invasion'' on
social media. For example, in 2018, she re-shared an article claiming,
``Trump has full constitutional power to stop the border invasion.''
Invasion rhetoric also appears in articles published on CIS's website.
America's Voice has documented other members of the House Committee
on Natural Resources amplifying similar ``invasion'' rhetoric.
This is not the first time Vaughan or a CIS staffer has been
invited to testify before a Congressional committee. It remains
important to highlight CIS's harsh anti-immigrant rhetoric and agenda
when they are given a prominent, prestigious platform. And while it is
fundamental within democratic principles to debate immigration policy,
dehumanizing rhetoric should play no part in that debate.
We appreciate the opportunity to submit this statement as part of
the Subcommittee's formal hearing record. For more information about
SPLC's work to ensure that our country safeguards our nation's long-
standing promise of opportunity and safety to arriving immigrants and
that immigrants are treated fairly, equally, and with dignity, please
contact Michael Lieberman, Senior Policy Counsel,

[emailprotected]
.

[all]
