- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1607, TO CLARIFY JURISDICTION WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN BUREAU OF RECLAMATION PUMPED STORAGE DEVELOPMENT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES; H.R. 3027, TO REAUTHORIZE FUNDING FOR THE RECLAMATION CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER PROGRAM, "RECLAMATION CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER PROGRAM REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2023"; AND H.R. 3675, TO AMEND THE WATER INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE NATION ACT TO EXTEND CERTAIN CONTRACT PREPAYMENT AUTHORITY, "WESTERN WATER ACCELERATED REVENUE REPAYMENT ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 1607, H.R. 3027, AND H.R. 3675

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND
ISHERIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Wednesday, June 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-525 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Tom McClintock, CA   CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR    Teresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

----------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, June 14, 2023.........................     1

Statement of Members:

Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     2
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     3

Panel I:

Boebert, Hon. Lauren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     4
Porter, Hon. Katie, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     5
Schweikert, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     6
Stanton, Hon. Greg, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona...........................................     6

Statement of Witnesses:

Panel II:

Brain, Michael, Deputy Commissioner, Bureau of Reclamation,
Washington, DC.............................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Questions submitted for the record.......................    12
Michael, Cannon, Chairman, San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water
Authority, Los Banos, California...........................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record.......................    16
Meyers, Leslie, Associate General Manager and Chief Water
Resources Executive, Salt River Project, Phoenix, Arizona..    16
Prepared statement of....................................    18

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

Submissions for the Record by Representative Huffman

Center for Biological Diversity, Statement for the Record    31
Hoopa Valley Tribe v. U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Case
No. 1:20-cv-01814-JLT-EPG..............................    32

Submission for the Record by Representatives Boebert and
Porter

National Water Resources Association, Letter dated June
13, 2023...............................................    33

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 1607, TO CLARIFY JURISDICTION WITH RESPECT
TO CERTAIN BUREAU OF RECLAMATION PUMPED STORAGE DEVELOPMENT, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES; H.R. 3027, TO REAUTHORIZE FUNDING FOR THE RECLAMATION
CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER PROGRAM, ``RECLAMATION CLIMATE CHANGE AND
WATER PROGRAM REAUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2023''; AND H.R. 3675, TO AMEND
THE WATER INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE NATION ACT TO EXTEND
CERTAIN CONTRACT PREPAYMENT AUTHORITY, ``WESTERN WATER ACCELERATED
REVENUE REPAYMENT ACT''

----------

Wednesday, June 14, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:31 p.m. in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bentz, LaMalfa, Gonzalez-Colon,
Boebert, Duarte, Hageman; Huffman, Napolitano, Hoyle, Dingell,
Gallego, and Porter.
Also present: Representatives Schweikert; and Stanton.

Mr. Bentz. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife, and
Fisheries will come to order.
Good afternoon, everyone. I want to welcome our witnesses,
Members, and our guests in the audience to today's hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and Ranking Member. I
therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from
Arizona, Mr. Schweikert, be allowed to participate in today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
We are here today to consider three legislative measures:
H.R. 1607, a bill to clarify jurisdiction with respect to
certain Bureau of Reclamation pumped storage development,
sponsored by Representative Schweikert of Arizona; H.R. 3027,
the ``Reclamation Climate Change and Water Program
Authorization Act of 2023,'' sponsored by Representative Porter
of California; and H.R. 3675, the ``Western Water Accelerated
Revenue Repayment Act,'' sponsored by Representative Boebert of
Colorado.

I now recognize myself for a 5-minute opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. Today, we are meeting to discuss the three
Bureau of Reclamation bills just mentioned.

First, H.R. 1607, introduced by Mr. Schweikert of Arizona,
which would extend the current Bureau of Reclamation withdrawal
of land from Forest Service property on the Salt River in
Arizona by a maximum of 2 miles in order to clarify
jurisdiction and facilitate the development of pumped storage
hydropower. Pumped storage hydropower utilizes two water
reservoirs at different elevations to generate power by moving
water down from one reservoir to the other through turbines.

Next, H.R. 3027, introduced by Ms. Porter of California,
would reauthorize the Bureau of Reclamation's WaterSMART Basin
Studies Program until 2033. I know Ms. Porter is aware that her
bill would require changes to ensure compliance with our floor
protocols. This includes a 7-year sunset and funding levels
equal to or less than the Fiscal Year 2023 funding levels.

Last, H.R. 3675, introduced by Mrs. Boebert of Colorado,
would extend authorities that allow Bureau of Reclamation
Project water users to prepay what they owe to the Federal
Government. This bill continues what was a program created
under the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nations
Act, which was signed into law by President Obama in 2016.

Unless specifically authorized, most Bureau of Reclamation
projects do not have the ability to make early payments to the
U.S. Treasury. More than 80 entities took advantage of this
program. Clearly, it was successful.

With that, I look forward to hearing from our Members and
witnesses before us today.

I now recognize Ranking Member Huffman for his opening
statement.

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Before we begin, I would like to ask unanimous consent for
Representative Greg Stanton of Arizona to participate in
today's hearing.

Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for joining us for today's hearing on three bills
relating to the Bureau of Reclamation.
The Bureau serves as the largest wholesaler of water in the
country, providing water to more than 30 million people and one
out of five farmers in the American West. I look forward to
hearing more about the bills on the agenda today and how they
will affect Reclamation's work.
The first bill we will discuss is Representative
Schweikert's H.R. 1607. This would reserve certain lands to the
United States, specifically for the development, generation,
and transmission of electrical power and energy for the use of
the Salt River Federal Reclamation Project. The legislation has
been proposed to assist that project in Arizona to expand
pumped storage for hydropower facilities to meet increasing
energy demands.
I look forward to hearing more about the effects of this
bill in general. I like pumped hydropower a lot as a resource
and a strategy.
The next bill on the agenda is Representative Boebert's
H.R. 3675, and this bill would permanently reauthorize a
section of the WIIN Act to allow Federal water contractors to
convert their Federal water contracts to permanent contracts.
It would also allow water contractors to pay back their
repayment obligations to taxpayers at a discounted rate, and
eliminate important requirements, specifically the requirement
that contractors pay the full cost of water on farms larger
than 960 acres.
The Committee has heard similar legislation over the years
regarding accelerated prepayment. And before the passage of the
WIIN Act, the Obama administration, taxpayer advocacy groups,
and many others raised significant concerns about provisions
like this. These concerns are just as relevant today, and they
should be fully considered before moving forward with this
legislation.
The final bill on the agenda is Representative Porter's
H.R. 3027, the Reclamation, Climate Change, and Water Program
Reauthorization Act. It would reauthorize Reclamation's
successful Basin Study Program, which helps water managers plan
and develop water strategies responding to climate change. We
have already completed 19 basin studies that have helped
identify and analyze approaches and strategies to meet future
water needs using the best available scientific information.
Ms. Porter's legislation would reauthorize this program to
ensure water management strategies assess the risks and impacts
of climate change on our water resources. This is a big deal.
As the West continues to endure the effects of drought, it
is critical that Federal technical experts effectively
collaborate with state, tribal, and local water managers to
address water supply and demand imbalances.
I hope today's hearing will facilitate a robust discussion
in which we can work together toward true bipartisan solutions
to address water management needs in the West.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. I will now introduce our first panel.
As is typical with legislative hearings, the bills'
sponsors are recognized for 5 minutes each to discuss their
bills. With us today, or soon to join us, are Congresswoman
Lauren Boebert, Congresswoman Katie Porter, and Congressman
David Schweikert.
I now recognize Mrs. Boebert for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LAUREN BOEBERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mrs. Boebert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to
testify in support of H.R. 3675, my Western Water Accelerated
Revenue Repayment Act.
This common-sense bill follows bipartisan precedent by
allowing agriculture and municipal water users to prepay what
they owe to the Federal Government. This prepayment generates
early revenue for the Treasury, while also decreasing Federal
paperwork requirements and operating costs for water users.
Without this authority, the vast majority of irrigation
districts do not have the ability to make an early repayment to
the Treasury. This is like telling a homeowner who has a
mortgage that they cannot make early payments to pay it off, or
like telling someone with a 5-year car loan they cannot pay off
anything early and must wait the full 5 years.
Under current law, Bureau of Reclamation water storage and
delivery project costs are allocated to the project
beneficiaries. Under the beneficiary pays principle, irrigation
and water districts that have contracts with the Federal
Government for water delivered from the Bureau of Reclamation
projects must repay the costs that they are allocated.
As long as the repayment obligation exists, these water
users have to jump through more red tape, burdensome paperwork
requirements, and limitations on how much acreage a farmer is
allowed to plant. Prior to the passage of this provision, if
water users wanted to repay what they owed early, Congress
would have to enact a Federal law authorizing the repayment.
Prior to its expiration in 2020, the Bureau of Reclamation
entered into agreements with 86 contractors for contract
prepayments. This ultimately generated $344 million for water
storage account funding.
One of those contractors that took advantage of this
authority is located in my district, the Florida Water
Conservancy District in Durango, Colorado. It utilized the
prepayment option back in 2019 for the Lemon Dam, which is a
reclamation project on the Florida River. They support this
legislation, and called this process ``smooth as silk.''
My bill is supported by many groups, including the Florida
Water Conservancy District in Durango, Mesa County Farm Bureau,
the Mesa County Commissioners, the San Luis & Delta-Mendota
Water Authority, and many others.
In their letter of support, the National Water Resources
Association stated, ``This added tool will assist water systems
in managing their operations in the most effective and
efficient way possible at the time of rising costs and higher
interest rates. The immersed water resource challenges in the
Western United States require a strong partnership and regular
collaboration between the water community and Federal
agencies.'' Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit this letter
that I am quoting from to the record.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.
Mrs. Boebert. Thank you. I encourage the Committee to
continue to move on this common-sense bill, and move it forward
through the Committee to see its ultimate passage.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I yield.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mrs. Boebert. I now recognize Ms.
Porter for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. KATIE PORTER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Porter. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Most people who want to hear a one-liner go to a comedy
club, not to a congressional hearing. But today, you all are
lucky. I am going to give you two one-liners. Here is the first
one: How many lawmakers does it take to extend a program that
provides our constituents with water? I know. That is not
funny. I guess you can see why I don't do stand-up.
Actually, what worries me about the very serious question
that I asked is that I don't know the answer. Reclamation's
Basin Study Program is going to expire in September, and
Washington still hasn't acted. We are running out of time
before our September deadline. Are we going to extend the
program or miss the target?
That brings me to my second one-liner, a one-line bill to
extend the program. Here is the line: Section 9503(f) of the
Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 is amended by
striking ``2023,'' and--hold it, hold it for the punch line--
inserting ``2033.'' This one-liner isn't a joke, either. It is
a solution that keeps this program intact without increasing
its funding or changing any policy. It is a proposal that helps
people retain access to water, and that is actually no joke,
that is actually very serious.
This one line means that Colorado Basin states will
continue to have the tools needed to assess water supply and
identify long-term challenges that serve as a baseline, that
help water utilities make informed decisions about providing
water to Western Americans.
This one line means that the Bureau of Reclamation can
continue to assure utilities that they are operating from the
same baseline, and encourage innovative partnerships and
conservation programs and policies to sustain current and
future supplies.
Washington needs to pass my clean extension--just one
line--of the Reclamation Basin Study Program.
If making sure our constituents don't go thirsty wasn't
enough, I am even prepared to sweeten the deal. I have agreed
to legislative changes if my bill, my one-liner, advances to
mark-up. To comply with current House rules, I have agreed to
change the 10-year reauthorization to an authorization of 7
years at the annual level most recently provided to the
program, $15.017 million.
If anyone can find any other changes that I could make to
this incredibly short bill, I am all ears. There aren't too
many words left to scrutinize. You want a different title?
Let's talk. But people are tired of all the talk from
Washington.
This bill should be a no-brainer. I am a teacher. I used to
always tell my students, ``You don't have to wait to the last
minute to do your homework.'' We don't need to wait to
September 2023, when this program expires, to reauthorize it.
We can do it now.
With debilitating droughts, stopping our constituents from
going thirsty should be a top priority. And we have a
straightforward solution right now. If we believe in protecting
water utilities and users, this bill should advance without
delay to a mark-up, and then to a House Floor vote under the
suspension of the rules.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ms. Porter.
I now recognize Mr. Schweikert for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DAVID SCHWEIKERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Schweikert. You snuck up on me there, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Ranking Member. I am actually here to make the pitch on
H.R. 1607. It is a pumped storage.
For those of you who may know Arizona, we have a couple of
unique sources of water. One is we fight with our friends in
California over the Colorado River, but we also have our own
watershed.
There is something called the Salt River Project. It is a
really, really unique quasi-municipality. It actually predates
statehood, which is sort of amazing to think about. But within
that is a chain of lakes in these brutally rugged mountains.
But it turns out that, and Stanton is an expert on this, he
knows this as well as any of us, in there is an opportunity to
do what we call pumped storage. And within that is the
uniqueness.
For those of us in the desert southwest, we actually have
time during parts of the day, because of our photovoltaic
portfolio, where power basically almost falls to minimal price,
the concept of pump up, and when the sun goes down and the air
conditioners are running, run the water back down the cliff.
It is a terrific spot. It mathematically looks like it
works. We just need the direction with the managing partner,
which we hope will be Salt River Project, or we assume, and the
Bureau of Reclamation, which is actually the true owner and
controller of the land. And then, obviously, the neighboring
Park Service.
So, Mr. Stanton and I have this concept and would like it
to continue to move forward.
With that, I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Schweikert. I thank the Members
for their testimony. I will now introduce our second panel.
Mr. Huffman. Did you want to give Stanton time?
Mr. Bentz. I am sorry, Mr. Stanton, we will indulge a short
statement.
Proceed.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GREG STANTON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Stanton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Ranking Member, and thank you for the opportunity to join the
Subcommittee for today's hearing.
I, too, want to speak in favor of H.R. 1607, an issue that
is of great importance to my home state of Arizona.
The population in the Phoenix Metro Area, already one of
the most populous regions in the country, is growing rapidly,
and our economy is growing right along with it, bringing new
energy demands. Back home, we are already seeing daily
temperatures in the hundreds. The hot summer months are when
demand for electricity are at its highest. That is why it is so
critical for our region to invest in our energy infrastructure.
Having a robust, diverse, renewable energy mix, including
hydropower, makes our power grid more resilient and better able
to meet the demands of our constituents.
Congressman Schweikert and I teamed up to introduce H.R.
1607 to help enable the evaluation and exploration of
additional pumped storage hydropower facilities to the Salt
River Reservoir System, which serves more than 2 million energy
customers in the Greater Phoenix area.
Pumped hydropower storage uses excess electricity when
demand is low, like during the day, when renewables like solar
panels are generating power, to pump water to a higher-
elevation reservoir. Throughout the night, when the other
renewable resources are ramping down, that water can be used to
generate hydropower to provide electricity to customers.
Not only do pumped storage projects help integrate
renewable energy into our power grid, they provide greater
flexibility and reliability for the entire system. And
critically, it cuts utility costs for Arizona families and
businesses.
And I hope the Committee will move quickly with this bill,
and thank my colleagues for their support.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Stanton. I thank the Members for
their testimony.
I will now introduce our second panel: Mr. Michael Brain,
Deputy Commissioner, Bureau of Reclamation, Washington, DC; Mr.
Cannon Michael, Chairman, San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water
Authority, Los Banos, California; and Ms. Leslie Meyers,
Associate General Manager and Chief Water Resources Executive,
Salt River Project, Tempe, Arizona.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``talk'' button
on the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of the 5 minutes, the light will turn
red, and I will ask you to please complete your statement.
I will also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
I now recognize Deputy Commissioner Brain for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL BRAIN, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER, BUREAU OF
RECLAMATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Brain. Good afternoon and thank you, Chairman Bentz,
Ranking Member Huffman, members of the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to provide Interior's views on the bills before you
today. My name is Michael Brain, and I have the privilege of
serving as the Deputy Commissioner for the Bureau of
Reclamation within the Department of the Interior.
As you are aware, the West is experiencing unprecedented
drought, and in Western watersheds there have been successive
and compounding years of dry hydrology. The drought highlights
the need for immediate actions, as well as for thoughtful
planning and on-the-ground work to make both our infrastructure
and our operational decisions more resilient.
Meeting Reclamation's mission today means addressing
drought resilience, water security, issues of equity, climate
change adaptation, and ecosystem health. Fortunately, with the
resources made available by Congress through the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act, Reclamation
has been able to prioritize and accelerate projects that will
help us to respond to the issues that we are faced with.
In the year-and-a-half that Reclamation has been charged
with implementation of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we
are proud of our efforts to engage with our tribal,
stakeholder, and congressional partners. Due to the strength of
these partnerships and the hard work of Reclamation's dedicated
staff, we have allocated $2.5 billion of Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law funding to 369 projects across 12 program
areas, and in all 17 Western states plus Alaska, Hawaii, and
Puerto Rico.
Reclamation has issued more than a dozen Bipartisan Infra-
structure Law-related funding opportunities to date, with more
on the way for the rest of 2023. We have established new
programs in small storage, aquatic ecosystem restoration, and
environmental water resource projects, and planning and design.
Aging Infrastructure Account funding made available in the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law has enabled numerous major
rehabilitation activities on facilities maintained by our
partners that would otherwise have been difficult to realize,
such as major lining projects on the New York and Truckee
Canals that will improve safety, reduce long-term maintenance
needs, and conserve precious water supplies.
Additionally, in Fiscal Year 2022 Reclamation distributed a
higher-than-ever 1-year investment of $420 million in the Rural
Water Program across six projects, some that benefit tribal
areas. In Fiscal Year 2023, we announced $278 million across
seven projects. We also allotted $60 million for the Arkansas
Valley Conduit Project, which benefits disadvantaged Americans,
and was able to break ground last month.
In addition to funding announcements that have already
taken place in the Colorado River Basin, Reclamation
anticipates making additional announcements pertaining to other
sections of the Inflation Reduction Act this summer.
Like the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation
Reduction Act, the legislation being considered today seeks to
address the challenges we currently face and those we will face
in the future. For example, H.R. 1607 will increase energy
storage through a pumped storage project that will help
Reclamation meet its mission to deliver power by improving grid
reliability, avoiding transmission congestion and potential
interruptions in energy supply.
This bill does not grant Reclamation any new authorities,
but will allow the Salt River Project to continue its path
toward construction.
The Department supports this bill, and looks forward to
working with the bill's sponsor and the Subcommittee on
technical edits.
Additionally, H.R. 3027, which would reauthorize
Reclamation's Climate Change and Water Program, gives
Reclamation and our stakeholders the tools we need to address
long-term challenges posed by climate change and shifting
hydrologic realities. The Department supports this bill and the
reauthorization of the Climate Change and Water Program.
Lastly, H.R. 3675 would allow for expedited repayment of
irrigation construction obligations, making more funding
available for additional water storage needs, as well as
providing additional flexibility for Reclamation's water users
and contract holders. The Department looks forward to working
with the bill's sponsor and the Subcommittee to address
technical edits.
The Department recognizes the bills before the Committee
today seek to address the impacts from the ongoing drought,
building a more resilient infrastructure and ecosystems, and
appreciates the work of all the bills' sponsors.
I look forward to discussing this legislation in more
detail, and to continuing to work with the Committee and the
bills' sponsors on potential technical edits as they move
forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Brain follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Brain, Deputy Commissioner, U.S. Bureau
of Reclamation
on H.R. 1607, H.R. 3027, and H.R. 3675

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, I am Michael Brain, Deputy Commissioner for the Bureau of
Reclamation within the Department of the Interior (Interior). Thank you
for the opportunity to provide Interior's views on these bills.
H.R. 1607--To clarify jurisdiction with respect to certain Bureau of
Reclamation pumped storage development, and for other purposes

The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is the largest water
supplier in the United States, owning and operating 188 projects across
the western states with dams, reservoirs, canals, and other
distribution infrastructure. Reclamation is interested in and supports
the potential to develop pumped storage projects at existing
facilities. Pumped storage is an efficient means to store energy when
supply exceeds demand and has been shown to be one of the most useful
methods for regulating intermittent renewable generation resources,
such as wind and solar. Increased energy storage provided by a pumped
storage project improves grid reliability, avoids transmission
congestion periods, and avoids potential interruptions in energy
supply.
Reclamation's Salt River Federal Reclamation Project, located near
Phoenix, Arizona is one of Reclamation's first projects, authorized in
1903, and includes facilities located across portions of Maricopa,
Gila, and Pinal Counties. The Salt River Federal Reclamation Project is
operated by the Salt River Project. The Salt River Project or ``SRP''
is comprised of two entities, the Salt River Valley Water Users'
Association, which operates the Reclamation Project, and the Salt River
Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District, a political
Subdivision of the State of Arizona, which operates the non-
hydrogeneration resources and provides power to central Arizona. Seven
storage reservoirs furnish water supply from the Salt and Verde Rivers
to the Phoenix metropolitan area. The power system includes
hydroelectric, natural gas, oil, coal, wind, and solar generation
resources. SRP is reducing its carbon dioxide emissions through the
retirement of older generation resources and development of renewable
generation and storage projects.
In 2014, Reclamation prepared a Reclamation-wide Pumped Storage
Screening Study that identified a location for pumped storage along the
Salt River. Based on that initial work, SRP developed two possible
locations for the construction of a pumped storage development project.
The results of that work indicated the potential for a project with a
generating capacity between 1,000 and 1,150 megawatts (MW) utilizing
pump-turbines housed alongside a water conveyance tunnel for generation
and pumping water from Apache Lake to an upper reservoir.
Using the data acquired from the previous studies, H.R. 1607 would
allow for the withdrawal of Federal land from the National Forest
System to the Bureau of Reclamation, through the Secretary of the
Interior, for the development, generation, and transmission of
electrical power and energy for the use of and benefit of the Salt
River Federal Reclamation Project in Arizona.
Through the transfer of this land, H.R. 1607 would allow the
proposed pumped storage project to be developed entirely within the
authorities and footprint of the Federal Reclamation Project--
streamlining development and maximizing Federal Reclamation Project
benefits.
H.R. 1607 would not grant Reclamation new authorities to fund the
construction of the project, but instead would allow the Salt River
Valley Water Users' Association to continue to evaluate and construct
the project at their cost.
Title to the facilities developed on such land would be held by the
United States as a part of the Project, with operation and maintenance
remaining a responsibility of the Salt River Valley Water Users'
Association as an authorized feature of the Project. H.R. 1607 would
also direct the Secretary of Agriculture to prepare a map, as soon as
practicable, depicting the boundaries of the covered land and make it
available at the appropriate offices of the Forest Service and the
Bureau of Reclamation.
The Department supports the development of pumped storage projects,
where feasible, as an efficient means to store energy and improve grid
reliability. The Department supports H.R. 1607 and looks forward to
working with the bill sponsor and the Subcommittee to address a few
technical edits.
H.R. 3027--Reclamation Climate Change and Water Program Reauthorization
Act of 2023

The American West faces serious water challenges. Increasing
populations, competition for finite water supplies, along with drought
and floods, all strain existing water and hydropower resources. At the
same time, extended droughts are impacting water availability and
climate change is likely to compound the impacts. Changes to
temperature, precipitation (rainfall and snowfall), and the timing and
quantity of snowpack and runoff pose a significant challenge to the
protection and use of water resources. Ensuring a safe and secure water
supply remains a fundamental pursuit for life in the West.
The Science and Engineering to Comprehensively Understand and
Responsibly Enhance Water Act (SECURE Water Act), included in the
Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009, authorized several Interior
programs to help address the Nation's water challenges. The Reclamation
Climate Change and Water Program, along with other critical programs
authorized by the SECURE Water Act, are set to expire at the end of
Fiscal Year 2023. H.R. 3027 would extend the Reclamation Climate Change
and Water Program authorization to 2033. The 2009 SECURE Water Act
provided Reclamation with specific authority and responsibility to use
appropriations to:

Assess the risks from climate change to water supplies in
each major Reclamation river basin

Analyze how such changes will impact various water uses
and services

Coordinate and collaborate with other federal agencies,
including the United States Geological Survey and the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, to use the
best available science to assess changes to water supplies

Provide resources to our partners and stakeholders to
collaboratively address current and future impacts to water
supply and demand

Conduct Reservoir Operations Pilots to identify potential
improvements to reservoir operations to manage water
through increased extreme events (e.g., floods and
droughts). (For more information, please see: Reservoir
Operation Pilots/WaterSMART (usbr.gov))

In carrying out the assessments, Reclamation has developed
consistent, West-wide approaches to assess climate change risks and
impacts to water resources as well as tools and information applicable
Reclamation-wide. Reclamation has leveraged research and development
activities when undertaking West-wide Climate Change Risk Assessments.
These assessments provide consistent projections within the Program for
Reclamation's WaterSMART (Sustain and Manage America's Resources for
Tomorrow) Basin Study Program, where stakeholder-driven Basin Studies
identify long-term water supply and demand imbalances and develop
strategies and tools needed by water managers to address those
imbalances. Non-Federal partners cost-share to evaluate the impacts of
climate change and identify a broad range of potential strategies and
tools to address current and future shortages.
Since authorization in 2009, Reclamation has funded 32 Basin
Studies in 15 Western States. Notable examples include the 2012
Colorado River Basin Water Supply and Demand Study that identified an
array of potential adaptation and mitigation strategies that are
fundamental to the follow-on efforts underway today, and the 2019 Upper
Deschutes Basin Study in Oregon that brought together different basin
interests in working toward strategies to improve streamflow for
ecosystem benefits while also recognizing the challenges facing
irrigated agriculture. These studies have strengthened relationships
with non-federal entities and have created a technical foundation
contributing to inform and allow for additional follow-on efforts.
Basin Studies have brought together partners with competing demands for
water and have paved the way for a common understanding of hydrology
and built a collaborative approach to identifying solutions, avoiding
conflict, and providing an alternative to litigation.
With our Federal, State, Tribal, and local partners, the Basin
Study Program addresses challenges resulting from climate change and
shifting demographics. Reclamation uses a multi-faceted approach to
support reliable water and hydropower deliveries; to help maintain
healthy ecosystems; to protect federally listed fish, wildlife, and
plants, as well as designated critical habitat; and to manage risks
(e.g., droughts, floods, and fires). Implementing the SECURE Water Act
has served as a catalyst for collaboration and innovation, improving
our understanding of climate change impacts to water resources and our
ability to provide a way for water users to collaboratively address
those impacts.
Given the historic drought conditions experienced over the past
decade, the authorities provided by the Section 9503 of the SECURE
Water Act remain an important tool for Reclamation's mission. The
Department supports H.R. 3027 and the reauthorization of the Climate
Change and Water Program.
H.R. 3675--Western Water Accelerated Revenue Repayment Act

The principle of ``beneficiaries pay'' has been a fundamental
aspect of Reclamation law since the early 1900s, requiring that
investments be repaid by the beneficiaries of that investment, except
where that benefit is for the common welfare or accrues to taxpayers
generally. Section 4011 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for
the Nation (WIIN) Act (P.L. 114-322) directed Reclamation to convert
water service contracts to repayment contracts under Section 9(d) of
the Reclamation Project Act of 1939, 53 Stat. 1195, allowing for full
and accelerated repayment of capital obligations owed to Reclamation
for facilities repayment upon a contractor's request, allowing for
repayment, either in lump sum or by accelerated prepayment, of the
remaining construction costs.
Under Section 4011 of the WIIN Act, upon a contractor's compliance
with and discharge of the obligation of repayment of the construction
costs, certain provisions of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (96
Stat. 1269), including certain limitations on farm acreage and federal
reporting requirements no longer apply.
Section 4011(e) further provided that subject to several
conditions, such prepayment of contracts beyond amounts necessary to
cover forgone receipts from scheduled payments for 10 years after
enactment shall be allocated to a Reclamation Storage Account to fund
construction of water storage project, with a cap of $335,000,000.
The direction provided by Congress under Section 4011 expired at
the end of 2020. H.R. 3675 would amend Section 4013, allowing for the
direction provided under Section 4011 to be extended with no
expiration.
Prior to expiration, Reclamation entered into agreements with 86
contractors that requested consideration under Section 4011(a) for
contract prepayment. While Reclamation received inquiries from other
regions and projects, the vast majority of requests were from
contractors that operate in the Central Valley Project (CVP) within the
California-Great Basin Region. As such, if this Section were to be
extended, it is unclear how many contractors would have interest. Since
enactment of the WIIN Act, storage account funding from contract
prepayment is currently $344 million.
It should be noted that under Section 4011, any new irrigation
repayment obligations taken on in support of new construction would be
subject to the provisions of the Reclamation Reform Act.
H.R. 3675 would allow for contracts repayment to be expediated,
allowing for funding to more quickly be returned to the Treasury and
provide additional flexibility for Reclamation's water users and
contract holders. The Department looks forward to working with the bill
sponsor and Subcommittee to address technical edits.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Michael Brain, Deputy
Commissioner, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
Questions Submitted by Representative Boebert
Question 1. Deputy Commissioner Brain, you testified that this bill
provides ``additional flexibility for Reclamation's water users and
contract holders.'' Can you go into more detail on that?

Answer. Section 4011 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for
the Nation (WIIN) Act (P.L. 114-322) allowed Reclamation water users
and contract holders to convert water service contracts into repayment
contracts. The conversion allows for accelerated repayment of
construction obligations owed to Reclamation for facilities repayment.
As Section 4011 is a voluntary process, it gives contract holders an
additional option to address their long-term needs. Further, under
Section 4011, once contractors fully repay their construction
obligation, they are no longer subject to the acreage limitation
requirements of the Reclamation Reform Act. This would allow for use of
Reclamation irrigation water on farming operations greater than 960
acres.

Question 2. Deputy Commissioner Brain, you testified that the
Bureau of Reclamation worked with 86 contractors that requested
consideration for contract prepayment when this was previously
authorized. Can you further discuss the successes of the program and
how the dollars collected from prepayment are being used?

Answer. As noted, Reclamation entered into agreements with 86
contractors that requested conversion of their water service contracts
into repayment contracts under Section 401l(a) of the WIIN Act. Under
Section 4011, the funding from these payments has been deposited in a
Reclamation Water Storage Account to fund construction of water storage
projects.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Deputy Commissioner, and I now
recognize Mr. Michael for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CANNON MICHAEL, CHAIRMAN, SAN LUIS & DELTA-MENDOTA
WATER AUTHORITY, LOS BANOS, CALIFORNIA

Mr. Michael. Good afternoon, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, members of the Subcommittee. It is a pleasure to be
here. I do feel quite a long way from the farm sitting here in
front of you, but I am pleased to be here.
My name is Cannon Michael. I run my family's farming
operation in the Central Valley of California. We grow over 20
different crops, both organic and conventional. We also manage
wildlife habitat that we own adjacent to the Grasslands
Wildlife Management Area. And we have an active compost center
on the farm, where we are taking green waste from urban centers
to turn it into valuable compost on the farm and help avoid the
organics going into landfills.
Over my career in farming, I have become interested in
California water issues and, obviously, it is essential to
farming, but it is also essential to our communities and to all
those around us and the environment.

I became Chairman of the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water
Authority because of my interest in that organization and our
27 members that have quite a bit of diversity with urban
representatives of San Benito and Santa Clara. Over 2 million
residents of California fall underneath the authority's
umbrella, as well as over 1.2 million acres of irrigated
farmland and over 130,000 acres of wetland habitat, being the
grassland. So, Ag, urban, and environmental users all working
together, which is essentially how I see the most sustainable
pathway in terms of California water. And I am a Director on
the Board of Directors of the Family Farm Alliance.

I am here today testifying about H.R. 3675, and thanks to
Congresswoman Boebert for bringing this forward.

There has been a lot of discussion about the streamlining
effect that this bill would have and the help that it is for
our members, actually, for the water authority. Almost all of
our members took advantage of this opportunity under the WIIN
Act. You can find in my written testimony quite a bit more
detail.

I think one of the most important aspects of this bill is
the provision that the funds repaid to the Federal Government
will be deposited in the water storage account that can be used
to construct new water facilities, which are desperately
needed, not just in California, but throughout the West.

Infrastructure is really the backbone of California. We
saw, certainly this year, the importance in the extreme wet
hydrology of the existing above-ground storage investments that
were made many years ago to protect communities such as
Sacramento and also provide the flood control benefits.

I think we also, with the excessive hydrology, saw quite a
bit of a missed opportunity in terms of a lot of water that was
not able to be captured. So, having additional funding for
water storage is critical.

And I would also highlight, in light of climate change,
cold water for anadromous fish is going to become increasingly
important, so having some of that infrastructure will provide
cold water pool for fish, which is important.

Again, our members have seen a huge benefit. As was stated
earlier, more than 80 entities have pursued that prepayment. I
believe there are up to 200 that could still take part in this,
so it certainly seems like an opportunity that should be
extended and opened up to others. Again, it has been very
beneficial for our folks.

I am happy to take some questions, and with that I will
yield my time.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Michael follows:]
Prepared Statement of Cannon Michael, Chairman, San Luis & Delta-
Mendota Water Authority
on H.R. 3675

My name is Cannon Michael, and I am the Chairman of the San Luis &
Delta-Mendota Water Authority. The San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water
Authority (Water Authority or SLDMWA) serves 27 member agencies within
the western San Joaquin Valley, San Benito and Santa Clara counties,
who provide water service to approximately 1,200,000 acres of irrigated
agriculture, over 2 million people, and more than 130,000 acres of
wetlands providing habitat critical to migratory waterfowl along the
Pacific Flyway. I also serve on the Board of Directors of the Family
Farm Alliance (Alliance) which has supported giving Reclamation
accelerated repayment authority for nearly two decades and also endorse
my comments.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 3675, a bill to
amend the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act to
extend certain contract prepayment authority. The Water Authority and
the Alliance fully support enactment of this bill, which will extend
important, win-win authorities that allow water users to accelerate
repayment of capital construction costs for Reclamation facilities. We
appreciate Congresswoman Boebert for introducing this bill and want to
thank all of the co-sponsors.
H.R. 3675 and Accelerated Repayment

Since its inception, the Reclamation program has generally operated
under the principle that the federal government expends the upfront
capital to construct water projects, with those capital costs repaid by
the beneficiaries of the projects under a contract with the Bureau of
Reclamation. Under Reclamation law, repayment obligations to the
federal government are typically repaid over as long as 40 or 50 years
through either a repayment contract or a water service contract. Water
users are also responsible for operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
of Reclamation facilities.
While both repayment and water service contracts ensure all capital
and O&M costs of the associate Reclamation facilities are paid, the
structure of repayment and application of regulations after all capital
cost have been repaid differ. For repayment contracts, capital is
amortized over the contract term (which is often determined by
Congress) at a fixed, annual payment and O&M is paid as it is incurred.
Water service contracts on the other hand, pay a combined rate for
water delivered that includes in capital repayment, O&M, and in some
cases, other costs that Congress has allocated to water users.
Once a Reclamation contractor has fulfilled all its capital
repayment obligations, those facilities are considered ``paid out.'' As
discussed further below, under current law, paid out repayment
contractors are no longer subject to restrictive acreage limits and
certain other regulations in Reclamation law. Water service contractors
do not get the same relief upon full repayment of capital obligations.
In the past, Congress has specifically allowed early repayment for
certain projects or facilities, though until a temporary authorization
was enacted in the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the Nation Act
(WIIN Act; P.L. 114-322) there was no general allowance or prescribed
process in Reclamation law to allow accelerate payout. That authority
has now expired.

H.R. 3675 would extend these WIIN Act authorities and allow
Reclamation contractors that remain interested in early repayment to
pursue such an action with the agency. Specifically, H.R. 3675 would
permanently address the numerous important aspects of Reclamation law
relevant to accelerated repayment, including:

Allowing for conversion from a water service contract to a
repayment contract for agricultural and municipal
contractors.

Authorizing prepayment of capital costs through a lump sum
or with accelerated installments.

Clarifying that current law related relief from acreage
limits, reporting requirements, and other components of the
Reclamation Reform Act (RRA) applies to all contractors
that pay out capital costs early under this authority,
while ensuring continued compliance with Reclamation law
and relevant requirements.

Establishing a discount rate to determine present value
for the purposes of repayment.

Prohibiting power revenues from being used in repayment of
capital costs under this authority.

Ensuring that accelerated repayment will not affect the
repayment obligations of other Reclamation contractors.

Ensuring that any remaining costs, including O&M, that are
not part of the accelerated repayment remain the obligation
of the contractor.

As outlined further below, accelerated repayment can bring several
benefits for Reclamation contractors and the federal government, and we
fully support making the pathway to those benefits permanent though
enactment of H.R. 3675.
Benefit of Accelerated Repayment for Water Users and the Federal
Government

Reclamation contractors pursue accelerated repayment of their
capital obligations for various reasons depending on their unique
circumstances. One common reason water users pursue accelerated
repayment is to remove the acreage limits and reporting requirements
established by the RRA which can be cumbersome and restrictive.
The RRA, enacted in 1982, modified Reclamation law by increasing
the per owner limits on acreage that can receive Reclamation water,
while also requiring that those limits account for all of a
contractor's land, including lands that are leased or in another
Reclamation project boundary. RRA also established increased water
prices (so called full-cost water) for water delivered to lands in
excess of established limits and requires extensive reporting and
paperwork each year. As referenced above, under current law,
contractors that are considered paid out under a repayment contract are
no longer subject to these RRA requirements, while water service
contractors remain subject to RRA limitations and reporting even after
capital repayment is complete. The efficiencies gained by removing RRA
restrictions and requirements can be significant and lead many
contractors to seek pay out sooner than their contract would otherwise
require.
Additionally, paying out federal obligations increases certainty
for contractors regarding long-term water supply, allows entities that
are interested to pursue title transfer in order to increase financing
opportunities and streamline approvals, and achieves other specific
goals like avoiding RRA related Securities and Exchange Commission
disclosures for publicly traded companies.
From the Federal perspective, authorizing early repayment will
accelerate Treasury receipts and raise revenue for the federal
government. Importantly, H.R. 3675 would ensure that all contractual
repayment obligations are repaid in full at present value, including
some that currently do not carry interest, ensuring that no additional
costs are shouldered by U.S. taxpayers.
However, the benefits from utilizing Sec. 4011 contract conversion
authority benefits more than a specific project or the Treasury. Funds
received from prepayment or accelerated repayment are held in a
Treasury account to be used for funding additional water storage
projects. The western United States has been experiencing significant
variations in hydrology, ranging from drought to flooding, and
expediting funds back to the federal government that can be turned
around to support additional water storage is of upmost priority. In
California, if the past few years have shown us anything, it's that we
must continue investing in additional water storage capacity so that we
can capture more water in wet periods like the ones we saw this year
that can be used in dry periods like we've had over the prior few
years. Since the WIIN Act was signed into law, more than 80 entities
have pursued prepayment of their federal obligations under the Sec.
4011 authority--which includes nearly all of our 27 members at the
Water Authority. These numbers illustrate the need and desire in our
region to utilize the Sec. 4011 authority under the WIIN Act, and the
legislation would allow other regions and water managers to consider
the benefits. H.R. 3675 permanently extends the Sec. 4011 authority
which expired in 2021, allowing the opportunity for more entities to
pursue contract conversions and prepayment while significantly
expediting receipts to the Treasury.
Conclusion

Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. We urge the
subcommittee to pass H.R. 3675 which will extend the benefits of early
repayment for additional Reclamation contractors and the federal
government. We look forward to working with the bill sponsor and the
Subcommittee on this proposal and stand ready to answer any questions
you might have.

______

Questions Submitted for the Record to Mr. Cannon Michael, Chairman, San
Luis & Delta-Mendota Water Authority
Mr. Michael did not submit responses to the Committee by the
appropriate deadline for inclusion in the printed record.
Questions Submitted by Representative Boebert
Question 1. Chairman Michael, thank you for your excellent
testimony and for making the trip. I greatly appreciate the Water
Authority's support of my bill. H.R. 3675. As you are aware, Colorado
and the West have suffered from extreme drought in recent years. Water
Storage projects are a great tool to help supply our communities with
clean water in dry times.

Can you elaborate how the funding generated from this common-sense
bill will lead to more water storage projects in the West?

Question 2. Chairman Michael, I know you touched on it your written
testimony, but is this bill good for taxpayers and if so, can you
explain why?

Question 3. Chairman Michael, can you further discuss how removing
the RRA limitations and burdensome requirements benefits contractors?

Question 4. Chairman Michael, can you elaborate on how H.R. 3675
will permanently address the numerous important aspects of Reclamation
law in relation to accelerated repayment?

Question 5. Chairman Michael, in this country, would we ever tell a
homeowner they couldn't pay off their home loan early? How about
someone with a car loan, we allow hard-working Americans to pay off
their car loans early if they are able to, correct?

Do you agree agriculture and municipal water users should also be
able to pay off what they owe through a similar, permanent program?

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Michael, and I now recognize Ms.
Meyers for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LESLIE MEYERS, ASSOCIATE GENERAL MANAGER AND CHIEF
WATER RESOURCES EXECUTIVE, SALT RIVER PROJECT, PHOENIX, ARIZONA

Ms. Meyers. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. I am Leslie Meyers,
the Associate General Manager and Chief Water Executive for the
Salt River Project. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in
support of H.R. 1607, legislation clarifying the Bureau of
Reclamation's jurisdiction over the development of hydro pumps.
SRP has been serving Arizona since 1903, almost 10 years
before Arizona became the 48th state. Today, we are the third-
largest not-for-profit, community-based public power entity in
the country, providing sustainable, reliable, and affordable
electricity to nearly 3 million people.
SRP is also the largest raw water provider in the Phoenix
Metropolitan Area. Formed at the turn of the 20th century to
contract with the Federal Government for construction of
Theodore Roosevelt Dam, SRP manages and operates seven Bureau
of Reclamation dams and reservoirs.
SRP began generating hydropower in 1906, later
incorporating pumped-back storage between the reservoirs to
provide resiliency to the system.
Today, SRP's diverse energy portfolio includes solar, wind,
geothermal, natural gas, coal, nuclear, and, of course,
hydropower.

As SRP adds significantly more solar to our power system,
we will need long-duration storage to store excess solar
generated during the day, and to dispatch it overnight to
ensure reliable service around the clock. SRP is currently
incorporating 1,100 megawatts of new 4-hour battery storage.
Additionally, we are developing an option of adding 2,000
megawatts of longer-duration pumped storage along Apache Lake
on the Salt River that will be capable of generating power for
up to 10 to 12 hours.

Simply put, pumped storage facilities push water uphill
from a lower reservoir to an upper reservoir when energy is
available, like when solar is generating during the day. Then,
when energy is needed back on the grid, water is allowed to
flow back downhill through the turbines to generate
electricity. Pumped storage facilities are straightforward and
proven technology, and in this case we will use existing
infrastructure.

SRP is evaluating two sites for the development of new
pumped storage. Both are located almost entirely on National
Forest System lands previously withdrawn for Reclamation
purposes by Congress and the Secretary of the Interior
specifically to store water and generate hydropower for the
beneficiaries of the Salt River Federal Reclamation Project. A
portion of both of those sites lies just outside the existing
withdrawal.

H.R. 1607 addresses this deficiency by extending the
existing withdrawal to cover both sites, which clarifies
jurisdiction and facilitates project development. The extension
provided in H.R. 1607 would align the development and
management of any new pumped storage facility with SRP's
current care, operation, and management of our existing
reclamation facilities.

To provide historical context, Congress and the Secretary
of the Interior have withdrawn National Forest System lands on
the Salt River Project watersheds more than 50 times since 1903
to facilitate appropriate development and operation of the
reclamation project components, like dams, reservoirs, canals,
pipelines, and our hydropower facilities.

It is important to note that this legislation does not
remove the need for any Federal or state environmental
permitting or public input processes, or tribal consultations.
SRP is committed to working with Federal agencies, Tribal
Nations, and many other stakeholders interested in this
project.

The Bureau of Reclamation, Tonto National Forest, and SRP
will continue to coordinate on land management decisions within
the proposed withdrawal, just as we do today under an existing
tri-party agreement.

Thank you, Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman, for
this opportunity to testify today. I look forward to answering
questions, and hope that we can continue to build off this
important work being done under H.R. 1607.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Meyers follows:]
Prepared Statement of Leslie A. Meyers, Associate General Manager,
Salt River Project
on H.R. 1607

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
in support of H.R. 1607, legislation to clarify jurisdiction with
respect to the development of pumped storage on the Salt River in
Arizona. My name is Leslie Meyers and I am the Associate General
Manager & Chief Water Resources and Services Executive at Salt River
Project (SRP).
The Salt River Project (SRP)

SRP was formed at the turn of the 20th century to contract with the
federal government for the construction of Theodore Roosevelt Dam, and
other components of the Salt River Federal Reclamation Project. SRP
manages and operates seven dams and reservoirs throughout Arizona,
along with 1,300 miles of canals, laterals, ditches, and pipelines to
deliver water to approximately 400 square miles of land in the greater
Phoenix area. The dam and reservoir system can store approximately 2.3
million acre-feet of water runoff from the Salt and Verde River and
East Clear creek systems, making SRP the largest raw water provider in
the Phoenix Metropolitan area.
SRP is also the third largest not-for-profit community based public
power utility in the country, providing reliable, affordable, and
sustainable electricity to nearly 3,000,000 people in Arizona. SRP has
a diverse energy portfolio that includes nuclear, solar and wind,
natural gas, battery storage, coal, geothermal and hydropower.
Need for Energy Storage and System Operational Flexibility

SRP is making transformative changes to its power generation
resource portfolio over the coming decade and beyond. In addition to
incorporating 1,100 MW of new four-hour battery storage by 2024, SRP is
also exploring long-duration pumped storage hydropower options. As more
renewable resources are added to the power system to meet projected
growth in energy demand, there will be an increasing need for a diverse
portfolio that includes longer-duration energy storage capable of
providing grid resiliency, that can store the large amount of solar
energy generated during the day and provide reliable electricity in the
evening hours.
SRP developed and operates 150 MW of pumped storage hydropower
generation on the Salt River dam and reservoir system. For more than 40
years, these pumped storage facilities have provided reliable
electricity and confidence that bringing additional pumped storage onto
SRP's system will help meet changing customer preferences and needs.
SRP has identified two sites adjacent to Apache Lake that can power the
equivalent of up to 500,000 homes by storing solar and other energy
during the day and delivering it during the evening. Each site would
use an existing reservoir (Apache Lake) as the lower reservoir and
require construction of a new upper reservoir. A 2014 Bureau of
Reclamation study \1\ (Reclamation-Wide Pumped Storage Screening Study)
found that adding pumped storage to Apache Lake as a lower reservoir
ranked 3rd out of 348 reservoir locations studied.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Reclamation-Wide Pumped Storage Screening Study: https://
www.usbr.gov/power/data/Pumped_Storage_Assessments/
Pumped_Storage_Screening_Study_Report_(Errata1_2)_Sep_ 2020.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These facilities would help provide a portion of the long-duration
energy storage while maintaining grid reliability and diversifying
energy storage resources and supply chains. Leveraging the resiliency
of SRP's existing reservoir system on the Salt River provides a
reliable renewable water source for pumped storage operations even
during severe drought.
History of SRP as a Reclamation Project & Associated Reclamation
Withdrawn Lands

Congress and the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) authorized
the construction of the Salt River Federal Reclamation Project as one
of the first projects under the Reclamation Act of 1902. The major dam
sites, storage reservoirs, and hydropower generating facilities that
SRP operates and maintains are located on National Forest System lands
that Congress and the Secretary withdrew for the Reclamation purpose of
storing water and generating hydropower for beneficiaries of the Salt
River Federal Reclamation Project.
Since 1903, Congress and the Secretary have withdrawn certain
National Forest System lands on the Salt and Verde River and East Clear
Creek watersheds more than 50 times to further these Reclamation
purposes.
Purpose of Legislation

In 1905, Congress and the Secretary withdrew the majority of the
National Forest System lands adjacent to Apache Lake where the two
potential pumped storage sites are located. H.R. 1607 would extend this
withdrawal by two miles to capture the upper reservoir sites and
associated infrastructure to clarify that the Bureau of Reclamation has
jurisdiction to evaluate the development of such facilities.
Accordingly, the legislation would align the jurisdiction, planning,
development, operation and maintenance of any such facilities with
other facilities of the Salt River Federal Reclamation Project
including that: (1) the exploration, planning and development of such a
project would be completed under Reclamation's jurisdiction rather than
permitting processes under the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
regulations, (2) Reclamation would lead environmental compliance for
the development of such facilities, (3) any such facility would be part
of Reclamation's Safety of Dams Program, and (4) other uses on such
National Forest System lands that do not conflict with Reclamation
purposes could continue.
It is important to note that the legislation does not remove the
need for federal and state environmental permitting and public input
processes including but not limited to those required under the
National Environmental Policy Act, Endangered Species Act, Tribal
consultations, National Historic Preservation Act and Bald and Gold
Eagle Protection Act.
Summary

Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of H.R.
1607. I look forward to answering any questions you may have.

______

Mr. Bentz. I thank the witnesses for their testimony, and I
will now recognize Members for 5 minutes each for their
questions. We will begin with Representative Hageman for 5
minutes.

Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses.
Mr. Brain, I just have a couple of real quick questions for
you. You talked an awful lot about climate change in your
statement. What have you done in terms of working with the
National Forest Service to address the mismanagement of our
national forests, the catastrophic forest fires, pine beetle
outbreak, and those kinds of things in terms of the impact on
our reservoirs in the interior West?
Mr. Brain. Congresswoman, thank you so much for the
question. We work collaboratively with a number of our sister
agencies throughout the Federal Government. I would be happy to
get back to you on the specifics of exactly how we collaborate
with them.
Ms. Hageman. You don't have those answers today?
Mr. Brain. I don't, ma'am, but I can tell you----
Ms. Hageman. OK, but you can talk a lot about climate
change, but you can't talk about the impact of the Forest
Service that they are having on our reservoirs in the interior
West?
Mr. Brain. In an effort to accurately answer your question,
I would like to get back with you with the specifics of those
interactions. But I can tell you that we do share science with
them to ensure that they are making decisions based off of the
best available science that we have in the Federal Government.
Ms. Hageman. Sure. And I would also like to thank the
gentlelady from Colorado for introducing H.R. 3675, which I am
proud to co-sponsor. It allows water users to make payments
more quickly and remove the burden of lengthy reporting
requirements established by the Reclamation Reform Act. It
accelerates Treasury receipts, while ensuring that all actual
obligations for repayment are being repaid at present value.
Perhaps most importantly, as Mr. Michael highlighted in his
testimony, this legislation will increase certainty for
contractors regarding their long-term water supply. And
providing this kind of certainty is extremely important to the
West.
Mr. Michael, you highlighted in your testimony the need to
incentivize construction of additional water storage so that we
can catch more water in wet periods, such as what we have seen
this winter and this spring. Mr. Michael, how have you already
seen the success of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for
the Nation, or the WIIN Act, which we intend to permanently
reauthorize through this legislation, strengthen Western water
storage capacity? How has the WIIN Act impacted that?
Mr. Michael. The WIIN Act has given opportunities for our
members to pursue numerous different projects. So, in addition
to the contract repayment, which has been very helpful, it has
also incentivized, under the WaterSMART Program, many different
projects within our member agencies to help accelerate, again,
creative solutions to deal with the water supply challenges
that we have. So, it is really an ability to put more dollars
to work, and more projects on the table.
Ms. Hageman. And you also highlighted in your testimony
that it is typical for water users to continue making these
payments for 40 to 50 years through a repayment contract or
water services contract on top of the operations and
maintenance facility payments. How have you seen the process of
needing to do this annually stifle the confidence of
developers, and ultimately prevent water projects from being
developed?
Mr. Michael. It is just another layer of difficulty and
just challenge of every year filing numerous papers. And our
districts are already challenged with a number of regulatory
requirements, and it just adds to the strain already, and
speaks to the affordability for our water users to have a huge
amount of staff time taken up with the reporting requirements
on top of everything else we have to do.
Ms. Hageman. Just more bureaucratic red tape.
Mr. Michael. A lot more work.
Ms. Hageman. OK. So, is it safe to say that the length and
complexity of the current process deters water project
development?
Mr. Michael. I don't think it helps. I mean, it definitely
doesn't help at a time when we certainly need acceleration
versus more difficulties.
Ms. Hageman. And you specifically stated that the RRA
required extensive reporting and paperwork each year for water
delivered to lands in excess of the established limits, but
that prepayments opened the door to removing these limitations.
I have constituents who have been forced to either pay heavy
fees or establish new entities every time a new operation
exceeds 960 acres. I have one constituent who called in because
he has had to establish five different entities at the
recommendation of the Bureau of Reclamation, by the way, to
avoid these fees.
Does this legislation allow irrigators bound by the 960
limitation to no longer be subject to those requirements if
they make the prepayments?
Mr. Michael. Yes, that is correct. And I would say that, in
California, especially the regulatory burdens and just the cost
in all aspects are forcing scale for a lot of farms. So, if you
are operating, it is more efficient to have scale and
effective. So, again, it is helpful to have that.
Ms. Hageman. You bet. Thank you, and that is excellent.
This is a great piece of legislation. I am deeply appreciative
of the gentlelady from Colorado for leading on this.
And I will take you up on that offer. I would sure like to
find out the information from the Bureau of Reclamation as to
what they are doing to work with the U.S. Forest Service to
prevent the kind of catastrophes that we have seen that impact
our reservoirs and our ability to store water. I look forward
to that information.
Mr. Brain. Certainly, Congresswoman. We look forward to it,
as well.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ms. Hageman. The Chair now recognizes
Ranking Member Huffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And the heavy,
burdensome fees that were just being discussed for farms over
960 acres, the translation for folks that don't know some of
this arcane lingo, that means you just pay the full cost of the
water. You don't get a subsidy. The terms we use are very
important sometimes.
Mr. Brain, I want to ask you a little more about H.R. 3675.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, prior language along
these lines has been objected to by taxpayer advocates and many
others. H.R. 3675 would permanently codify this language. And
in testimony before this Committee with a previous version of
this language, the Obama administration said, and I quote,
``There are concerns with the financial and discounting
language in the bill, including the offer of a discounted
repayment.'' And the testimony goes on to cite the
``discounting at half the Treasury rate with respect to
outstanding contract or repayment obligations.''
The legislation before us today would permanently extend
that same discounting repayment at one-half the Treasury rate
for Federal water contractors, which was only in place for 5
years when this language was, at the last minute, inserted into
the WIIN Act. And when the CBO took a look at this in 2014, it
found that taxpayers would lose $530 million in foregone
receipts to the Treasury over the period from 2025 to 2050.
So, Deputy Commissioner Brain, I want to just ask if the
Bureau has assessed the long-term effects of this legislation
with respect to payments to the Treasury, and if, in fact, this
would result in significant losses to the Treasury, foregone
receipts from Federal water contractors. Is that something that
would concern you?
Mr. Brain. Thank you so much for the question, Ranking
Member Huffman.
We have not assessed the long-term impacts. The reality is
that it would result in reduced payments into the reclamation
fund, but it would also result in increased payments into the
storage account that was mentioned earlier. So, without knowing
which Reclamation partners are specifically interested in
utilizing this authority, it is a little difficult to gauge
what the potential scope of the problem could be.
Mr. Huffman. If it resulted in significant losses to the
Treasury, though, is that something that would be a concern?
Mr. Brain. It certainly would be. From our perspective, the
reclamation fund really is something we rely on very heavily to
respond to drought.
One of our main concerns, however, with the legislation is
that the funds that would be meant to be kept for project
purposes would be going into the storage account. So, there
could be some unintended consequences there, and we would be
happy to work with the Committee on technical amendments that
would address those concerns.
Mr. Huffman. I appreciate that. I want to ask about the
acreage limitation piece.
Concerns have also been raised about allowing water
contractors to immediately convert to new contracts that won't
require interest charges for all water delivered above that
960-acre threshold, essentially accelerating the delivery of
federally subsidized water beyond small farms to large farming
operations. That is a significant public policy departure.
And I just want to ask if you could tell us how the
Reclamation Reform Act requirements that codified that acreage
limitation would change for contractors who converted their
water contractors under the terms of this bill.
Mr. Brain. Thank you again for the question, Ranking Member
Huffman.
A reclamation principle, a long-standing principle, has
been beneficiary pays. I believe you mentioned it earlier. Two
of the contractual mechanisms whereby the beneficiary does pay
for projects is the water service contract and the long-term
contracts.
Allowing stake holders, which has been done in the past
utilizing this authority, to convert from the first type of
contract to a longer-term contract, but also pay it up front,
would have impacts. And one of the impacts would mean that they
would satisfy their obligations of the contract sooner, meaning
that they will have fulfilled their obligations on the
Reclamation Reform Act sooner than they would have.
Mr. Huffman. And subsidized water would go to larger farms,
right?
Mr. Brain. Perhaps.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ranking Member Huffman. The Chair now
recognizes Congressman LaMalfa for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Michael, you mentioned that funds received from
prepayment or accelerated payment are held in a Treasury
account to be used for funding additional water storage
projects, correct?
Mr. Michael. Yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. So, California, obviously, needs to
accelerate its water storage capacity, its developments, to
take advantage of years like this one. I mean, look how much
water we are losing out on right now due to the massive excess
that we have been blessed with this year. It seems shameful.
We have pretty much Lake Shasta and Lake Oroville topped
off. I think Folsom will top off here. New Melones is doing
pretty good. It is a little tougher one to fill, of course. San
Luis Reservoir, they managed to get that filled up. But Trinity
Lake is lagging way behind. But we are doing pretty good, for
the most part.
So, when talking about the repayment and such, from your
experience, what group of water users do you believe would want
to take advantage of this early repayment option you are
talking about? From the people you associate with or, more
particularly, to your district.
Mr. Michael. So, more than 90 percent of our districts
underneath the umbrella of our agency have taken advantage of
the repayment process under the WIIN Act and the contract
conversions. So, it is very popular in our area, and was used
widely and, again, seems like that should be extended as an
opportunity for others. But it varies, I think, by
circumstance.
Mr. LaMalfa. You see it as a good value for the taxpayer?
Mr. Michael. I do. Again, there are trade-offs with
accelerating payments. But money being directed more readily
and quickly, potentially for water storage projects, I think,
is very valuable in light of what we are facing in California
and throughout the West.
Mr. LaMalfa. Certainly. We have opportunities right now
that are close to the top of the books. Actually, in my
neighborhood, with a possible raise of Shasta Dam, you need
630,000 acre feet when you fill it, and then Sites Reservoir,
which would also impound 1.5 million acre-feet, we would
probably have 700,000 or 800,000 right now if it existed. So,
certainly, we need to look at all these aspects.
Deputy Commissioner Brain, as you had mentioned, with the
enactment of the WIIN Act, storage funding from contract
prepayments is currently $344 million. Is that a correct
number?
Mr. Brain. It sounds correct, sir, but I would have to get
back to you on whether that is the actual----
Mr. LaMalfa. Ballpark is fine, OK.
So, the question I posed to Chairman Michael, do you have
an estimate for how much we might expect the Treasury's account
for water storage projects to increase with the passage of H.R.
3675?
Mr. Brain. No, we don't right now. I would be happy to work
with you and your staff on that.
The difficulty is we don't know the extent nor the type of
entities that would be interested in utilizing this authority.
We have the past experience that we have that was mentioned,
the success of utilizing the authority with respect to the 86
users that have already benefited from it. But without knowing
more about the specifics of the types of entities that are out
there that could use this in the future, we really are unaware
of the impacts.
Mr. LaMalfa. How about from existing program authorities?
What recommendations would the Bureau be looking at that we
could, with existing authority, be able to expand storage
projects?
Mr. Brain. I am sorry, sir, I don't particularly understand
the question.
Mr. LaMalfa. Does the Bureau have recommendations using
existing program authorities to increase water storage project
funding?
Mr. Brain. No, certainly, one of the things we are doing,
Congressman, is utilizing the funding provided to us by the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to increase storage opportunities
in the West. We have invested significant resources that were
provided to us by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and we
stood up a new small storage program to do so, as well.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. With legislation like the WIIN Act, that
was a very bipartisan effort, there are contentions made that
important regulations might be pushed aside with a passage of
Representative Boebert's bill. Do you agree with that
estimation that, indeed, regulations will be pushed aside?
Mr. Brain. I would say that we agree that there would be a
reduction in the administrative burdens that do currently
exist.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, the burdens to your ability to carry out
your tasks, your duties would be reduced.
Mr. Brain. It would be the burdens on the project partners,
like the ones that my colleague detailed earlier.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. So, a plus. OK.
I see my time is expired, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. LaMalfa. The Chair recognizes Ms.
Porter for 5 minutes.
Ms. Porter. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
About half of the members of this Subcommittee represent
residents of the Colorado Basin states. Deputy Commissioner
Brain, how does Reclamation's Basin Study Program prevent these
fine folks, our constituents, from going thirsty?
Mr. Brain. Thank you very much for the question,
Congresswoman.
The Basin Study Program really is a unique authority within
Reclamation's portfolio. It allows us to bring together
multiple types of stakeholders in a particular river basin to
really gain intelligence as to what problems are facing their
water scarcity issues in the future, and also what tools they
may have in their quiver to be able to deal with those in the
future.
Ms. Porter. What are the biggest problems? What are the
biggest failures of the Basin Study Program at this time?
Mr. Brain. Congresswoman, again, I appreciate the question.
I would say that a reauthorization of the Basin Study
Program would allow Reclamation to continue partnering with
their stakeholders to ensure that we continue to carry out the
work that is already going on.
Ms. Porter. So, here we have a successful government
program that is collaborating with different kinds of
stakeholders--private, public--at different levels of
government. And the biggest problem it has is that it is not
reauthorized.
Deputy Commissioner Brain, without the Basin Study Program,
how will it be harder for utilities to provide water?
Mr. Brain. Where do we start? The challenges facing our
Western partners in Reclamation's mission are immense, and they
are exacerbated by climate change. You, yourself, in the state
of California have experienced compounding years of drought,
followed by significant atmospheric rivers that came through in
the early part of this year.
What the Basin Study program does is allow us to work with
our partners, who can be state, they can be local, they can be
tribal, they can be water managers, to really come up with a
suite of tools that identify the problems and utilize the best
available science to address those in the future. And that
could even point them toward funding decisions they may make.
Ms. Porter. Could our constituents go thirsty or have
limited water during a drought if we don't manage our water
resources as carefully as possible?
Mr. Brain. Reclamation's mission, Congresswoman, is to
provide water and power to our Western states. And, certainly,
climate change and water scarcity is challenging our ability to
carry out that mission.
Ms. Porter. This is a very sort of basic question, but what
happens when people go thirsty, are thirsty?
Mr. Brain. I would say again the mission of the Bureau of
Reclamation is to provide water and power to them. The first of
those would be water, because it is primary to the needs of our
colleagues out in the West.
Ms. Porter. I noticed this Committee always very kindly
provides water for all of its Members because it is not fun to
go thirsty. It is not good for your health. Does any Member of
Congress here want their constituents to go thirsty?
Chairman Bentz, I knew you wouldn't raise your hand. When
you put this bill up for a legislative hearing, I knew you were
serious about stopping Americans from being thirsty, and I need
your help with the next step. I would love to have your
commitment to marking up this bill and getting it onto the
Floor.
I would like to yield to you for a yes or no response.
Mr. Bentz. That is very kind of you, but I think I will
pass until I read your bill more carefully.
Also, I am going to be asking some questions of the Deputy
Commissioner regarding the exact value of the program. I did
reach out, just for your information, to folks who have used
this program in the past. One didn't even remember it, and the
other one was modestly supportive. We will continue to look
into it.
Ms. Porter. Well, I appreciate your engagement, Mr.
Chairman, and I am looking forward to providing some more
information to you about how this program helps folks in
California, where we hear a lot of good things about it.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to insert into the
record a letter of support that my office received yesterday
from the National Water Resources Association for this bill,
H.R. 3027. Specifically, they are supporting this bill, as long
as I make the change to the 7-year reauthorization, which I
already signaled that I would do. May I enter this into the
record?
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.
Ms. Porter. Thank you.
We have 3 months to extend this program. We have about 3 to
4 weeks left in our June, July, August before we hit that
September reauthorization deadline. I really appreciate the
Chairman's interest in this issue, and I look forward to
hearing his questions to the Deputy Commissioner.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Ms. Porter. The Chair now recognizes
Representative Gonzalez-Colon for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Michael, in your testimony you explained that
since the WIIN Act was enacted into law, over 80 entities,
including nearly all of the 27 members of the San Luis & Delta-
Mendota Water Authority, have pursued repayment of their
Federal obligations under section 4011 authority.
My question will be could you discuss some of the reasons
that might explain why these entities and other Reclamation
contractors pursue accelerated repayment of their capital
obligations?
And what benefits do they gain from prepaying their
outstanding Federal obligations using the authorities provided
under section 4011 of the WIIN Act?
Mr. Michael. As has been highlighted a little bit, one of
the common reasons that water users pursue accelerated
repayment is to remove the acreage limits and reporting
requirements established by the Reclamation Reform Act, or RRA,
which are very cumbersome and restrictive.
The efficiencies gained by removing the RRA restrictions
and requirements can be significant and lead many contractors
to seek paying out their contracts sooner, which is one of the
primary reasons. And it also increases some certainty for
contractors regarding long-term water supply, and allows
entities to pursue title transfer in order to increase
financing opportunities and streamline approvals.
So, each entity has a different calculus that they look at
as to why, but, essentially, probably those are the top
reasons.
Mrs. Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And how does
the Federal Government and the American taxpayers benefit from
this authority provided under section 4011, allowing
agricultural and municipal water users to prepay outstanding
obligations?
And how will permanently authorizing this section, as this
bill, H.R. 3675, seeks to do, benefit both Reclamation
contractors and the Federal Government?
Mr. Michael. I think the primary is getting the dollars
back to the Treasury earlier than would be in the drawn-out
process of the long-term repayments.
And then also, as highlighted, that money going into the
water storage account is helpful to get badly-needed projects
that have time sensitivity based on what we are seeing from the
changing climate, and the variability that we are seeing, and
the droughts. So, again, we need projects in a more rapid time
frame, and this would essentially get those payments upfront
into that water storage account faster.
Mrs. Gonzalez-Colon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank the witnesses, as well, for coming today.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman
Napolitano for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Brain, good to see you again, sir. My question is to
you, Mr. Brain, in regard to the Basin Study Program, assisting
water managers in assessing the risks and impacts of climate
change on water resources at the regional level.
Also, can you speak to the importance of collaboration
between all Federal agencies and the local water managers plus
the Native American tribes in developing effective, long-term
management strategies and conservation?
Mr. Brain. Thank you, Congresswoman Napolitano, it is good
to see you, as well.
You really hit the nail on the head with the benefits of
the program. It really has a way of incorporating and bringing
together a wider variety of stakeholders that are across the
river basin that are really seeking common ground. And they do
so by utilizing the best available science and in partnership
with Reclamation to identify those problems that they are
looking to address.
And, as we mentioned earlier, they could be addressing them
sort of operationally, they could be identifying potential
funding opportunities that are out there. So, it really is a
way of bringing together a diverse group of stakeholders.
And we have carried out 33 basin studies, and would be
happy to share with folks in the record some of the benefits of
that.
Mrs. Napolitano. I would like to see some of them, if you
would, please. I think the Committee would like to see them.
I think that it is just that this current situation in
drought in the Western states has called for collaboration. I
hope that this collaboration goes beyond this time. and that it
continues, especially with the EPA. I know that I have been
after the Army Corps of Engineers to include into their goals
water storage, and I am hoping that goes into one of the
agencies that you talk to.
Mr. Brain. Congresswoman, thank you again for the question.
We are constantly communicating with our colleagues across the
Federal Government, and that includes the Corps of Engineers.
As you very well know, Reclamation is a decentralized
organization, so the vast majority of our 6,000 employees are
spread out through the West, and they live and work in the same
communities that our colleagues from the Corps do. So, those
conversations and the collaboration happen on a day-to-day
basis.
Mrs. Napolitano. Good. I am just wondering how long that is
going to take before any Federal agency, not just yours,
actually puts the programs to work instead of waiting months
and years sometimes before they are implemented.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Congressman
Duarte for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Deputy Commissioner Brain, welcome. Thank you for being
here today. The Bureau of Reclamation does some important work
on water infrastructure throughout the arid West, correct?
Mr. Brain. Congressman, we like to think so.
Mr. Duarte. Yes, I do. I do believe so. And when you build
this infrastructure, it has to be paid for over a period of
time. It is bonded, it is financed with hundreds of millions of
dollars, if not billions of Federal money.
And would it be true to say that an important part of your
valuation for projects would be water rights?
Mr. Brain. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duarte. In California, we have water rights
underpinning enormous Federal investments in water
infrastructure. And, of course, those water rights and that
water availability underpins a $3.6 trillion annual economy and
42 million people not going thirsty, as was of interest.
Has the Bureau of Reclamation taken an interest in
California Legislature's recent efforts to rewrite our water
rights, dissolve our current common law water rights system as
it is established, and replace it with a complete authority
under the State Water Resources Control Board?
Mr. Brain. Congressman, thank you very much for the
question.
I have colleagues within the Bureau of Reclamation that are
aware of and intimately familiar with that. Unfortunately, I
came today prepared to discuss the three bills that are before
the Subcommittee, and I don't have the accurate information to
be able to answer that question.
Mr. Duarte. OK. I would like you to get back to me on that.
I am very concerned that your investments in the water
infrastructure--canals, dams--throughout California, the
Central Valley project--you know all the assets--are direly
threatened by some emerging legislative efforts to dissolve
California's well-established water rights system, and to have
those water rights allocated each year, potentially, by a newly
elected legislature. And in doing that, even threatening to do
that, I am very concerned that it makes future infrastructure
investment nearly impossible.
And without the security of the water rights, how do we
invest in long-term water infrastructure? And I will ask that
in the abstract, not the specifics, since I realize, although
you are a Deputy Commissioner, you may not have been prepared
specifically for the immediate issue.
Mr. Brain. Thank you, Congressman. I am certainly happy to
follow up with your staff and commit to you to work on an
answer for that.
Mr. Duarte. Mr. Michael, I know you have been around water
for a while. Do you have any thoughts on these issues?
Mr. Michael. Well, water rights are, obviously, critical
for municipalities and agricultural users, and even our
environmental users. So, security of water and deliveries is
what underpins our communities and the economy that we have
built in California.
Certainly, I can see a path forward to some potential
changes to address some of the concerns, but certainly would
think a wholesale rewrite of water rights would be extremely
problematic, and not beneficial. So, I can see there is a path
forward, but certainly, as you pointed out, a lot of
investments have been made, and values have been established,
and it certainly would be very difficult.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. I am hoping the Bureau of
Reclamation will take a look at this and assert itself into the
potential, as you made the investments on behalf of the
American taxpayer to develop the economy and the environmental
priorities of California. Our Ag system, our communities are
all reliant upon these water assets. And to reallocate the
water rights from them would certainly upset the expectations
of the Federal Government and its interests when it funded
these water assets.
Mr. Brain. Congressman, I look forward to following up with
you on that. I truly do.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. Another issue, earlier this spring,
and many springs, many California farmers are waiting for their
water allocations to come down. And, understandably, there is a
certain disposition for the Bureau of Reclamation to be
cautious about over-committing water in a given year until the
snowmelt comes in, and a minimum water allocation can be safely
designated. This year, we didn't see water allocations really
get finalized until March and April, when we had obvious
abundant snowpack and water resources coming into the dams.
Could you please help us understand or assure us that we
can give earlier allocation information to our farmers, so they
can plan their operations in the future?
Mr. Brain. Congressman, thank you for the question. I
certainly understand the concern. And as I mentioned before,
the vast majority of our Reclamation employees do live and work
in communities throughout the American West, so they are
intimately familiar with the natures of the work that takes
place out there.
So, I do commit to work with you as we move forward on
that.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, I appreciate it.
I yield back to the Chair.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Duarte. The Chair now recognizes
Congressman Gallego for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member
Huffman. I am glad to be here today to highlight a common-
sense, bipartisan bill that will improve Arizona's clean energy
storage capacity, improve energy reliability, and fight rising
utility costs.
As Arizona continues to grow and become a hub of industry
and technology, it is more important than ever to make sure
that we are prepared to supply the energy our state needs from
reliable, renewable sources. Not only would improving our
state's pumped storage hydropower facilities increase our
overall energy supply, it would improve grid reliability. This
is especially important in the hot summer months, when
blackouts would have major impacts on health and demand is at
its highest. By allowing SRP to explore construction of
additional facilities, H.R. 1607 is an important step in the
right direction.
Thank you, Ms. Meyers, for being here today and for the
work that SRP does providing reliable, sustainable electricity
in our state. I have a couple of questions for you.
As you know, our home state of Arizona is blessed with 300-
plus days of sunshine and abundant solar resources. In fact,
Arizona ranks as one of the top five states in the country when
it comes to solar resources. How will pumped storage increase
the amount of clean energy on the grid?
Ms. Meyers. Thank you very much, Representative Gallego.
Today, as we generate electricity from solar power, we are
only capable of using that energy as it is produced. So, having
the ability to store that power really expands our capability
to use renewable energy, and expands our resiliency and
flexibility.
Mr. Gallego. With the proposed addition of new hydro pumped
storage, how confident are you and SRP that there are adequate
water supplies for this project?
Ms. Meyers. Thank you for that question.
We actually operate pumped-back storage on the reservoirs
on the Salt River Project, and we keep our reservoirs full for
that same purpose, our lower three reservoirs. So, knowing that
we would draw water from those reservoirs, it works very well
within the system that we have today, and we are very confident
that we have the water supplies that we need for the pumped-
back storage project.
Mr. Gallego. And can you tell us how SRP selected the two
sites it is exploring adding this pump storage to, and why you
are looking at specifically these two sites?
Ms. Meyers. Yes. Probably the key component of the site
selection is that they are adjacent to our existing system. We
have access to transmission, and we have existing withdrawn
lands for a large portion of that project already. So, it is
actually the perfect site to add to the Federal reclamation
project.
Mr. Gallego. And Ms. Meyers, how much energy would this
produce?
Ms. Meyers. We have the potential to produce about 2,000
megawatts, which is a significant portion of our overall
capacity.
Mr. Gallego. And how many megawatts does SRP generate in 1
day?
Ms. Meyers. Our overall capacity is 900 megawatts, I am
sorry, 9,000 megawatts.
Mr. Gallego. OK. But this is definitely a good additive to
that. Well, thank you so much.
And I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, and I thank the witnesses for their
valuable testimony, and the Members for their questions.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. Eastern Time on Tuesday, June 20. The hearing record will
be held open for 10 business days for these responses.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 2:39 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Huffman

Statement for the Record
John Buse, Senior Counsel
Center for Biological Diversity
on H.R. 3675

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee: I am a Senior Counsel at the Center for Biological
Diversity, which is a non-profit, public interest environmental
organization with over 87,000 members. The Center is dedicated to the
protection of native species and their habitats through science,
policy, and environmental law. I have worked on the Center's behalf on
a range of federal and California state water policy and water
infrastructure issues, and with that perspective, offer these comments
in opposition to H.R. 3675.
H.R. 3675 is a small bill with large consequences. H.R. 3675 would
amend section 4013 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements for The
Nation Act (``WIIN Act,'' Public Law 114-322) to make another section
of the WIIN Act--section 4011--permanent. Section 4011, which expired
in 2021, provides that federal water service contracts may be
``converted'' to repayment contracts, where the Bureau of Reclamation
sets a fixed repayment obligation for contractors.
As the House Natural Resources Committee's June 14, 2023 memorandum
states, more than 80 federal water contractors took advantage of
section 4011's contract conversion opportunity while that provision was
in effect. Most or all of these contractors held short-term water
supply contracts for water supplied by California's Central Valley
Project (``CVP''). Under the terms of section 4011 of the WIIN Act,
these water supply contracts were converted to permanent repayment
contracts. Reclamation converted the contracts without any compliance
with federal environmental laws, including the National Environmental
Policy Act (``NEPA'') and the Endangered Species Act notwithstanding
the manifest environmental consequences of making the contracts
permanent for California's San Francisco Bay-Delta system, for other
watersheds affected by the CVP, such as the Trinity River Basin, for
federally recognized tribes, and for federally protected species.
Reclamation has acknowledged that water diversions for operation of the
CVP have had serious adverse effects on the human environment, yet it
has made these commitments permanent without any consideration of
alternatives or conditions that would reduce or avoid these effects.
If H.R. 3675 becomes law, Reclamation will doubtless persist in
converting water service contracts to permanent repayment contracts
without complying with NEPA and the Endangered Species Act. We have
challenged the lawfulness of Reclamation's failure to comply with
federal environmental laws in a case now pending in the Eastern
District of California.\1\ However, even if we prevail in this
litigation, H.R. 3675 will perpetuate another grave injustice that has
occurred with the conversion of federal water contracts under the WIIN
Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Ctr. for Biological Diversity v. U.S. Bureau of Reclamation,
Case No. 1:20-cv-00706-JLT-EPG.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under the Central Valley Project Improvement Act, CVP contractors
are obligated to pay environmental restoration costs to address the
CVP's ongoing damage to the environment and fisheries.\2\ However, in
CVP contracts converted under the WIIN Act before section 4011 expired,
Reclamation has consistently failed to allocate over $340 million of
these restoration costs to contractors.\3\ Thus, H.R. 3675 would make
permanent a provision that Reclamation has used to shift the burden of
funding hundreds of millions of dollars of vitally needed restoration
away from wealthy CVP contractors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Central Valley Improvement Act Sec. 3406, Pub. L. No. 102-
575, 106 Stat. 4600, 4706-31 (1992).
\3\ First Amended Complaint, Hoopa Valley Tribe v. U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation, E.D. Cal. Case No. 1:20-cv-01814-JLT-EPG (attached) at
para.121.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For these reasons, the WIIN Act's contract conversion program
should not be renewed, and we oppose H.R. 3675.

______

Hoopa Valley Tribe v. U.S. Bureau of Reclamation

Case 1:20-cv-01814-JLT-EPG

U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California

Full document is available on our Committee Repository at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20230614/116079/HHRG-
118-II13-20230614-SD003.pdf

------

Submission for the Record by Reps. Boebert and Porter

National Water Resources Association

Washington, DC

June 13, 2023

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chairman
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

On behalf of the National Water Resources Association (NWRA), I am
writing to express our support for H.R. 3675, the Western Water
Accelerated Revenue Repayment Act and a modified H.R. 3027, the
Reclamation Climate Change and Water Program Reauthorization Act of
2023. These bills make available resources and tools that can enhance
the management of water resources in the Western United States.
NWRA is a nonprofit federation of state water resources
associations, regional associations, and agriculture and municipal
water agencies. Our members provide water and hydropower to
approximately 50 million individuals, families, agricultural producers,
and other industries in a manner that supports our communities large
and small, our economy and our environment.
H.R. 3675 would amend the Water Infrastructure Improvements for the
Nation Act (WIIN) to allow for Section 4011 to once again authorize
agriculture and municipal water users to prepay outstanding project
costs through a single lump sum payment or over a period of three
years. This added tool will assist water systems in managing their
operations in the most effective and efficient way possible at a time
of rising costs and higher interest rates.
H.R. 3027 would reauthorize the Reclamation Climate Change and
Water Program that was used by the Bureau of Reclamation (BOR) to
establish the WaterSMART Basin Study Program (Program). The Program
uses basin studies, reservoir operations pilots, and studies on
changing weather patterns to assist the BOR and its partners enhance
water supply management. This program is another tool water systems in
the West can utilize to improve operational efficiencies. We recognize
that due to House Rules, H.R. 3027 will need to be modified to proceed.
We support modifying the bill to provide for a seven-year
reauthorization and maintain current FY2023 funding levels.
The immense water resource challenges in the Western United States
require a strong partnership and regular collaboration between the
water community and federal agencies. We believe H.R. 3675 and H.R.
3027 look to ensure a broad range of resources are available to address
the needs of the Western water community.

Sincerely,

Dale Nellor,
Executive Vice President

[all]
