- H.R. 7408, "AMERICA'S WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION ACT"

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 7408, ``AMERICA'S WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Wednesday, March 6, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-101

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-062              WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

BRUCE WESTERMAN, AR, Chairman
DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Vice Chairman
RAUL M. GRIJALVA, AZ, Ranking Member

Doug Lamborn, CO                        Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sabla n,
Tom McClintock, CA                              CNMI
Paul Gosar, AZ                          Jared Huffman, CA
Garret Graves, LA                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS            Joe Neguse, CO
Doug LaMalfa, CA                        Mike Levin, CA
Daniel Webster, FL                      Katie Porter, CA
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon,               PRTeresa Leger Fernandez, NM
Russ Fulcher, ID                        Melanie A. Stansbury, NM
Pete Stauber, MN                        Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
John R. Curtis, UT                      Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, NY
Tom Tiffany, WI                         Kevin Mullin, CA
Jerry Carl, AL                          Val T. Hoyle, OR
Matt Rosendale, MT                      Sydney Kamlager-Dove, CA
Lauren Boebert, CO                      Seth Magaziner, RI
Cliff Bentz, OR                         Nydia M. Velazquez, NY
Jen Kiggans, VA                         Ed Case, HI
Jim Moylan, GU                          Debbie Dingell, MI
Wesley P. Hunt, TX                      Susie Lee, NV
Mike Collins, GA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL
John Duarte, CA
Harriet M. Hageman, WY

Vivian Moeglein, Staff Director
Tom Connally, Chief Counsel
Lora Snyder, Democratic Staff Director
http://naturalresources.house.gov
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON WATER, WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES

CLIFF BENTZ, OR, Chairman
JEN KIGGANS, VA, Vice Chair
JARED HUFFMAN, CA, Ranking Member

Robert J. Wittman, VA                Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Mike Levin, CA
Garret Graves, LA                    Mary Sattler Peltola, AK
Aumua Amata C. Radewagen, AS         Kevin Mullin, CA
Doug LaMalfa, CA                     Val T. Hoyle, OR
Daniel Webster, FL                   Seth Magaziner, RI
Jenniffer Gonzalez-Colon, PR         Debbie Dingell, MI
Jerry Carl, AL                       Ruben Gallego, AZ
Lauren Boebert, CO                   Joe Neguse, CO
Jen Kiggans, VA                      Katie Porter, CA
Anna Paulina Luna, FL                Ed Case, HI
John Duarte, CA                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ, ex officio
Harriet M. Hageman, WY
Bruce Westerman, AR, ex officio

------
CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Wednesday, March 6, 2024.........................     1

Statement of Members:

Bentz, Hon. Cliff, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Oregon............................................     1
Huffman, Hon. Jared, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................     3
Westerman, Hon. Bruce, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arkansas..........................................     5

Statement of Witnesses:

Strickler, Matthew, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and
Wildlife and Parks, Department of the Interior, Washington,
DC.........................................................     7
Prepared statement of....................................     9
Booth, Austin, Director, Arkansas Game and Fish Commission,
Little Rock, Arkansas......................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Bronson, Ryan, Director of Government Affairs, Rocky Mountain
Elk Foundation, Missoula, Montana..........................    23
Prepared statement of....................................    25
Olson, Glenn, Donal O'Brien Chair in Bird Conservation and
Public Policy, National Audubon Society, New York, New York    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Supplemental testimony submitted for the record..........    30
Tenny, David P., President and CEO, National Alliance of
Forest Owners, Washington, DC..............................    37
Prepared statement of....................................    38

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record:

National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, Statement for the
Record.....................................................    73

Submissions for the Record by Representative Westerman

Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Letter
of Support.............................................    77
National Cattlemen's Beef Association and Public Lands
Council, Letter of Support.............................    78
Property and Environmental Research Center, Letter of
Support................................................    80
SEAFWA, ``Non-Hunting Sport Shooters' and Firearm Owners'
Attitudes Toward the Federal Aid in Wildlife
Restoration Program''..................................    82
Outside Groups Supporting H.R. 7408......................    83
Associated Builders and Contractors, Letter of Support...    84

Submissions for the Record by Representative Huffman

Poster used in hearing...................................    43
``Bruce bucks'' image....................................    44
AWHCA and RAWA Comparison of Sample State Apportionment
Estimations............................................    44
Letter from stakeholders opposing H.R. 7408..............    85
Letter from stakeholders opposing CEQ funding cuts in
H.R. 7408..............................................    88
Letter from stakeholders opposing coastal resilience
funding cuts in H.R. 7408..............................    89

Submissions for the Record by Representative Dingell

Co-sponsor lists for RAWA in the 117th Congress and 118th
Congress...............................................    50
117th Congress RAWA Floor Vote...........................    56
Blue Ribbon Panel, ``The Future of America's Fish and
Wildlife--Final Report and Recommendations'' March 2016    59
H.R. 2773, ``Recovering America's Wildlife Act of 2002''.    60
Letters of Support for RAWA from multiple stakeholders...    61
RAWA Markup, 116th Congress, Committee Report 116-685,
Pt. 1..................................................    63

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 7408, TO AMEND THE PITTMAN-ROBERTSON
WILDLIFE RESTORATION ACT TO MAKE SUPPLEMENTAL FUNDS AVAILABLE FOR
MANAGEMENT OF FISH AND WILDLIFE SPECIES OF GREATEST CONSERVATION NEED
AS DETERMINED BY STATE FISH AND WILDLIFE AGENCIES, AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES, ``AMERICA'S WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSERVATION ACT''

----------

Wednesday, March 6, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 12:05 p.m., in
Room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Cliff Bentz
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bentz, Radewagen, LaMalfa,
Kiggans, Duarte, Hageman, Westerman; Huffman, Peltola, Hoyle,
and Dingell.

Mr. Bentz. The Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries will come to order.
Good morning, everyone. I want to welcome Members,
witnesses, and our guests in the audience to today's hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Under Committee Rule 4(f), any oral opening statements at
hearings are limited to the Chairman and the Ranking Member. I
therefore ask unanimous consent that all other Members' opening
statements be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted in accordance with Committee Rule 3(o).
Without objection, so ordered.
We are here today to consider H.R. 7408, ``America's
Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act,'' sponsored by Chairman
Westerman of Arkansas. I now recognize myself for a 5-minute
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLIFF BENTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF OREGON

Mr. Bentz. Today, the Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Subcommittee will consider H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act, offered by Congressman Bruce
Westerman of Arkansas. This legislation is a combination of
policies that would, if enacted, increase the chances of
recovering at-risk species, sharpen the operation of the
Endangered Species Act, and improve the investment of tax
dollars dedicated to these important areas.
Specifically, this legislation would invest in state
wildlife programs such as congressionally-mandated State
Wildlife Action Plans, which serve as outlines for the recovery
of species of greatest concern. These programs exist in 50
states and in U.S. territories.
The bill imposes congressional oversight on the expenditure
of taxpayer money, assuring that the allocation of these funds
is actually resulting in habitat restoration and species
recovery.
This legislation will also improve management of our
National Wildlife Refuge System by granting Good Neighbor
Authority to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. This is
important to me because the Klamath Basin located in Oregon and
Northern California is the home to six National Wildlife
Refuges. I represent that portion of the Basin in Oregon, and
Congressman LaMalfa represents the portion of the Basin in
California.
We have firsthand knowledge of the neglect and intentional
damage being inflicted upon these refuges by the inappropriate
taking of the refuges' water to support in-stream interests,
rather than the creatures that need the habitat formerly
available in the refuges. This Good Neighbor Authority will
provide the Service with a means of working with other states,
tribes, and counties to conduct and implement improved
management of refuges across the United States.
I would be remiss if, while discussing refuges, I fail to
mention the truly damaging rule concerning refuges recently
proposed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife. This rule would damage
refuges by limiting practices that are beneficial to the birds
using the refuges. These practices include use of certain types
of crops, the management of bird-hungry predators, and other
standard agricultural practices. These regulations will harm
our refuges by limiting the use of Good Neighbor Authority.
This is an issue that this Committee will be looking into.
The bill would also provide a legislative fix to Cottonwood
Environmental Law Center v. U.S. Forest Service, a Ninth
Circuit decision that has triggered a reinitiation of
consultation frenzy in our National Forest System. This result
is not improved management, but instead has caused and
continues to cause inefficient and duplicative planning
efforts, diverting the Forest Service from focusing upon the
existential dangers of wildfire and the many other important
issues our forests face. The court's misguided decision to
force unnecessary and duplicative review of all other plans
upon a triggering event will be corrected in this bill.
H.R. 7408 also makes common-sense and strategic reforms to
the Endangered Species Act that are designed to empower private
landowners and states to conserve and restore habitat for
listed species. It is clear from its own data that the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service has failed in its responsibility to
recover species. According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, 300 domestic species were projected to recover by
2023, but only 57 species have recovered. This bill addresses
this dismal record, providing incentives to thousands of
private landowners, states, counties, tribes, and others that
will promote species recovery and improve the ways we have
available to actually recover species.
One of the many innovative ideas in this bill is its
requirement that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the
National Marine Fisheries develop objective, incremental
recovery goals for listed species, and then to provide
regulatory relief as those goals are met. Having these agencies
determine and explain in detail the numbers of species needed
to achieve sustainability is valuable for any number of
reasons, but here are several.
A clear statement of the goal to be achieved will allow the
agencies to immediately reduce regulation when that goal is
achieved.
Secondly, a clear statement of the number of species
necessary to achieve sustainability will provide assurance to
the agency so it can discontinue efforts in that area and shift
to other species in need without, hopefully, the flood of
lawsuits that inevitably follow agency actions.
Finally, establishing a goal will avoid what is happening
now with the grizzly bear. Two thousand was the general idea,
two thousand bears. Now, there are close to 8,000, and still
confusion as to which number is correct. This situation is best
described by Lewis Carroll, who said, ``When you don't know
where you're going, any road will get you there.'' We are way
past being able to afford the cost of wandering about, not
knowing where we are going, and this bill provides a
requirement that we actually know what we are trying to achieve
when it comes to species recovery.
I am looking forward to hearing from Chair Westerman, the
sponsor of this legislation, and hearing from all of the
witnesses joining us today.
I now recognize Ranking Member Huffman for his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JARED HUFFMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Huffman. Good morning. Nearly a decade ago,
representatives from states, NGOs, businesses, and sportsmen
were assembled into a blue ribbon panel to answer an important
question: What is needed to fully implement State Wildlife
Action Plans so we can stop the drastic decline in important
species and their habitat? And the response was clear: $1.3
billion annually in mandatory, permanent funding to realize a
transformative approach to conservation.
This formed the foundation of Representative Debbie
Dingell's bipartisan Recovering America's Wildlife Act, or
RAWA. The work of Debbie Dingell and our colleagues on both
sides of the aisle, in conjunction with an inclusive and
deliberative process, is a testament to how big bipartisan
bills have always happened. They did everything right, and that
is why RAWA passed the House with solid bipartisan support last
Congress, and garnered thousands of endorsements and strong
state and tribal support from all over the country.
But thoughtful, bipartisan lawmaking fell out of favor when
team extreme took over the House. Instead of building on this
great work, the Chairman has hijacked and frankly made a
partisan mess of RAWA. After a year of promising that he was
committed to getting this done, this bill that we are
considering today is all we got. We went from a bill with 42
Republican co-sponsors and 17 Republicans voting for it on the
House Floor to a bill that has no bipartisan support because it
has been turned into a MAGA ransom note.
No wonder team extreme can't figure out its messaging.
Since the rollout, we have heard three different narratives.
``It is not RAWA'' is one of them. Then there is ``it is kind
of like RAWA.'' And then there is ``it is better than RAWA.''
So, for those wondering which it is, let me help. Kind of like
RAWA is certainly not it. Better than RAWA is definitely not
it. Not RAWA is closer, but doesn't quite capture it.
The real description is that it is anti-RAWA, it is a
Trojan horse that undermines Fish and Wildlife funding. This
botched attempt at rewriting RAWA lacks mandatory permanent
funding, which was the whole point from the blue ribbon panel.
It only authorizes $320 million annually for all of our states
and territories. And let's be clear: That $320 million isn't
real money. You know that, right?
Team extreme, the folks who scramble for Democratic votes
every time there is a must-pass piece of legislation in this
Congress, expect you to believe that you can count on them to
appropriate this funding every year. For those watching at home
who may have heard the Chairman's opening statements, or who
may be listening to what we are certainly going to hear in a
moment from Mr. Westerman, you may have thought that House
Republicans had an epiphany and are actually proposing a
serious investment in protecting wildlife.
Let me explain what is really going on here. For any
additional wildlife funding to happen under this bill, the
money would have to be specifically appropriated by a future
Congress. This messy bill doesn't bother to do it because team
extreme would never vote for it. So, the $320 million, that is
essentially Monopoly money. And I will pass some around here
for those who are interested in pretending that we are actually
funding wildlife. And team extreme is going to keep handing out
real taxpayer money, we know that, to their friends in the
fossil fuel industry and the mining industries. We have seen
that in several of their bills. But for wildlife, pretend money
is going to have to do.
Look, unfortunately, this is not the only problem with the
bill. It point blank undermines existing habitat conservation
efforts by rescinding over $1 billion for conservation and
permitting from the Inflation Reduction Act and Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, rescinding a billion real dollars in return
for $320 million pretend. What a deal for wildlife.
It also guts the commitments we have made to local
conservation efforts. The rewrite of the tribal title is
appalling, slashing the authorization to just $20 million a
year, which is supposed to cover all 574 federally recognized
tribes. That comes down to about $20,000 per tribe annually.
That is insulting.
Straying further from the blue ribbon recommendations, the
bill would sunset the Pittman-Robertson Act sub-account in
2029, leaving states and tribes in chaos and uncertainty.
Oh, and if you didn't notice, under this Chairman's bill,
10 of the 16 states and territories represented by members of
this Subcommittee will actually be losing money for habitat
conservation, including Chairman Westerman's home state of
Arkansas.
And finally, it wouldn't be a Subcommittee hearing without
an attack on our bedrock environmental laws. This bill
dismantles core ESA protections.
So, look, folks, we are running out of time to address our
biodiversity crisis to help wildlife. We had a blue ribbon
panel that led to RAWA. We need to finish the good work that
Representative Dingell and so many others began in the previous
Congress. This bill is a partisan, harmful, and extreme attempt
to take us backward. We should oppose it and let Representative
Dingell and folks who are serious about wildlife funding get
back to work.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. I now recognize the Chairman of the Full
Committee, Mr. Westerman, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRUCE WESTERMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Bentz. It sounds like
Representative Huffman is almost there on this one.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Westerman. It was once said some of my colleagues
across the aisle aren't always trying to mislead people or mis-
state facts, they just know so much about just what isn't so.
And I think we have seen an illustration of that today.
And I will remind everybody that the bill that my colleague
referred to did pass the House last Congress with a Democrat
Majority, but it didn't even get a vote in the Democrat Senate,
Democratic-controlled Senate, or obviously, it didn't make it
to the Democrat President's desk. So, we are trying to do
something that is actually good for wildlife management and
fiscally responsible. And that is why I am glad that we are
holding a hearing on my bill, H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act.
And, again, I want to thank everyone for being here.
The long-term health of our species is determined by the
quantity and quality of habitat that they call home. And the
best way to recover at-risk species is by restoring their
habitat. To borrow a phrase from the Field of Dreams, ``If you
build it, they will come.'' America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act brings together a series of investments in
conservation and policy initiatives that are designed to
empower states, tribes, and private landowners to restore
habitat for species, including species listed under the
Endangered Species Act and those at risk of being listed under
the ESA.
And for those who may think this is an extreme way to do
business, it is kind of the same model we use for the farm
bill, where we reauthorize it every 5 years and it is subject
to appropriations. So, it doesn't seem like such an extreme way
to do business to me.
Mr. Chairman, something I particularly want to highlight
that makes this bill unique is that it will play a role in
restoring wildlife habitat across all landownerships, whether
state, Federal, tribal, or private lands.
What the bill does on private lands will be especially
critical. As the conservationist Aldo Leopold put it,
``conservation will ultimately boil down to rewarding the
private landowner who conserves the public interest.'' The
legislation encourages state game and fish agencies to partner
with and give technical assistance to private landowners who
want to engage in habitat restoration efforts on their land.
Additionally, it provides regulatory certainty to private
landowners who are investing in conservation on their lands by
prohibiting the designation of critical habitat on those lands.
The bill also takes an innovative step by giving states the
opportunity to fund habitat conservation activities through
revenues raised by habitat conservation projects. Imagine that,
conservation that funds itself over time without requiring a
massive permanent mandatory spending program from the Federal
Government.
Many people claim that conservation and economic success
are mutually exclusive. However, I believe the two do go hand
in hand. We are blessed with a rich abundance of resources, but
we have a sacred responsibility to manage them properly. Doing
so would not only be a benefit to our environment, but would
also tremendously help our rural economies.
I know that in my district we have so much potential. And
while we do a good job of managing our resources, including on
Federal lands, there are obviously opportunities to do even
more. For example, the Forest Service completed a landscape-
scale habitat restoration project for the benefit of the red-
cockaded woodpecker in Arkansas. They went in and thinned the
timber, and were able to use the sale of the timber to pay for
the management cost. This not only created habitat for the red-
cockaded woodpecker, but also produced more songbirds, quail,
turkey, and deer. And we have a picture of what that looks
like.
[Slide.]
Mr. Westerman. And this is pretty simple. That is untreated
forest. That is the management. And that is what you get at the
end of the day. And guess what? It didn't cost the taxpayers
anything. It paid for itself, so you wouldn't need permanent
mandatory spending to do work like that.
H.R. 7408 also proposes common-sense reforms to the ESA
that empower states to have more management opportunity and
regulatory authority over certain listed species. No one knows
how to manage species better than the communities that live
closest to them, and it is about time we took authority away
from DC bureaucrats and put it back in the hands of the men and
women who know their wildlife best and know how to create the
habitat that will sustain these wildlife.
And I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
you the witnesses that will be testifying today. I look forward
to hearing from each of you.
I yield back.

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Chairman Westerman. I thank the
gentlemen for the opening statements. I will now introduce our
witness panel.
Mr. Matt Strickler, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fish and
Wildlife and Parks with the Department of the Interior in
Washington, DC; Mr. Austin Booth, Director of the Arkansas Game
and Fish Commission in Little Rock, Arkansas; Mr. Ryan Bronson,
Director of Government Affairs with the Rocky Mountain Elk
Foundation in Missoula, Montana; Mr. Glenn Olson, the Donal
O'Brien Chair in Bird Conservation and Public Policy for the
National Audubon Society in New York, New York; and Mr. Dave
Tenny, President and CEO of the National Alliance of Forest
Owners in Washington, DC.
Let me remind the witnesses that under Committee Rules,
they must limit their oral statements to 5 minutes, but their
entire statement will appear in the hearing record.
To begin your testimony, please press the ``on'' button on
the microphone.
We use timing lights. When you begin, the light will turn
green. When you have 1 minute remaining, the light will turn
yellow. And at the end of 5 minutes, the light will turn red,
and I will ask you to stop talking. It says, ``complete the
statement,'' but I have learned.
I also allow all witnesses to testify before Member
questioning.
I now recognize Mr. Strickler for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW STRICKLER, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
FISH AND WILDLIFE AND PARKS, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,
WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Strickler. Good morning, Chairmen Westerman and Bentz,
Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. My
name is Matt Strickler. I serve as Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Fish and Wildlife and Parks at the Department of the
Interior. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you
today on H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation
Act.
I would like to start by saying that the Department
supports many of the goals of this legislation. We agree it is
important to conserve and restore wildlife habitat. We agree it
is important to recover species listed under the Endangered
Species Act, and to take conservation actions that will keep
other species from needing the Act's protections in the first
place. We support the extension of Good Neighbor and
Stewardship Contracting Authority to the Fish and Wildlife
Service, and we support the intent of protection for landowners
against Freedom of Information Act disclosure of the occurrence
and location of listed species. That is important common
ground, and I don't want it to get lost in the course of this
hearing.
With that said, we need to be clear about the fact that our
planet and our country are experiencing compounding climate and
biodiversity crises that have major negative implications for
our natural heritage, the livability of our communities, and
the health and safety of the American people. We cannot begin
to face down these challenges without bold action and a serious
commitment of dedicated resources for habitat restoration and
species and ecosystem recovery.
The 2015 Blue Ribbon Panel on Sustaining America's Diverse
Fish and Wildlife Resources estimated that $1.3 billion is
needed each year to fully implement congressionally-mandated
State Wildlife Action Plans. Unfortunately, Congress has never
funded these plans at more than $90 million annually, and in
recent years the number has been less than $70 million. This
doesn't even account for the chronic underfunding of the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service's Endangered Species Act work.
Against this backdrop, this bill is a significant step
backwards from the bipartisan legislation that passed the House
last Congress. There is no guarantee that a new $300 million
authorization will move congressional appropriators to fund
these activities at higher levels than they have in the past.
And taking away nearly a billion-and-a-half dollars in
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act
funding that has already been appropriated is simply counter-
productive.
Communities across the country have benefited and will
continue to benefit from the deployment of these BIL and IRA
funds, and the jobs and economic development that come along
with them. These dollars are doing everything from replacing
aging irrigation infrastructure, to restoring aquatic
ecosystems, to making coastal communities more resilient to
hurricanes. Given how much there is to do to strengthen our
economy and our environment, we cannot afford to trade-off
these secure funds.
The provisions of this bill that weaken the Endangered
Species Act also work against the legislation's stated
purposes. The ESA works. We just celebrated the 50th
anniversary of this remarkable law that has prevented the
extinction of almost all species that have received its
protections, has recovered dozens of species, and has put many,
many more on a path to recovery. Making it more difficult for
the Fish and Wildlife Service to implement by altering the
successful Candidate Conservation Agreement with Assurances
Framework, complicating the designation of critical habitat on
private land, making problematic changes to the process of
creating 4(d) rules, and prematurely turning management of
listed species back over to the states will not help protect
wildlife habitat or improve the likelihood of species recovery.
The dedicated public servants of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service are working hard every day in close partnership with
states, tribes, localities, industry, private landowners, and
other Federal agencies to protect and recover species and their
habitats, while also accommodating economic activities that, if
left unregulated, would negatively impact those species and
habitats. It is an incredibly difficult job, and they deserve
Congress' support to do it. Unfortunately, the legislation, as
written, does not meet the moment.
For those reasons and others included in our written
testimony, the Department cannot support H.R. 7408 as a whole,
and must strongly oppose the proposed rescissions of BIL and
IRA funding in many of the ESA-related sections. We would
welcome the opportunity to work with the Chairman and
Subcommittee to address our concerns and recommendations.
Hopefully, we can build on the common ground that we have
identified and arrive at a bipartisan solution that moves us
closer to accomplishing our shared wildlife habitat and
conservation goals.
I am happy to answer any questions you have. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Strickler follows:]
Prepared Statement of Matthew J. Strickler, Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Fish and Wildlife and Parks, Department of the Interior

Introduction

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Matthew J. Strickler, Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks within the Department of the
Interior (Department). I appreciate the opportunity to testify before
you today on H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation
Act.
Generations of habitat loss and the spread of invasive species and
disease, all exacerbated by a rapidly warming climate, put ever-
increasing pressure on America's wildlife. Many species are being
pushed to the brink and we are facing a biodiversity crisis, increasing
the need to protect species under the Endangered Species Act (ESA) and
complicating efforts to recover species. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (Service) is doing everything we can to leverage partnerships
to accomplish our conservation mission. Working with others, we
implement strategic, science-based conservation measures on the ground
to conserve and improve habitat, recover species, and conserve species
under the ESA, which can also help prevent the need for listing. When
given the tools and resources to accomplish this work, the Service,
together with states, Tribes, territories, landowners, and non-federal
partners can do great things--and nature, when given a chance, can
rebound.
In 2000 and 2001 respectively, Congress created the State and
Tribal Wildlife Grant Programs, which led to the development of the
State Wildlife Action Plans (Action Plans). These plans were a historic
progression in wildlife management by state fish and wildlife agencies.
Collectively, they provided the first nationwide blueprint for
conserving fish and wildlife. State wildlife agencies identified over
12,000 rare, declining, and imperiled species of fish and wildlife and
the conservation actions needed for their recovery. The critically
important conservation work envisioned in these plans cannot be
implemented without sufficient resources, and the resource needs are
great. However, Congress has never supported these programs at the
levels needed for them to reach their full potential. In FY 2010,
Congress appropriated $90 million, which was the high point for funding
the Action Plans. More recently, the State Wildlife Grant (SWG)
Program's average annual appropriation has been about a third less, or
$67 million per fiscal year.
In 2015, the Blue-Ribbon Panel on Sustaining America's Diverse Fish
and Wildlife Resources, convened by the Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies, estimated that $1.3 billion is needed each year to
fully implement the Action Plans. Demand for Tribal Wildlife Grant
Program funds by Tribes is similarly high and yet only about 25 percent
of applicants are awarded funds each year due to insufficient funding
for the program. Dedicated, robust, predictable, and reliable funding
that addresses the resource needs of states and Tribes for their
conservation goals would be transformational. Making this investment in
conservation today will yield long-term benefits, including
strengthened wildlife populations, improved ecosystem function, job
creation and economic development, enhanced recreation opportunities,
and health and safety benefits for local communities.
Congress has the opportunity to once again enact a significant and
holistic investment in the conservation of our nation's wildlife. The
Department supports many of the goals identified in the legislation,
including conserving and improving habitat, recovering listed species
and preventing the need to list species under the ESA, and extending
good neighbor and stewardship contracting authorities to the Service.
However, this bill falls short, as we believe robust, predictable
funding is essential to address the resource needs of states and Tribes
for the conservation of at-risk species and recovery of listed species.
Additionally, we have significant concerns with many of the provisions
in the legislation. While we appreciate and support the goals of some
parts of this legislation, as a whole and as written, we oppose this
legislation.
The Department strongly opposes the rescissions of the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law (BIL) and Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) funding in
this legislation. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which we
commonly refer to as the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law or BIL, has been
a transformational investment. This investment, which provided
significant and dedicated funding in a number of discrete areas, has
dramatically expanded the Service's ability to support locally led
projects benefiting people and wildlife. It has enabled us to identify
new approaches to addressing long-standing, complex conservation
challenges across the nation, including in the Klamath Basin, the
sagebrush ecosystem, and Lake Tahoe, as well as nationwide efforts to
restore fish habitat connectivity. We have seen that the habitat
restoration work done under BIL supports good paying jobs today and
makes investments in nature that will provide sustained economic and
ecosystem dividends far into the future. The funding that would be
rescinded by H.R. 7408 was provided by Congress to address aging water
infrastructure across the West, water conservation and energy
efficiency, as well as for collaborative ecosystem restoration projects
to improve the health of fisheries, wildlife, and aquatic habitat.
These are programs that need more investment, not less.
Additionally, we believe that more needs to be done if we are to
meet the conservation challenges that we face as a nation. The
Department does not currently support the legislation as drafted and
recommends changes to the structure of the proposed legislation to
ensure the reliable funding needed to address the escalating challenges
facing wildlife and meet the growing resource needs of states, Tribes,
and territories, as well as the Service. The Department also has
concerns with and opposes several of the ESA implementation provisions.
My testimony below addresses these suggestions and concerns in greater
detail. We welcome the opportunity to work with the Chairman on this
legislation.
Title I--Wildlife Conservation and Restoration

The Service appreciates the intent and the purpose of Title I of
H.R. 7408 to conserve and improve habitat, recover listed species, and
prevent the need to list at-risk species. However, the Service has
numerous recommendations that are necessary to accomplish the goals of
the legislation and meet the challenges facing America's wildlife
today. Similar to the SWG Program, Title I of H.R. 7408 would authorize
additional resources for states and territories to implement their
Action Plans and to restore habitat for the conservation of species at
risk.
The SWG Program has a 20-year track record of collaborative
conservation success. Through the SWG Program, each State and territory
has developed science-based Action Plans, often with input from Tribes,
which provide a roadmap for fish and wildlife conservation in every
corner of America. State agencies have begun to address the highest
priority needs identified in the Action Plans and have demonstrated the
value of timely, collaborative, science-based actions taken to conserve
wildlife and their habitats before they become too rare or costly to
restore. Conservation work funded by the SWG Program and guided by the
Action Plans has helped candidate species avoid listing under the ESA
and helped threatened or endangered species progress toward recovery.
The Service understands that the annual appropriation of $300
million authorized in H.R. 7408 is intended to address the backlog of
habitat restoration work identified in the Action Plans. This
beneficial intent would be best supported through predictable funding,
but the ultimate effectiveness of this provision under the bill is tied
to annual appropriations. As noted above, the Blue-Ribbon Panel
determined that $1.3 billion is needed each year to fully implement the
Action Plans, but recent annual appropriations for the SWG Program have
been about $67 million per fiscal year--far short of the need.
State and Tribal partners often pursue projects under their Action
Plans that require either planning years in advance or sustained
funding over a similar time period. Similarly, state and Tribal
partners will likely need to build additional capacity to develop and
implement the grants that H.R. 7408 proposes. Without the surety
provided through dedicated funding, it would be difficult for partners
to hire additional full-time employees and efficiently plan and
implement projects. The Service notes that other mandatory funding
streams, including through the Wildlife Restoration (also known as
Pittman-Robertson) grant program, have been particularly successful
because partners are able to reliably plan for future projects and
supplement their capacity. For the reasons stated above, it was the
recommendation of the Blue-Ribbon Panel that robust, predictable
funding be made available, and the Service looks forward to working
toward this goal with the Chairman and Subcommittee.
In addition, we have numerous comments and suggestions regarding
the specific provisions in Title I of H.R. 7408, which are outlined
below.
The Service notes that many of the allowable uses of the funding
under H.R. 7408 do not include a requirement to facilitate recovery of
listed species or prevent the need to list at-risk species. The Service
recommends strengthening the connection between the allowable uses of
funding and the recovery of listed species and proactive conservation
of at-risk species. Additionally, the Service is concerned that some of
the restrictions on land acquisition in H.R. 7408 would be difficult to
implement for the states. The ability for states to acquire lands is an
important tool for the conservation of species of greatest conservation
need. Limiting the ability of states to acquire lands with funds
appropriated under H.R. 7408 only when ``no other source of funding is
available to purchase such land'' could lead to challenges and delays
with critical conservation work. The Service suggests this provision be
limited to ``when no other source of Department of the Interior funding
is available to purchase such land.'' This would clarify that other
funds would still be needed for the required non-federal match. The
Service supports the provisions in H.R. 7408 that would allow grant
projects to be funded with a 10% non-federal match, instead of a 25%
non-federal match.
Further, a holistic approach to recovering species listed under the
ESA, and preventing at-risk species from needing to be listed, will
require additional resources for the Service, as outlined in the
President's Budget. Such resources would help recover listed species by
supporting development of recovery plans and implementation of
activities identified in existing recovery plans. The Service requires
sufficient resources to effectively carry out its statutory obligations
under the ESA. There are many species for which the Service or other
stakeholders have few resources available to engage in recovery
efforts. This fact was highlighted in the Service's FY 2020 Endangered
and Threatened Species Expenditures Report, which found that for 27
percent of listed species, less than a total of $5,000 were reported by
federal and state agencies as expended per species.
Other areas of ESA implementation also require additional
resources, as outlined in the President's Budget. Between 2003 and
2022, Service environmental review staff decreased by 20 percent while
new species were listed and economic activity and litigation increased.
The number of projects received by the Service has increased
significantly since 2022, reflecting the investments made through the
BIL and IRA. We anticipate that project funding under the IRA and BIL
will further increase the demand for Service technical assistance and
consultations under Section 7 of the ESA. Additional resources are
necessary to ensure that the Service can help federal action agencies
fully meet their responsibilities under section 7(a)(2) of the ESA in a
timely manner. In addition to the requested funding to increase
environmental permitting capacity, the President's Budget also proposes
to expand our existing authorities to allow federal agencies to more
effectively transfer funds provided under BIL to both the Service and
the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) to complete permitting
activities.
The Service carries out robust collaboration efforts on voluntary
conservation agreements under Section 10 of the ESA. Having the
resources necessary to support these efforts to work with our partners
is another important component of being able to holistically address
the recovery of listed species and improve the ecological health of at-
risk species. Voluntary landowner conservation agreements provide
conservation benefits for species and regulatory predictability for
landowners and other partners.
The Service appreciates that H.R. 7408 would dedicate 10 percent of
the appropriated funds to a competitive innovation grant program. The
program would catalyze new techniques, tools, strategies, and
collaborative partnerships to benefit species of greatest conservation
need. Some of America's most cutting-edge conservation initiatives--
including efforts to conserve species at landscape scales by working
across state and Tribal boundaries--have received timely and critical
support from the SWG Program.
The Service notes that we would not be capable of undertaking this
grant program with the prescribed administrative funding level of 0.33
percent for Title I. This administrative funding level would not allow
for the Service to meet its fiduciary program integrity and compliance
responsibilities or support states and territories with federal
financial assistance processes. This funding level would not be
sufficient for the Service to comply with federal environmental laws
including the ESA, the National Historic Preservation Act, and the
National Environmental Policy Act--requirements for all habitat
restoration projects. The funding level is also insufficient for the
Service to help states and territories develop the required biennial
rigorous accountability measures for the program and prepare summary
reports for Congress.
The Service is able to administer large grant programs, such as the
Wildlife Restoration program, efficiently with low administrative
funding rates. This is due to multiple factors, including scales of
efficiencies generated by grants with large funding, well-established
implementation policies and procedures, and an expert staff of grant
management professionals located around the country to collaboratively
support state efforts. These efficiencies would not be in place for a
new grant program and would not be achievable with an administrative
funding rate of 0.33 percent. In addition, the Service manages the
administrative funding for the Wildlife Restoration and Sport Fish
Restoration grant programs in accordance with the Administrative
Improvement Act's (16 U.S.C. 669h and 777h) explicit administrative
expense criteria. The Administrative Improvement Act restricts use of
Wildlife Restoration and Sport Fish Restoration administrative funding
to the direct implementation of those two grant programs, negating the
ability for the Service to use that funding to administer H.R. 7408.
To address this concern, the Service recommends an administrative
funding level of three percent to administer Title I. A three percent
administrative rate is consistent with the rates identified for the
competitive innovation grant program in Title I, with the Tribal
Wildlife Conservation and Restoration in Title II, and the Wildlife
Conservation Restoration Program (Pub L. 106-553).
Lastly, as currently drafted, H.R. 7408 is integrated within the
Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Program (Pub L. 106-553) and the
Wildlife Restoration Act (16 U.S.C. 669). It appears that some of the
current language in H.R. 7408 would apply only to the Wildlife
Conservation Restoration Program, yet others would apply to the
Wildlife Restoration Act in its entirety. This would impact all the
programs within the Wildlife Restoration Act, in both how these grant
programs would be implemented and how revenue generated by the states
under H.R. 7408 could be spent.
The Service welcomes the opportunity to work with the Chairman and
Subcommittee to address these comments, concerns, and recommendations.
Title II--Tribal Wildlife Conservation and Restoration

Title II of H.R. 7408 would establish a Tribal Wildlife
Conservation and Restoration Account authorized at $20 million per year
through FY 2029. The bill directs the Director of the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA) to establish a noncompetitive grant program to distribute
funding to Tribes. The grants would be used for conservation and
restoration programs for habitat and wildlife.
The BIA notes concerns with the funding match requirement in Title
II. Requiring Tribes to match federal funding is often a significant
barrier to participation. Additionally, while the BIA appreciates the
funding and authorization of this program in Title II, it would like to
further discuss the use of noncompetitive grants as $20 million in
formula distribution will amount to a small per-Tribe funding amount.
The BIA suggests explicitly including Tribal Conservation Law
Enforcement Officers (CLEO) as a use of funds. CLEO are critical to the
success of Tribal conservation and fish and wildlife management on
Tribal lands and inclusion in this statutory authority would ensure
they are effectively supported.
Title III--Conservation and Management for Wildlife Refuges

Title III of H.R. 7408, grants the Service good neighbor authority
(GNA) and stewardship contracting authority (SCA) for restoration
services, as requested in the Service's FY 2024 budget proposal. The
Service conducts a wide range of restoration services on our lands,
including treating insect- and disease-infested trees, removing
hazardous fuels, utilizing prescribed burns, and managing invasive
plant species. GNA and SCA would supplement the Service's capacity to
conduct these projects with support from states, counties, Tribes, and
local partners. The U.S. Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management
have a proven and successful record of engagement with non-federal
partners to expand their capacity for critical restoration services on
federal lands using GNA and SCA. Extending these authorities to the
Service would improve our ability to protect and improve wildlife
habitat on our lands, including on national wildlife refuges, and
reduce impacts to adjacent lands. The Service strongly supports the
inclusion of GNA and SCA for ecosystem restoration in H.R. 7408 and
appreciates the Chairman's support for these provisions. However, the
authorization here is much broader than is necessary for the Service to
accomplish its habitat restoration objectives.
Additionally, this title would provide the Service with GNA for a
suite of recreation services. Improving and expanding public access and
compatible wildlife-dependent recreational opportunities is a priority
for the Service. We work with a wide array of partners, through
cooperative agreements, lease agreements, and special use permits to
enhance our recreation facilities. As it is unclear exactly how this
authority could be used and what impacts it might have on wildlife
habitat, we have some concerns, but look forward to learning more and
working with the Committee to avoid unintended consequences.
The Service greatly appreciates the collaborative approach of the
Chairman's staff on this legislative language. We welcome the
opportunity to continue working together to provide additional
technical assistance on this Title. The Service recommends including
additional language to ensure that projects conducted under these
agreements align with management goals, existing law, and the Service's
conservation mission. We would also appreciate the opportunity to work
with the Subcommittee to better understand how the provision regarding
GNA for recreation would complement our existing authorities and
strengthen our ability to work with partners.
Title IV--Incentivizing Wildlife Conservation on Private Lands

The Service has a number of concerns regarding Title IV of H.R.
7408 and strongly opposes Sections 401 and 402. The Service shares the
Chairman's interest in addressing issues related to species location
data and the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and would appreciate the
opportunity to work with the Chairman and Subcommittee on recommended
improvements to Section 403.
Title IV would require the Secretary of the Interior to consider
net conservation benefits of Candidate Conservation Agreements with
Assurances (CCAAs) or programmatic CCAAs when determining if a species
is considered threatened or endangered under the ESA. This title would
codify language regarding CCAAs and programmatic CCAAs within Section
10 of the ESA that would reflect a number of changes to existing policy
regarding such agreements.
Regulatory policy regarding CCAAs and programmatic CCAAs is
outlined in 50 CFR 17.22. This legislation would expand the scope of
parties covered by such agreements by changing the language from
applying only to non-federal landowners so that it also requires the
inclusion of federal agencies if the covered party consents to the
request by the agency. It would also exempt CCAAs and programmatic
CCAAs from Section 7 consultations. Both changes undermine the purpose
of Section 7 of the ESA. That purpose helps ensure that any action
authorized, funded, or carried out by a federal agency is not likely to
jeopardize the continued existence of any threatened or endangered
species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat
of such species. While the Service and NMFS are the primary agencies
responsible for implementing the ESA, all federal agencies are
responsible for utilizing their authorities to further the purposes of
the ESA.
H.R. 7408 would create a new 120-day deadline for the Secretary to
determine whether or not to approve a CCAA. At the same time, the bill
decreases the level of responsibility of the non-federal parties to the
agreement and increases the administrative workload for the Service,
both in setting up and implementing the agreement. This includes
requiring the Service to determine baseline conditions in the plan area
and eliminating the already very narrow instances in which a covered
party may need to take additional conservation measures due to
unforeseen circumstances.
H.R. 7408 also limits the species that can be included in a CCAA to
``candidate species'' defined as candidate and proposed species.
Currently, unlisted species that either are, or are likely to become,
candidates for listing in the future are eligible for inclusion in
CCAAs. By narrowing the range of at-risk species that may be included
in a CCAA, this legislation would limit voluntary conservation
agreements for other at-risk species that are likely to become listed
in the future. H.R. 7408 would enable a party to a programmatic CCAA to
enroll other parties in the agreement and convey any existing permit
authorization to them as well. It would also require the Secretary to
go through a public comment process on any programmatic CCAA, but would
remove the comment period for permit applications under CCAAs and the
process for objecting to permit issuance. Further, H.R. 7408 requires
the Secretary to provide a written explanation for denials of CCAAs and
adjustments that would enable the Secretary to approve the proposed
agreement, even though this type of agreement may in some cases not be
in the best interest of the candidate species.
The Service works collaboratively with landowners in developing
CCAAs. In return, the Service issues Enhancement of Survival Permits
that provide assurances that, if the species is subsequently listed and
no other changes have occurred, the Service will not require the
permittee to conduct any additional conservation measures without
consent. Additionally, the permit authorizes a specific level of
incidental take of the covered species, should listing occur. The
current CCAA and programmatic CCAA regulations provide incentives for
non-federal landowners to voluntarily conserve candidate species, as
well as other non-listed at-risk species, by providing a net
conservation benefit through one or more of the following actions:
protecting existing populations and habitats; restoring historical
populations; restoring or creating new habitat; and declining to
undertake potentially damaging activity. This system effectively
balances proactive voluntary conservation and minimization of risk for
non-federal landowners.
Additionally, in February 2023, the Administration published a
proposed rule regarding Section 10(a)(1)(A) Enhancement of Survival and
Section 10(a)(1)(B) Incidental take Permits. These changes would
improve implementation and streamline the conservation programs
associated with the issuance of enhancement of survival permits and
incidental take permits, including permits associated with CCAAs. The
proposed regulatory revisions would increase efficiency and flexibility
by combining Safe Harbor Agreements and CCAAs into one agreement type
so that one agreement can cover both non-listed and listed species.
Title IV of the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act would
unnecessarily upend the balance the Service has established through the
CCAAs and impose additional procedural requirements and uncertainty to
a successful voluntary conservation program for which the Service has
existing authority.
Title IV would also prohibit the Secretary from designating as
critical habitat privately owned or controlled land that is subject to
a land management plan that meets certain criteria. Critical habitat
could not be designated on private land that is subject to a management
plan that is similar to an integrated natural resources management
plan, or was prepared in cooperation with the Department and state
agencies, or meets other criteria, such as that the Secretary
determines will maintain the population of the species and minimize
impacts of activities that would likely result in incidental take of
the species.
When the Service designates critical habitat, we follow a science-
based process to identify those specific areas that are essential for
species conservation. Critical habitat designations are an important
tool to educate the public and other federal agencies regarding areas
essential for recovery of listed species. These designations do not
create preserves or parks, nor do they affect activities by private
landowners where there is no federal funding or authorization involved.
Critical habitat designations affect federal agency actions or
federally funded or permitted activities. The ESA requires federal
agencies to ensure that their actions are not likely to destroy or
adversely modify designated critical habitat.
The language in this section would effectively force the Service to
identify any existing land management plans, compare them to the bill's
criteria, and determine whether or not they would sufficiently minimize
and mitigate impacts to the species. This will add additional
analytical requirements to an already challenging designation process
that must be completed within statutory deadlines, and the bill does
not include funding for additional personnel. The Service developed a
joint policy with NMFS for excluding areas from designations of
critical habitat. This 2016 policy provides guidance for implementing
Section 4(b)(2) of the ESA that allows discretionary exclusion of
specific areas from a designation of critical habitat based on specific
circumstances. The policy provides details on consideration of
conservation plans and partnerships, and Section 10 of the ESA
permitted plans as the basis for excluding areas. The proposed language
of this Title would add confusion for the Service and public, and would
be unnecessary considering the guidance outlined in the 2016 policy.
The Administration opposes these sections and believes they would
undermine the science-based process used to protect listed species.
In addition, this Title would prohibit the Secretary from making
information on the occurrence or specific location of a species of
fish, wildlife, or plant on privately owned or controlled land publicly
available in response to FOIA requests. The Department would be able to
provide such information publicly if a written request is submitted by
a federal or state agency or an educational or research institution,
and also the private party concerned.
The Service appreciates the Chairman's interest in this issue.
While FOIA contains several exemptions that agencies can use to
withhold certain types of information, such as confidential business
information or national security-related information, location
information on protected or at-risk species generally doesn't qualify
for an exemption. The Service's inability to withhold location
information impacts our ability to work effectively with partners and
has other harmful implications for vulnerable species. Many federally
recognized Tribes have listed species on their lands, and some have
declined to share information about species locations due to FOIA
concerns. Certain state wildlife agencies have shared concerns
regarding public release of state-owned data. We have also found that
many private landowners or companies are often unwilling to provide the
Federal government details regarding species that are listed or under
review that occur on their property because they are concerned about
that information being disclosed to the public through FOIA. Some
researchers and museum collectors have also refused to share
information on certain rare species due to FOIA concerns. These
concerns of our partners have a chilling effect on research and
collaborative conservation, and they may result in an underestimation
of the contribution of private lands to conservation and make it harder
for the Service to assess population and habitat status. Further, some
species can be put at risk by FOIA disclosures of their exact locations
due to increased threats from wildlife trafficking, or because there is
an unsustainable demand for people to see them in their habitat.
The Service encourages the Chairman and Subcommittee to adjust the
proposed FOIA exemption to apply to information regarding the
occurrence, or specific location of data regarding species that are
protected under the ESA or other statutes, and at-risk species,
regardless of whether they occur on Federal, state, Tribal, or private
lands. The Service would appreciate the opportunity to work with the
sponsor and Subcommittee on technical assistance on Section 403.
Title V--Forest Information Reform

Title V of H.R. 7408 includes the language of the Forest
Information Reform Act (H.R. 200). This language states that neither
the Department of the Interior nor the Department of Agriculture are
required to reinitiate consultation on a land management plan when a
species is listed as threatened or endangered, critical habitat is
designated, or new information concerning a listed species or critical
habitat becomes available. This language is related to the Cottonwood
decision and complications regarding forest management. The
Administration recognizes that this is an important issue. The
Departments of the Interior and Agriculture have worked closely
together to provide technical assistance on legislation on this topic
in the past.
The Administration believes important nuances are missing from the
language in H.R. 7408. For example, stating that the Secretary shall
not be required to reinitiate consultation on a ``completed land and
resource management plan that has no on the ground effects'' would be
an important distinction that would help prevent harmful unintended
consequences of this legislation. The Service has recommended changes
to Title V and would welcome the opportunity to work with the Chairman
to provide technical assistance.
Title VI--Providing for Greater Incentives to Recover Listed Species

Title VI of H.R. 7408 would modify the section 4(d) requirements
and protections for species listed as threatened under the ESA. If the
Secretary issues a threatened species regulation that includes any
prohibitions provided for endangered species, such as prohibitions on
import or export, or take, the Secretary must also establish recovery
goals, provide for decreasing stringency of regulation as these goals
are met, and provide for state management after these goals are met.
The legislation provides that such a regulation would not apply to a
state that has entered into a cooperative agreement with the Secretary
unless the state also adopts such regulation. H.R. 7408 would also
enable states to develop recovery strategies for threatened or
candidate species and petition the Secretary to use that strategy as
the basis for any 4(d) regulations for that species within that state.
The Service strongly opposes Title VI.
The Service has multiple concerns with Title VI of H.R. 7408. It is
unclear how the proposed requirement for the Secretary to establish
objective, incremental recovery goals would relate to current statutory
requirements for recovery planning under section 4(f) of the ESA or to
the proposed state recovery strategies, particularly with regard to the
statutory requirement under section 4(f)(4) of the ESA to provide for
public notice, review and comment before approval of a recovery plan.
Under this Title, a state would take on management of a species after
recovery goals are met and before a species is removed from the list of
threatened species--but only if the state is willing to take on this
management. This language would introduce greater complexity and
confusion over jurisdiction and management of species and interrupt
continuity of recovery activities. This legislation would increase the
Service's procedural requirements and workload associated with listing
a species as threatened with a 4(d) rule, all of which would still be
subject to the statutory time frames for making listing determinations.
As evidenced in the President's recent budget requests, the Service
lacks sufficient funding to handle our listing workload under the
existing listing process. Absent the resources to carry out these
additional procedural steps, we will face an even greater risk of
deadline litigation. In addition, the proposed requirement to evaluate
and make findings on petitions from states to adopt state recovery
strategies will add substantially to the workload of an already under-
resourced staff and will likely open another avenue of deadline and
merits challenges to Service listing determinations.
Under this Title, if the Service were to approve a state's petition
to utilize a state recovery strategy for a threatened or candidate
species as the basis for any regulations issued regarding the species
within the state, the Service would be forced to adopt the strategy as
the regulation itself. By preventing the Service from writing its own
regulations, this Title raises Administrative Procedure Act concerns by
not allowing public notice and comment, and would increase the
likelihood of the Service having to deny a petition and go through
multiple iterations with a state, greatly increasing the amount of
resources expended by both the Service and the state. This legislation
also places the burden on the Service to establish criteria for future
evaluation of state recovery strategies and requires the Service to
revise 4(d) regulations should the recovery strategy be ineffective in
conserving the relevant species. The required deference to state
regulatory mechanisms and recovery strategies would appear to make
federal protection under the ESA deferential to state law. The Service
notes that this legislation would likely create a state-by-state
patchwork of different regulations across the range of a species.
The Service has the existing ability to tailor 4(d) rules to
species' needs and can currently craft rules in a manner that allows
for greater flexibility than this legislation affords. In addition,
whenever the Service proposes listing a species as a threatened species
and identifies the protections that are necessary and advisable for the
conservation of that species, states are afforded an opportunity to
review and comment on the proposed rulemaking.
Title VII--Rescissions and Repeals

The Department is concerned that H.R. 7408 would rescind $750
million in funding provided to the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation)
under the BIL and the unobligated balance on the $25 million in funding
provided to Reclamation under Section 50232 of the IRA. Additionally,
H.R. 7408 would rescind $700 million in BIL funding provided to the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Administration
strongly opposes the rescinding of BIL and IRA funds and using them as
offsets.
Section 50232 of the IRA provides $25 million to Reclamation for
the design, study, and implementation of projects (including pilot and
demonstration projects) to cover water conveyance facilities with solar
panels to generate renewable energy. Solar panels placed over canals
have the potential to create new benefits and derive additional value
from existing federal water resource projects. Since enactment of the
IRA, Reclamation has been working with stakeholders and Tribes across
the West on potential projects that can support water conservation and
energy efficiency. On July 28, 2023, the Executive Co-Sponsors of
Reclamation's Program Management Plan for IRA transmitted an Internal
Call for Proposals (CFP) to Reclamation's regional directors requesting
responses by October 30, 2023. Reclamation received multiple proposals
from the regions, reviewed the proposals, and has begun to make
selections and allocations.
In December 2023, the Biden-Harris Administration announced the
first project under this new authority, with nearly $6 million for the
Gila River Indian Community in Arizona to construct and install solar
panels over the Casa Blanca Canal. Reclamation will work with the Gila
River Indian Community to cover 2,782 linear feet of the Casa Blanca
Canal with approximately 2,556 solar panels. The solar panels are
expected to generate 1.31 megawatts of clean energy, providing 2.26
million kilowatt-hours of annual electricity to the Gila River Indian
Community. This project will help inform similar projects to better
understand their impacts and make that information publicly available.
The remaining funding is planned to be used on similar
opportunities across the West, with additional allocations expected to
occur in February 2024. Without different types of projects spread out
across the West, the ability of Reclamation and its partners to analyze
the costs and benefits of solar panels over canals and their efficacy
in different environments will be significantly reduced. Projects
related to those that will be funded with Section 50232 of the IRA have
received much support. This support includes a letter from 125 groups
requesting that Reclamation develop an initiative to deploy solar panel
systems over Reclamation's canals to produce renewable energy, reduce
water loss, and help protect habitat managed by the Department. This
effort has also received letters of support from the Legislative
Director of the Sierra Club, local municipalities, Tribes,
universities, and Reclamation's operating partners.
The BIL provides $3.2 billion to address the extraordinary
operation and maintenance needs of aging water infrastructure across
the West and $250 million for the design, study, and construction of
aquatic ecosystem restoration and protection projects.
To date, Reclamation has committed $836 million in aging
infrastructure funding and $51 million in aquatic ecosystems funding.
Aging and inefficient water infrastructure is a major cause of water
supply issues for thousands of communities across our country. Building
on $240 million allocated in 2022, Reclamation announced in April 2023
that an additional $585 million in funding is being provided to 83
projects in 11 states to increase drought resilience and improve water
delivery systems. Among the 83 projects selected for funding are
efforts to increase canal capacity, provide water treatment for Tribes,
replace equipment for hydropower production, and provide necessary
maintenance to aging project buildings. Specific examples of the
important work being done with this funding include $4 million for
lining 6 miles of the New York Canal in Idaho to promote safety and
conserve water lost to seepage, $10 million to rehabilitate or replace
fish screens at the headworks at the North Unit Irrigation District
main canal in Oregon, $6 million for repairs to the Fort Laramie Canal
in Wyoming, and $35 million to restore safe, long-term operation of the
Truckee Canal in Nevada.
As noted in Reclamation's March 2023 Asset Management Report, the
estimated total funding for Major Rehabilitation and Replacement (MR&R)
over the next five years is $7.3 billion, with approximately $3 billion
of anticipated MR&R activities planned to be funded by Reclamation.
Future BIL investments in the nation's aging water infrastructure are
critical to ensuring the safety of these projects to deliver clean,
reliable water to communities, irrigators, ecosystems, and economies
across the West. Reducing the funding would significantly reduce
Reclamation's ability to fund water and power projects that support
resilience and reliability of the nation's critical water
infrastructure.
The $44.6 million for aquatic ecosystems restoration and protection
projects announced in December 2023 includes widespread interest in
Reclamation's new WaterSMART Aquatic Ecosystems Restoration Program,
with 18 projects across 8 states. Applications received in the second
application period, which closed on January 24, 2024, collectively
request approximately $200 million in federal funding. Together, the
$44.6 million already allocated and the new proposals recently received
represent a demand of almost $250 million, which is the total amount of
BIL funding allocated to the WaterSMART Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration
Program over the five-year period from 2022 to 2026. Accordingly, the
funding from BIL is crucial to the implementation of this new program
to support collaboratively developed ecosystem restoration projects
that provide widespread regional benefits and improve the health of
fisheries, wildlife, and aquatic habitat through restoration and
improved fish passage. Additional BIL funding will be used for future
funding rounds to provide widespread economic and environmental
benefits, as well as to improve the health of fisheries and critical
habitats.
The Biden-Harris Administration strongly opposes the use of BIL and
IRA funding as offsets. This funding was appropriated to Reclamation by
Congress for its critical work on canals, aging infrastructure, and
aquatic ecosystems.

H.R. 7408 would also repeal three programs administered by the
Service. The programs to be repealed include one to prevent, control,
and eradicate invasive species in alpine lakes, a second to eradicate
Asian giant hornet populations, and a third to address invasive species
in Alaska, Hawaii, and U.S. territories. While these are important
activities for conservation, the Service does not currently receive
appropriations under these authorities and would continue to address
invasive species through other successful programs.

Conclusion

The Department appreciates the opportunity to testify on H.R. 7408,
the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act. We agree with the
goals of parts of this legislation, including the need to conserve and
improve habitat, recover listed species, advance proactive conservation
of at-risk species, and extend good neighbor and stewardship
contracting authorities to the Service. However, as a whole and as
written, we oppose this legislation. Robust funding is essential to
address the resources needs of states and Tribes for the conservation
of at-risk species and recovery of listed species. Additionally, the
Department strongly opposes the proposed funding offsets and we have
concerns with many of the provisions related to ESA implementation. We
would welcome the opportunity to work with the Chairman and the
Subcommittee to address our concerns and recommendations. More can be
done, and needs to be done, to change our trajectory and set our nation
on a path to a strong and durable conservation future.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you, Mr. Strickler. I now recognize
Director Booth for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AUSTIN BOOTH, DIRECTOR, ARKANSAS GAME AND FISH
COMMISSION, LITTLE ROCK, ARKANSAS

Mr. Booth. Good morning, Chairman Westerman, Chairman
Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and to the other members of the
Committee. I am Austin Booth, the Director of the Arkansas Game
and Fish Commission, and I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to represent not only the fine state of Arkansas,
but the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies.
The Association, as some of you may know, represents state
fish and wildlife agencies in all 50 states, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, and the District of Columbia. And as you do know, we
are the agencies that are principally responsible for managing
fish and wildlife today. And, therefore, we will be held most
accountable by the generations of tomorrow in how we steward
our resources, both monetary and natural.
Taken together, our present mission and also our future
obligations means that we, as an association of state
conservation agencies, we more than anybody else, are uniquely
positioned with boots on the ground to work both urgently and
collaboratively to advance the perpetual cause and ultimate
success of conservation.
In short, the association supports passage of H.R. 7408.
This important and impactful bill will help resolve a decades-
long funding gap that needs to be addressed and needs to be
addressed urgently so that state agencies like the Arkansas
Game and Fish Commission can finally rise to the challenge of
conserving and restoring the habitat for over 12,000 Species of
Greatest Conservation Need.
First and foremost, we greatly appreciate Chairman
Westerman's willingness to prioritize funding to state fish and
wildlife agencies. It is a large and big positive step forward
to allow agencies like us to deliver voluntary and proactive
conservation for fish and wildlife on both public and private
lands.
For nearly a century, state fish and wildlife agencies have
been the reliable, transparent, and accountable stewards of
Federal Pittman-Robertson and Dingell-Johnson funding. There
are countless successes that we can point to throughout the
country and in our own state of Arkansas, but some of these
include the red-cockaded woodpecker, the black bear, white-
tailed deer, and wild turkey, just to name a few that have
flourished under state management.
Given this track record of demonstrated impact, we welcome
the next 5 years of H.R. 7408 as an opportunity to not only
have a greater impact on the landscape that we have had for the
past 8 years, but also an opportunity to prove the necessity
and feasibility of enduring and dedicated funding.
To be abundantly clear, the most compelling reason to
support this important bill is the urgency of what agencies
like the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission see every single day
on the landscape. This bill would provide more than $300
million to proactive, not reactive, conservation practices,
which is good for wildlife, it is good for taxpayers, it is
good for businesses, and, most importantly, good for our
communities that we all serve.
As you know, the states currently receive only roughly $70
million annually under the state and Tribal Wildlife Grant
program to conserve more than 12,000 Species of Greatest
Conservation Need. What does that look like in Arkansas? It
looks like roughly $60,000 a year. However, if fully funded,
H.R. 7408 would provide approximately five times that level of
funding to help us address these SGCNs. More importantly, it
would come with a match rate of 90/10.
But this bill is much more than a funding measure; it
doubles down on congressionally-mandated State Wildlife Action
Plans as our scientifically-based blueprints that can guide
investment, resulting in fewer random acts of conservation.
This bill elevates the role of the private landowner through
voluntary conservation practices. It captures perfectly the
roll-up-your-sleeves partnership that we have and enjoy with
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. It supports healthy and
impactful forestry industries, and it recognizes the states as
the true and valued partner in the recovery of listed species.
This bill, in short, will fundamentally change the way that
we approach conserving Species of Greatest Conservation Need,
and all for the better.
I would be remiss today if I did not thank Representative
Dingell for her support for state fish and wildlife agencies.
Over the years, she has raised awareness of the decline of
thousands of non-game species, and we are very grateful for
that.
To conclude, as an association, we will continue to
advocate for the need for sustained and dedicated funding.
However, we greatly appreciate Chairman Westerman's commitment,
and his passion for voluntary cooperative conservation, and his
support for agencies like the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission
in this bill. We acknowledge the challenges of advancing
legislation that calls for creation of new funding, and deeply
appreciate his willingness to take on that challenge.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to be here this
morning, and I look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Booth follows:]
Prepared Statement of Austin T. Booth, Director,
Arkansas Game and Fish Commission

Good morning, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and members
of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today.
I am Austin Booth, Director of the Arkansas Game and Fish
Commission. Today I am representing the Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies (AFWA). AFWA's mission is to represent and protect
the authorities of our member agencies and enhance their abilities to
manage fish and wildlife as public trust resources for current and
future generations. All 50 states are members as well as the U.S.
Virgin Islands and the District of Columbia. As you know, these are the
agencies with principal management responsibility for fish and
wildlife, so they are uniquely positioned to work collaboratively to
improve habitat.
America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act (AWHCA) would help
resolve a decades-long funding gap that needs to be addressed so state
agencies can meet the challenge of conserving and restoring habitat for
over 12,000 Species of Greatest Conservation Need (SGCN).
The Association appreciates Chairman Westerman's willingness to
prioritize funding to state fish and wildlife agencies for wildlife
habitat restoration and supports passage of the bill as it is a
positive step forward to providing funding that state agencies can use
to deliver voluntary and proactive habitat conservation for fish and
wildlife on public and private land.
We also appreciate that this legislation will provide states with a
set of tools to help us accomplish this work, and we hope it will pave
the way for continued conversations about how we can address America's
accelerating conservation challenges at the appropriate scale. State
fish and wildlife agencies have been the reliable and transparent
stewards of federal Pittman-Robertson and Dingell-Johnson funds for
decades. There are countless successes to point to in my home state of
Arkansas as well as across North America. Black bear, waterfowl, white-
tailed deer, and the wild turkey populations have recovered under state
management. Given this success, we look forward to discussing
opportunities to provide even greater flexibility for states to put
these funds on the ground as this bill advances, specifically related
to land acquisition and reporting requirements.
The bill would authorize $300 million in annual funding for the
next five years, subject to appropriations, to state agencies to help
conserve declining fish and wildlife species, including species of
greatest conservation need identified by the states. This includes
those species already listed as threatened or endangered and others
that are declining but not yet listed. Currently, on average, states in
total only receive $70 million annually under the State and Tribal
Wildlife Grant Program to conserve over 12,000 SGCN identified in their
congressionally mandated State Wildlife Action Plans (SWAPs). If fully
appropriated, H.R. 7408 would provide nearly 5 times the current level
of funding to help states address critical species management and
habitat needs.
The costs of inaction are much greater than what it will take to
conserve and restore SGCN. The federal government pays more than $1
million in administrative costs to list a single species, and on
average $18 million for science and habitat work once listed. In
addition, it is estimated that listing costs the private sector 3-5
times that due to direct costs, regulatory uncertainty, and foregone
opportunities. If we had to list 2,000 species over the next decade,
it would cost the federal government at least $38 billion and could
cause $110-$190 billion in private sector costs.
Proactive conservation is good for wildlife, good for taxpayers,
good for business and good for our communities. By directing funds to
states, America will be fueling shovel ready projects that immediately
create jobs in a sector with one of the highest returns on investment,
supporting continued world class outdoor recreation opportunities.
Every $1 million invested in species and habitat conservation creates
on average 33 quality jobs, so if fully funded, the bill would create
nearly 10,000 jobs every year. Each dollar spent on conservation adds
$2.40 to the nation's gross domestic product. The outdoor recreation
economy as a whole, accounts for 2.2% of GDP.
Funds authorized by AWHCA could be used for the management,
control, and prevention of invasive species, disease, and other risks
to the habitat of SGCN. States, through federal excise taxes, state
hunting and fishing license revenues, and other federal and state
funding programs have shown that they can restore popular game species
like waterfowl, wild turkey, elk, and white-tailed deer. However,
states are losing ground on conserving the full suite of species under
their jurisdiction like butterflies, crayfish, mussels, amphibians,
reptiles, and other non-hunted species. For these species, adequate
funding streams do not currently exist. The risk here is that without
proactive conservation these species may be candidates for federal or
state listing, or worse yet, be driven to extinction. This bill
highlights the need to fund management activities that are detailed in
SWAPs to conserve these SGCN.
The Act also encourages a variety of successful forest and
vegetation management activities to improve forest health by modifying,
improving, enhancing, or creating wildlife habitat to reduce the risk
of damage or destruction to wildlife habitat due to wildfires, insects,
or disease. These tools are critically important for conservation and
restoration, particularly in Arkansas where many of our forests are too
dense, suffering from lack of viable timber markets to absorb the
potential wood yield, and lack of ecologically significant fire. Every
year it seems that states are presented with new challenges and must
rely on existing tools to try to address them. This bill recognizes the
importance of active management to address these current and emerging
challenges.
The bill also encourages states and federal agencies to work
collaboratively with private landowners to achieve positive
conservation outcomes. State agencies have a long and successful track
record of working with private landowners to deliver conservation.
``Better together'' is an adage that is reflected in the bill.
One example of this collaborative conservation in action is
Arkansas's largest lizard, the eastern collared lizard, is an SGCN and
is threatened due to glade habitat loss. Eastern collared lizards are
keystone predators in glades, where they feed on insects, spiders and
other smaller lizards. Glades are open, rocky, thin-soiled areas that
are found within woodlands and forests. This habitat needs frequent
prescribed fire to maintain its openness. Fire suppression has caused
many acres of glades to become encroached with eastern red cedar and
other woody growth. Without fire, native grasses and flowering plants
cannot thrive, and open habitat is reduced.
Since the early 2000s, the Arkansas Game and Fish Commission (AGFC)
and partners have implemented numerous glade restoration projects on
agency lands, partner lands, and private lands. Restoration efforts
include removing eastern red cedar and conducting prescribed fire to
reclaim high quality glade habitat. To date, more than 50,000 acres of
glades and associated woodland complexes have been restored. Efforts
are currently underway on an additional 2,500 acres. Populations of
eastern collared lizards are being monitored as restoration continues.
One population has been observed for several years and experienced
population declines each year prior to restoration. Post-restoration,
this population has now been stabilized. Although there have been great
strides in conservation made for important species, without much needed
funding, states won't be able to stay ahead of the pressures that keep
pushing our fish and wildlife further toward becoming endangered.
An additional example of collaborative conservation in Arkansas are
our efforts for the Red-Cockaded Woodpecker (RCW). AGFC has partnered
with the Arkansas Natural Heritage Commission, The Nature Conservancy,
US Forest Service, US Fish and Wildlife Service, and private industry
to protect, restore, and maintain habitat for this species. In 2010,
state wildlife grant funds were used to reclaim open pine habitats with
the use of thinning and prescribed fire at Warren Prairie Natural Area
in Southeast Arkansas. Once habitat conditions were met, RCWs were re-
introduced to the site and today the area boasts a well-established
breeding population. The AGFC, PotlatchDeltic, and other partners also
work together at Moro Big Pine Natural Area/Wildlife Management Area to
maintain open pine habitat and existing populations there. Currently,
AGFC is working with the Ross Foundation in southwest Arkansas to
restore habitat, with the goal of translocating RCWs in the future.
Establishing a breeding colony here would fill in a gap between
populations in the Ouachita Mountains and the Gulf Coastal Plain and
provide a big step towards recovery for the species in the state.
Looking to the future, the AGFC and state agencies across the
country are ready to implement funds for conservation of SGCN at the
habitat level, with shovel-ready projects waiting on Congressional
support. Arkansas' rivers are nationally known for their quality and
rugged beauty, and are the centerpiece of the outdoor recreation
industry, undergirding Arkansas' livestock and poultry industries.
Unfortunately, ever increasing sediment loads are negatively impacting
both agriculture producers and canoeists alike, potentially leading to
increased endangered species listings for the globally rare fish and
mussels found here.
Fortunately, Arkansas is well positioned to address these pervasive
threats with the Arkansas' Rivers Conservation Initiative. Data
collected by partners clearly demonstrates that for our highland rivers
occurring in the Ozark and Ouachita mountains, the majority of sediment
is coming from actively eroding stream banks and dirt and gravel roads.
Over the past twelve years, Arkansas' conservation partnerships have
been working with private landowners and County-roads managers to
develop cost effective restoration plans to stabilize both riverbanks
and gravel roads using advanced BMP's and stream-reach scale river
restoration strategies. These partnerships have demonstrated success in
multiple watersheds and are currently ready to expand, implementing
projects for stream restoration and stabilization, riparian tree
planting, off-site watering for livestock, dirt and gravel roads
upgrades, road drainage, river corridor easements acquisition, forest
carbon development, low-water crossing retro-fits, and aquatic barrier
removals. Partners including private landowners, County Roads
Departments, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Arkansas Natural
Heritage Commission, Trout Unlimited, and The Nature Conservancy are
highly engaged and have proof-of-concept projects completed with
baseline data collected and benchmarks established. This would support
existing jobs and create new ones to reduce maintenance cost for
counties, improve gravel roads for Arkansas citizens (85% of all roads
in AR are gravel and receive little funding), protect drinking water,
improve fishing and eco-tourism, reduce the chance of listing species
as federally endangered, and reduce land lost to erosion on private
lands.
Finally, from the pine-oak woodlands of the Ozark highlands, to the
bottomland forests of the Delta, to the pine curtain in the coastal-
plain of south Arkansas, our state's wealth and the health of our
wildlife are tied to its forests. Fortunately, we are ready to
implement the Keeping Arkansas Forest-as-Forest Initiative. Living
within these forests are people, animals, and fish who all need healthy
ecosystems to thrive. As mentioned, Arkansas' forests are too dense,
suffering from lack of viable timber markets to absorb the potential
wood yield and lack of ecologically significant fire. The goal of this
initiative is to work with private industry and landowners to create
market incentives to boost timber value while increasing the ability to
deliver prescribed fire on private lands. Additionally, habitat strike
teams funded through this initiative will implement prescribed burning,
invasive species treatments, and timber stand improvement projects
within focal areas that will benefit SGCN. The combined effect will
improve habitat and reduce the chance of moving species into a
federally protected status.
Without funding for fish and wildlife conservation, fewer Arkansans
will benefit from and have opportunities to enjoy the healthy fish and
wildlife that is the fabric of many of our communities. Species
familiar to generations of Arkansans like monarch butterflies, Northern
Bobwhite quail, Alabama shad, Ozark hellbenders, Eastern Whippoorwills
and hundreds of other species now need our help.
The AWHCA also creates an innovation grant program with 10% of the
funds ($30 million) for the purpose of catalyzing innovation of
techniques, tools, strategies, or collaborative partnerships that
accelerate, expand, or replicate effective and measurable recovery
efforts for habitat of SGCN which includes those species listed under
the federal Endangered Species Act (ESA). Encouraging and rewarding
innovation is critically important. We haven't identified all the tools
in the toolbox yet, and creating a program where our NGO partners,
states, and tribes are encouraged to work together to identify projects
and methods to advance conservation is incredibly important.
The Act also establishes a 10% cost share for states, which will
cut down on paperwork and reduce the burden on states to obtain
matching funds, which in some instances can become a barrier to
effective and efficient conservation. We applaud the Chairman's
acknowledgement of the need for states to spend more time putting
habitat on the ground, and less time chasing matching funds. States
bring significant resources such as staff who provide technical
assistance on a daily basis to deliver conservation for this country.
States proudly can say that they regularly use their investments of
funding, staff time, and other resources to stretch valuable federal
funding whether through programs like Pittman Robertson, State and
Tribal Wildlife Grants (STWGs) or the North American Wetlands
Conservation Act (NAWCA). But, with the number of federal programs
requiring higher match levels, finding eligible match can at times be a
challenge. This bill contains a 90:10 match, the same match enacted for
projects funded by Pittman-Robertson under the Target Practice and
Marksmanship Training Support Act, meaning states can focus on getting
conservation on the ground, which can be especially important when
working with private landowners. States will continue to have skin in
the game with a 10% cost share, not to mention the actual delivery of
the habitat and conservation activities on the ground.
While states agencies are primarily focused on the first title of
the Act, the bill also includes funding for tribes to conduct similar
management activities. The Act also includes a variety of policy
provisions, including the extension of Good Neighbor Authority (GNA) to
the Fish and Wildlife Service National Wildlife Refuge System. Arkansas
has had success implementing GNA with the USFS, primarily using funds
to remove invasive feral hogs from national forest lands. Removal of
feral hogs reduces negative impacts to important habitats and protects
ground-nesting birds such as turkey and quail from nest disturbance and
predation.
This bill provides another opportunity for states and NGO
conservation partners to leverage our efforts in support of the
National Wildlife Refuge System. This is another example of helping to
stretch federal investments. By creating an opportunity to share
resources to deliver habitat conservation, and in return any proceeds
are returned to additional habitat management efforts, there exists an
opportunity to create a cycle of conservation where active management
leads to additional active management efforts.
The bill also proposes to improve the efficiency of environmental
reviews related to national forest management plans, codifies the
Candidate Conservation Agreements with Assurances (CCAA), and would
authorize state fish and wildlife agencies to take on greater
responsibilities related to species recovery plans for federally listed
species, for which they still have legal obligations. Since the ESA
provisions in title 6 are voluntary for states to participate in, we
don't believe it imposes new requirements on any state. Those that see
value in participating can benefit from additional flexibility and
authority to help recover federally listed species, as well as
candidate species and species that are petitioned for listing. States
have well-established, trusting relationships with partners and private
landowners, which can help ensure conservation work is done where it is
most needed. It's important to remember that even with the Federal
listing of a species, states continue to have an obligation to recover
and manage species as required by law.
CCAAs are voluntary agreements between government and landowners
that help address the needs of at-risk species before listings are
required. Along with financial assistance, states use CCAAs to partner
with landowners and incentive conservation, giving landowners
regulatory certainty and helping keep species from needing to be listed
under the ESA. Conservation can only be successful if we work together.
If barriers are identified, let's remove them so that the ultimate
measure of success--species delisting and recovery, and preventing the
need to list in the first place--can be realized.
A significant barrier to getting projects on the ground is the 2015
Cottonwood Environmental Law Center v. United States Forest Service
(``Cottonwood'') decision, which requires the U.S. Forest Service
(USFS) and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to reinitiate consultation
at a forest or land management plan level with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration when ``new information'' relating to the ESA is
discovered. Until 2015, and again since 2018, new information was
considered and accounted for at the project level. The temporary fix
passed by Congress in 2018 expired last year, so legislative change is
necessary to return the ESA to status quo and allow projects to move
forward without costly and burdensome review processes.
I would be remiss today if I did not also thank Representative
Debbie Dingell for her support for state fish and wildlife agencies.
She raised awareness of the decline of thousands of nongame fish and
wildlife species and has been a champion for the need to support state
fish and wildlife agencies in their efforts to conserve the full array
of fish and wildlife.
In closing, congressionally mandated State Wildlife Action Plans
are scientifically-based blueprints that can guide strategic
investment, resulting in less random acts of conservation. While state
fish and wildlife agencies will continue to advocate for the need for
sustained and dedicated funding to implement these plans, we greatly
appreciate Chairman Westerman's commitment and passion for voluntary
and cooperative conservation, and his support for state fish and
wildlife management activities in America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act. We acknowledge the challenges of advancing
legislation that calls for establishing new funding and appreciate his
willingness to take on that challenge.
Finally, should there be a delay in passing this Act, we would urge
Congress and appropriators to provide state and tribal agencies with
additional funding through the STWG program to accelerate the
conservation and restoration of SGCN. Time is not on our side and the
likelihood that more species will be added to the endangered species
list is growing.
Once again, thank you Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and
members of the Committee for giving me the opportunity to testify, and
I look forward to answering your questions.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Director Bronson for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RYAN BRONSON, DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS,
ROCKY MOUNTAIN ELK FOUNDATION, MISSOULA, MONTANA

Mr. Bronson. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member
Huffman, and members of the Subcommittee. I am Ryan Bronson,
Director of Government Affairs for the Rocky Mountain Elk
Foundation.
The Elk Foundation is a 225,000-member non-profit
conservation organization with a mission to ensure the future
of elk, other wildlife, their habitat, and our hunting
heritage. We are headquartered in Missoula, Montana. Since our
founding in 1984, we have helped conserve and enhance more than
8.9 million acres, and improved access to over a million-and-a-
half acres. Our 500 chapters raised money in communities across
the country to conserve the public lands and wildlife that are
impacted by the legislation you are discussing today.
My organization represents hunters, and we are proud of the
role hunters have played in restoring America's wildlife for
the past century and more. Since the passage of the Pittman-
Robertson Act in 1937, state fish and wildlife agencies have
received over $27 billion. Today, 60 percent of state wildlife
budgets are from hunting and fishing licenses and other outdoor
recreation revenue.
The America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act supplements
our contributions as sportsmen by providing state agencies and
tribes with a downpayment of up to $300 million annually to
recover imperiled species. Investing in conservation efforts on
the front end can prevent Federal threatened and endangered
listing decisions and the regulatory burden and costs
associated with those decisions down the road. Rocky Mountain
Elk Foundation works closely with state fish and wildlife
agencies, and we appreciate that this bill supports their good
work.
Title VI of the bill directs Federal agencies to establish
incremental recovery targets for threatened species, and allow
states to gradually assume management authority when those
targets are met. Section 4(d) of the Endangered Species Act
already permits this, but agencies rarely use it. Doing so,
could lower the temperature on highly-contested delisting
decisions and empower state wildlife agencies to achieve
recovery.
States successfully manage most species, and they can be
counted on to play a bigger role with threatened species. Elk
benefit from diversity and actively-managed forests, as do most
wildlife. Actively-managed forests provide diverse age
structures of trees and diverse habitat that provide for the
various life cycle stages of many species.
In addition, managed forests are more resilient to weather,
insect outbreaks, and catastrophic wildfire. The Good Neighbor
Authority has increased the Forest Service's capacity to manage
our forests by partnering with states, counties, and tribes to
expand and expedite management across priority landscapes. We
support the expansion of Good Neighbor Authority to wildlife
refuges and recreation services, as proposed in Title III.
Unfortunately, litigious special interests have weaponized
the Endangered Species Act to delay many wildfire prevention
and habitat management projects. The Ninth Circuit Cottonwood
Environmental Law Center v. U.S. Forest decision, commonly
known as the Cottonwood Decision, established a new criteria
for the Forest Service to re-initiate consultation on already
completed forest plans. The agency has repeatedly testified
that this duplicative consultation requirement has no
conservation benefit.
Further, this decision conflicted with the previous Tenth
Circuit ruling and a similar 2004 Supreme Court decision
regarding BLM plans.
Cottonwood case law has already delayed hundreds of
projects leading to catastrophic wildfires that have destroyed
lives, property, homes, and important wildlife habitat. There
is an urgency to address this issue. The 2018 temporary partial
fix expired 1 year ago. The Forest Service previously estimated
that failure to enact a permanent legislative fix would create
an initial consultation workload of 187 taxa across 36 national
forests in the Ninth Circuit alone, taking up to 10 years to
complete and diverting millions away from high-priority
projects.
Reversing the Cottonwood Decision has bipartisan support.
The Obama administration appealed the decision in 2016. The
Trump administration proposed a rule to resolve this issue, and
the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee passed this
bill by unanimous consent last fall. The Rocky Mountain Elk
Foundation strongly supports Title V of H.R. 7408 that would
finally resolve this issue.
Again, the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation thanks the
Committee for the opportunity to be here today, and we look
forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Bronson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ryan Bronson, Director of Government Affairs,
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation

Chairman Bentz and Members of the Committee. I am Ryan Bronson,
Director of Government Affairs for the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation.
The Elk Foundation is a 225,000-member non-profit conservation
organization with a mission to ensure the future of elk, other
wildlife, their habitat, and our hunting heritage. We are headquartered
in Missoula, Montana.
Since our founding in 1984 we have helped conserve and enhance more
than 8.9 million acres and improved access to over 1.5 million acres.
Our 500 chapters raise money in communities across the country to
conserve the public lands and wildlife that are impacted by the
legislation you are discussing today.
RMEF believes strongly that Hunting Is Conservation. Hunters know
firsthand that stewardship of the land goes hand-in-hand with
maintaining wildlife--and our own way of life. That is why sportsmen
proudly bear the responsibility of providing the most significant and
sustainable source of funding for wildlife. Thanks to passage of the
Pittman-Robertson Act in 1937 state fish and game agencies across
America have received over $27 billion in Wildlife Restoration Act
funding, and 60% of state wildlife budgets are from hunting and fishing
licenses and other outdoor recreation generated revenue.
H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act,
supplements our contributions by providing state agencies and tribes
with a downpayment of up to $300 million annually to recover imperiled
species. Investing in these conservation efforts on the front-end can
prevent federal threatened or endangered listing decisions, and the
regulatory burden and costs associated with those decisions, down the
road. Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation works closely with state fish and
game agencies, and we appreciate that H.R. 7408 supports their good
work.
From sage grouse to grizzly bears, state fish and game agencies
have championed the recovery of some of our most iconic species despite
having no assurance these efforts will yield a regulatory outcome. The
federal government should incentivize good faith efforts, but instead,
states are often left demoralized by regulatory barriers, bureaucratic
processes, and lengthy court battles that confuse management on the
ground, discourage future recovery initiatives, and provide no benefit
to the species themselves.
Title 6 of H.R. 7408 directs federal agencies to establish
incremental recovery targets for threatened species and allow states to
gradually assume management authority as those targets are met. This
title also ensures federal wildlife experts have the full-suite of
wildlife management tools available to use at their discretion to
conserve threatened species. These provisions affirm an existing,
though rarely used, authority to manage threatened species as Congress
originally intended.
This approach to threatened species management has the potential to
lower the temperature on numerous highly-contested delisting decisions.
We anticipate social tolerance for listed species would increase and
litigation would decrease as a result. More importantly, the regulatory
incentives and flexibilities and the empowering of state agencies would
place more imperiled species on the road to recovery.
Elk benefit from diverse and actively managed forests, as do most
wildlife. Actively managed forests provide diverse age structures of
trees, and diverse habitat that provides for the various life cycle
stages of many species. In addition, managed forests are more resilient
to weather, insect outbreaks and catastrophic wildfire.
The Good Neighbor Authority has increased the Forest Service's
capacity to manage our forests by partnering with States, counties, and
tribes to expand and expedite management across priority landscapes. We
support the expansion of this authority to wildlife refuges and
recreation services as proposed in title 3.
Unfortunately, litigious special interests having weaponized the
Endangered Species Act to delay many wildfire-prevention and habitat
management projects. The 9th Circuit Cottonwood Environmental Law
Center v. US Forest Service decision (aka. Cottonwood) established a
new criteria for the Forest Service to reinitiate consultation on
already completed forest plans. The agency has repeatedly testified
that this duplicative consultation requirement has no conservation
benefit. Further, this decision conflicted with a previous 10th Circuit
ruling and a similar 2004 Supreme Court decision regarding BLM plans.
Cottonwood caselaw has already delayed hundreds of projects, leading to
catastrophic wildfires that have destroyed lives, property, homes, and
important wildlife habitat.
For example, the Stonewall project in Montana's Helena-Lewis and
Clark Forest would have benefited elk and other wildlife, but was
delayed by Cottonwood litigation. In 2017 the Park Creek and Arrastra
wildfires burned over half of the proposed treatment area with
intensities that damaged some of the soils in the area. This was
economically and ecologically costly.
In April 2022, the Hermit's Peak Fire in New Mexico began as a
prescribed fire that got out of control. The Forest Service's Wildfire
Review Report revealed hazardous fuel reduction treatment was delayed
from September 2019 to October 2020 by a Cottonwood-related injunction.
The subsequent 341,000-acre fire has not been good for threatened
Mexican Spotted Owls, elk, other wildlife, or people.
There is an urgency to address this issue. The 2018 temporary,
partial fix expired one year ago. The Forest Service previously
estimated that failure to enact a full and permanent legislative fix,
would create an initial consultation workload of 187 taxa across 36
national forests in the ninth circuit alone, taking up to 10 years to
complete and diverting millions away from high priority projects.
Reversing the Cottonwood decision has bipartisan support. The Obama
administration appealed the decision in 2016, the Trump administration
proposed a rule to resolve this issue, and the Senate Energy and
Natural Resources Committee passed the bill by unanimous consent last
fall.
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation strongly supports title 5 of H.R.
7408 that would finally resolve this issue.
Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation thanks the Committee for the
opportunity to participate today.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I now recognize Chair Olson for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF GLENN OLSON, DONAL O'BRIEN CHAIR IN BIRD
CONSERVATION AND PUBLIC POLICY, NATIONAL AUDUBON SOCIETY, NEW
YORK, NEW YORK

Mr. Olson. Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and
Chairman Westerman, thank you for the opportunity to testify
here today. And may I just say it is an honor to be with this
panel? You have a great group of people here. We have a lot in
common with, and are partners with, each of these organizations
they represent.
Audubon's mission is to protect birds and the places they
need today and tomorrow. We have more than 2 million members
and supporters, 510 local chapters in most of your districts
around the country, and 55 nature centers across the country,
including Little Rock, Arkansas.
I also want to take the opportunity to thank Chairman
Westerman and his entire team for what they bring to
conservation, and how accessible they are to not only our
national staff, but our state program in Arkansas and our
Little Rock, Arkansas Audubon Society.
And I have been told on good authority that Chairman
Westerman loves woodpeckers, and we have yet to be out in the
field with you looking at red-cockaded woodpeckers or pileated
woodpeckers, but we look forward to that in the future.
In 2015, Audubon was asked to join a panel established by
the Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies to consider the
current system of conservation funding. I joined the blue
ribbon panel, along with leaders from the business sector,
hunting and fishing groups, private landowners, state fish and
wildlife agencies, and other conservation groups. This non-
partisan panel was chaired by John Morris, the founder of Bass
Pro Shops and the owner of Cabela's, and David Freudenthal, who
was the former Governor of Wyoming.
All the participants on the panel had a common goal: to
find the most effective and efficient method for funding
conservation that would guarantee the long-term health and
survival of wildlife species, from songbirds to big game. We
spent over a year together developing our recommendations.
After considering a multitude of recommendations and
options, including from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the
National Association of Realtors, the panel recommended that
Congress dedicate $1.3 billion annually to the Wildlife
Conservation Restoration Program under the Pittman-Robertson
Act. The financial investment, the panel determined, was
critical and necessary to carry out the congressionally-
mandated State Wildlife Action Plans, and this funding was
critical to recover and conserve 12,000 identified at-risk
Species of Greatest Conservation Need.
Implementing the panel's recommendation would offer
proactive and cost-effective support in preventing species from
becoming threatened or endangered through long-term,
collaborative, and voluntary conservation. And as history tells
us, most species can't be recovered in less than 5 years.
Emerging from the panel's recommendation was the Recovering
America's Wildlife Act, legislation that was mentioned earlier.
It was sponsored by Congressman Debbie Dingell and initially by
Congressman Don Young, the former Chairman of this Committee.
It passed with bipartisan support in the 117th Congress.
We are in the midst of a biodiversity crisis, which is
having a profound effect on people and their communities. North
America has lost 3 billion birds since 1970, about one in four
birds, with widespread declines in all other groups of birds
except for waterfowl, which are being intentionally managed
through the NAWCA program and doing very well.
Birds are experiencing ongoing threats from habitat loss
and degradation, climate change, and many other challenges.
State Wildlife Action Plans have identified more than 400 at-
risk bird species with strong conservation needs. Recovery of
dwindling populations to prevent more species from becoming
endangered and threatened requires sustained dedicated
investment.
Birds are a major economic driver in communities across the
country. Bird watching brings in significant revenue to local
economies. The latest survey by the Fish and Wildlife Service
found that 96 million people in the United States engage in
bird watching and contribute over $100 billion to local
economies.
And I told Congressman Bentz before the hearing started
that we have had this wintering bald eagle festival in Klamath
County for over 35 years in the dead of winter, after duck
season is closed, and how important that has been that the
Chamber of Commerce, Willamette Industries, all the hotels and
restaurants, gas stations, and we appreciate the Presidents Day
holiday weekend and the Audubon Bird Festival going on. Those
are happening across the country, those kinds of events.
America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act will provide
funding with a goal of conserving and restoring wildlife
habitat, and we appreciate the Act's goal of engaging private
landowners and cooperative conservation on their forests,
ranches, and farms. We need that approach.
This legislation, the America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act, would provide $300 million to states and $20
million to tribes annually over 5 years. This is only a
fraction of the blue ribbon panel's recommendation in dedicated
annual funding, and it would require reauthorization every 5
years, which could cause inconsistency in funding levels at the
state levels as they look to develop long-term conservation
plans.
We also think that the tribal investments are critical to
wildlife conservation and management. Native Americans, Alaskan
Natives, and Native Hawaiians manage an area of wildlife
habitat almost as large as California, and they do so without
the benefit of----
Mr. Bentz. Mr. Olson, I am sorry to interrupt your
testimony, but your time is expired.
Mr. Olson. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Bentz. That is fine.
Mr. Olson. OK, thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Olson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Glenn Olson, Donal O'Brien Chair in Bird
Conservation, National Audubon Society

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the America's
Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act. I am Glenn Olson, and I serve as the
Donal O'Brien Chair in Bird Conservation at the National Audubon
Society. Audubon's mission is to protect birds and the places they
need, today and tomorrow. Audubon has more than two million members and
supporters, 510 affiliated chapters and 55 nature centers across the
country.
In 2015, Audubon was asked to join a panel established by the
Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies to consider the current
system of conservation funding. I joined the Blue Ribbon Panel along
with leaders from the business sector, hunting and sportfishing groups,
private landowners, state fish and wildlife agencies, and other
conservation groups. The panel was chaired by John Morris, the founder
of Bass Pro Shops, and David Freudenthal, the former Governor of
Wyoming. All the participants on the Panel had a common goal to find
the most effective and efficient method of funding conservation that
would guarantee the long-term health and survival of wildlife species--
from songbirds to big game.
We spent over a year together developing our recommendations. We
held a DC hearing that included positive feedback on our approach from
both the US Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of
Realtors. The concept of pro-actively and intentionally sustaining
wildlife populations so that future listings of threatened and
endangered species would not be necessary was well-received as a sound
approach to guide investments.
After considering a multitude of options, the panel recommended
that Congress dedicate $1.3 billion annually to the Wildlife
Conservation Restoration Program under the Pittman-Robertson Act--the
financial investment the Panel determined was critical and necessary to
carry out Congressionally-mandated State Wildlife Action Plans and
recover and conserve 12,000 identified species of greatest conservation
need. Implementing the Panel's recommendation would offer proactive and
cost-effective support in preventing species from becoming threatened
or endangered, through long-term collaborative and voluntary
conservation.
Emerging from the Panel's recommendations was the Recovering
America's Wildlife Act, legislation sponsored by Congresswoman Dingell
with significant bipartisan support, and which passed the House in the
117th Congress. This legislation was supported by Audubon and a broad
and diverse coalition of supporters and stakeholders--similar in
breadth and scope to the parties who engaged with the Blue Ribbon
Panel. I would like to thank Congresswoman Dingell and the other
Members of the Subcommittee who supported that legislation for your
efforts on this important issue.
We are in the midst of a biodiversity crisis, and no species is
being spared, which has profound effects on people and communities.
North America has lost nearly 3 billion birds since 1970--or about 1 in
4 birds--with widespread declines across nearly all groups of birds,
including a 40% decline in Western Meadowlarks, the iconic state bird
of Wyoming, Oregon, Montana, Kansas, and others.
Birds are experiencing ongoing threats from habitat loss and
degradation, climate change, and many other challenges. Habitat loss
affects a bird's ability to find food, water, and safe places to raise
their young and migrate. Even common backyard birds are at risk.
Wildlife Action Plans have identified more than 400 species of
birds with conservation needs. Recovery of dwindling populations to
prevent more species from becoming threatened and endangered requires
sustained, dedicated investment, as populations can take decades to
bounce back to sustainable levels.
Birds are a major economic driver in communities across the
country. Birdwatching brings in significant revenue to local economies.
The latest survey by the Fish and Wildlife Service found that 96
million people in the U.S. engaged in birdwatching in 2022,
contributing $100 billion to the U.S. economy every year. Birds also
provide cultural significance, and critically important and valuable
pest control to agriculture and forestry.
For this reason, legislation that meets the moment of the
biodiversity and wildlife conservation crisis is key. We appreciate the
intent of the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act to provide
funding toward the goal of conserving and restoring wildlife habitat.
And we appreciate the Act's goal of engaging private landowners in
cooperative conservation on their forests, ranches and farms--we need
this approach.
However, the proposed funding levels and sunset of these
investments, coupled with the rescission of Inflation Reduction Act and
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act funding, and the inclusion of
other policy measures, gives us concern and therefore Audubon is unable
to support the bill as currently written.
The legislation provides $300 million to States and $20 million to
Tribes annually for five years. This funding is only a fraction of the
Blue Ribbon Panel's recommended $1.3 billion in dedicated annual
funding. The legislation would require reauthorization every five
years, which could cause inconsistency in funding levels and
uncertainty for multi-year conservation. A consistent funding source is
needed to ensure the effectiveness of these projects.
Tribal investments are critical to wildlife conservation and
management. Native Americans, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiians
manage an area of the nation's wildlife habitat almost as large as
California without the benefit of revenue from hunting and fishing
license sales and federal tax revenue that state wildlife agencies are
able to utilize. Under the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act,
Tribes would receive only $20 million for the next five years compared
to $97.5 million annually under the Recovering America's Wildlife Act.
The legislation also rescinds critical funds for the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Bureau of Reclamation.
The rescission of these funds would affect important freshwater and
coastal restoration and aging infrastructure upgrades--which are
critical for conserving natural resources that communities depend on.
In closing, we need the pillars of what the Blue Ribbon Panel
recommended is necessary to protect thousands of at-risk species; and
which was reflected in the Recovering America's Wildlife Act. That
legislation incorporated the needs and concerns of a broad, diverse
coalition of stakeholders, and reflects years of collaboration and
partnership. It has enjoyed bipartisan support in Congress and deep
support among states, Tribes, and the conservation and business
communities.
We look forward to working with the Subcommittee to build on
today's discussion and pursue bipartisan measures that align with the
recommendations and findings of the Blue Ribbon Panel, and that
effectively address the biodiversity crisis that is driving alarming
declines in wildlife populations that we hold near and dear.

______

*****

The following documents were submitted as supplements to Mr.
Olsen's testimony.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD012.pdf

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD013.pdf

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.epsThe full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD015.pdf

------

Mr. Bentz. No, thank you. I now recognize CEO Tenny for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID P. TENNY, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL
ALLIANCE OF FOREST OWNERS, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. Tenny. Good morning, friends. Thank you for inviting me
to participate this morning. I want to focus my attention today
on why it is so important for all of us to work together to
advance voluntary, proactive species conservation as the
prevailing paradigm for conservation on lands, private lands,
everywhere.
Back in the 1990s, I was a brand-new forestry staffer for
then-Congressman Wally Herger. The prevailing issue of the day?
The northern spotted owl. My first impression coming in the
door was this was a war between owls and people, and I had been
enlisted to defend the people. Well, I had just completed my
first woods tour in Wally's district in Northern California
when, on a Thursday, I had dinner with then-President of the
California Forestry Association, Gilbert Murray. The following
Monday he was blown up by the Unabomber. So, there I was,
wondering had I just made a terrible mistake? What had I got
myself into? How could it be possible that a bird could be the
source of so much conflict and tragedy?
Fight or flight kicked in. My initial instinct was to
fight. But then I met a remarkable group of people from the
small town of Quincy, California. Quincy was at that time the
epicenter of conflict over the California spotted owl, which is
a close cousin to the northern spotted owl. A few years before,
local leaders from opposing viewpoints met in the Quincy
Library to resolve their differences. They chose the library
because it was the only place in town where they wouldn't yell
at each other.
That was the humble beginning of what became known as the
Quincy Library Group, or the QLG. The QLG was one of the first
local forest collaboratives that sought to replace conflict
with cooperation and collaboration. Eventually, QLG earned its
own legislation, the Quincy Library Group Forest Recovery and
Economic Stability Act. That was the first bill I ever wrote as
a member of Congressional staff. Well, the bill passed 429 to 1
in the House, and then it passed unanimous consent in the
Senate, and President Clinton signed it into law. But this was
an inflection point for me.
I saw a group of good, ordinary people rise above conflict,
and show the nation that voluntary collaboration cannot only
conserve owls, but also change their culture in ways that could
benefit species and communities everywhere.
So, let's fast forward a few decades. For nearly 8 years,
NAFO, the National Council for Air and Stream Improvement
(NCASI), and the Fish and Wildlife Service have collaborated
with other partners at the state and local level on a new
approach to species conservation. We call it the Wildlife
Conservation Initiative, or the WCI. Like QLG, the WCI seeks to
empower ordinary people like us to do extraordinary things to
benefit species and communities everywhere.
The WCI has a very simple objective that is to conserve
common, at-risk, and listed species on private working forests
through sustainable forest management. It also operates very
simply. We jointly identify priority species that need our
forests for their habitat. We collect field data on those
species, and then we decide together how to use sustainable
forest management to conserve those species. Today, the WCI is
a nationwide effort, and it is setting a standard for
collaboration between private landowners, Federal and state
agencies, and local stakeholders.
NAFO member companies have committed 44 million acres to
this effort. To put that in perspective, that is more acres
than Virginia and West Virginia combined. Last year, NAFO,
NCASI, and the Service signed a programmatic MOU to apply the
WCI nationwide. A few weeks ago, we signed another MOU with
AFWA to be a companion to what we are doing with the Service,
and bring us all together in a common effort.
A wonderful example of our success is the gopher tortoise
in the South. It is a species that has habitat upon which 350
other species rely for their survival. In 2022, the Service
found that it was unnecessary to list the eastern population
segment of the gopher tortoise because of the data that was
provided through the WCI. So, it is doing what we want it to
do. It is conserving common, at-risk species and, in this case,
preventing the need for listing. It is showing that proactive
collaboration is more powerful than waiting for reactive
regulation.
Though the most important and enduring thing that is
happening is the change in our culture. And we are finding that
culture is the most important aspect of the WCI. In fact, that
is what we are doing in California right now. It is because of
this culture that we have been able to conserve the California
spotted owl and make it unnecessary for listing, which brings
us to the purpose of this hearing.
We welcome the efforts of this Committee, Chairman
Westerman, and his colleagues to try to advance this concept
forward. We welcome the efforts of others to push RAWA forward.
These are good ideas. We think we can work together to find
solutions that will advance this paradigm, and we look forward
to doing that with you. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Tenny follows:]
Prepared Statement of David P. Tenny, National Alliance of Forest
Owners

Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman, and distinguished Members
of the Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries Subcommittee, on behalf of the
National Alliance of Forest Owners (NAFO), thank you for the
opportunity to testify on private working forests and the important
role they play conserving at-risk, threatened, and endangered species.
NAFO is a national advocacy organization advancing Federal policies
that ensure private working forests provide clean air, clean water,
wildlife habitat, and jobs through sustainable practices and strong
markets. NAFO member companies own and manage 44 million acres of
private working forests across the U.S. NAFO's membership also includes
State associations and national associations representing tens of
millions of additional acres. Our members embrace a culture of
stewardship for their forests and the wildlife that depend on them.
Since the passage of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) 50 years ago,
species conservation has frequently mired stakeholders in inefficient
and ineffective conflict, especially on Federal lands. However, decades
of experience have proven that, on privately owned lands, conservation
efforts are most effective when landowners, Federal and State agencies,
and stakeholders identify shared conservation objectives and
proactively and voluntarily work together to accomplish them. Such
collaboration has built the trust necessary to innovate on better and
more enduring approaches to species conservation and has increased our
understanding of conservation at both the local and landscape level.
As we consider our course for the next 50 years of species
conservation under the ESA, we would be wise to draw from what our
experience has taught us--culture is more powerful than law or policy,
and a culture of voluntary, collaborative conservation will always be
more effective than reactive regulation and conflict. That is the focus
of my testimony today.
Private Working Forest Owners as Conservation Partners

Across the country, NAFO members join other private working forest
owners in meeting some of the highest sustainable forest management
standards in the world. Wildlife habitat, clean water, clean air,
carbon mitigation benefits, long-term forest health, and rural
prosperity are all well-established outcomes of sustainable forest
management. That is why private forest management in the U.S. leads the
world in quality and productivity across a variety of performance
measures.
Private working forests--or those managed to provide a sustainable
supply of wood and fiber for homes, building construction, and over
5,000 consumer products that we use every day--are critical to
successful species conservation because of the scale of private
ownership in the United States. Forty-seven percent of forests in the
U.S. are privately owned. In some areas of the country, 80% or more of
our forests are privately owned. NAFO members invest substantially in
maintaining habitat for terrestrial and aquatic species as a
fundamental management objective. Forest owners also invest in
collaborative research to understand how sustainable forest management
can further benefit the conservation of both game and non-game wildlife
species, particularly at-risk wildlife species.
Multiple approaches to wildlife conservation can work together to
provide conservation benefits. At a baseline, sustainable forest
management promotes forest health and resilience, which supports all
forest-dependent species; and forest certification provides additional
assurances of sustainable forest management implementation. Beyond that
baseline, NAFO members also participate in conservation projects and
programs to conserve a wide variety of species. Nearly 11 million acres
of NAFO member land are participating in conservation programs or
projects. Together, these complementary layers of conservation have
become standard operating procedure for NAFO members, proactively
conserving species before they require emergency conservation measures
or regulatory intervention.
The Importance of Sustainable Forest Management for Creating Diverse
Forest Types

Private working forests provide habitat for thousands of common,
at-risk, and listed species. Sixty percent of at-risk species depend on
private working forests for survival. Through sustainable forest
management, private forest owners create a mosaic of interconnected
forest conditions. This variability across the landscape provides a
diversity of high-quality species habitat.
For example, sustainable forest management creates healthy young
forests, characterized by open fields and low, thick brush. Young
forests are home to species of conservation concern such as Kirtland's
warbler, the New England cottontail rabbit, and the American woodcock.
Other wildlife species that depend on young forest for at least part of
their habitat requirements include wild turkey, grouse, elk, white-
tailed deer, eastern cottontail rabbit, black bear, and native
pollinators like honeybees and butterflies.
Sustainable forest management also provides open-canopy forests,
characterized by widely spaced trees that allow sunlight to reach the
forest floor. Several leafy plant species that provide food and habitat
for many at-risk species require a lot of sunlight to grow and thrive
in these conditions, Examples of at-risk species that depend on these
conditions are the gopher tortoise, Louisiana pine snake, southern hog-
nosed snake, and gopher frog. Numerous at-risk plant species that need
additional sunlight are also found in open-canopy forests.
Sustainable forest management protects rivers and streams by
leaving a buffer along watercourses called Streamside Management Zones
(SMZs). Forest landowners implement State-based Best Management
Practices (BMPs) in SMZs during harvests to protect water quality. SMZs
also facilitate wildlife travel and include riparian species, providing
further habitat diversity on the landscape. Additionally, these
riparian forest buffers filter sediment from runoff after rain and
snow, keeping the water in streams and rivers clean for aquatic
species, like at-risk mollusks and fish.
The Wildlife Conservation Initiative (WCI)

Eight years ago, NAFO member companies established the Wildlife
Conservation Initiative (WCI) as a voluntary, collaborative partnership
to conserve common, at-risk, and listed fish and wildlife species on
private working forests. This groundbreaking initiative is building a
culture of trust and collaboration between regulators and landowners.
Last year, NAFO, the National Council on Air and Stream Improvement
(NCASI), and the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS) signed a
programmatic Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to implement the WCI
nationwide. A weeks ago, NAFO and the Association of Fish & Wildlife
Agencies (AFWA) signed a companion MOU to connect NAFO member
companies, the USFWS, and State agencies in a common WCI effort.
What began as regional collaboration between NAFO member companies
and USFWS field offices has now grown into a national, agency-wide
initiative and a model for engaging forest owners, Federal and State
agencies, and other stakeholders in effective voluntary species
conservation. The WCI is demonstrating the value of active forest
management as a wildlife conservation tool.
The WCI operates simply. NAFO member companies partner with NCASI,
the USFWS, State agencies, and other collaborators to identify priority
species and collect and share field data on the species and how
sustainable forest management affects them. In some cases, data helps
to identify better management approaches to maintain and improve
conservation benefits.
The reduction of regulatory risk to landowners, the growing culture
of trust between landowners and regulators, and the formal recognition
of the conservation value of sustainable forest management serve as
powerful incentives for private forest owners to engage in
collaborative conservation projects through the WCI. NAFO members have
partnered with researchers and regulators through the WCI to conduct
much-needed research on mussels in Louisiana, pollinators in
California, wood turtles in Michigan, habitat needs across landscapes
in Alabama and Florida, Humboldt martens in Oregon, and migratory birds
across the entire Eastern Seaboard.
Collaborative Success Outcomes

Collaborative conservation through the WCI delivers positive
outcomes for wildlife while reducing the regulatory burden on private
landowners.
The USFWS has cited the benefits of sustainable forest management,
private land access for researchers through the WCI, and forest
certification as significant contributions to species conservation,
often negating the need for further Federal action. One example of WCI
success is the gopher tortoise.
The gopher tortoise is a keystone species, benefiting more than 350
other species--including snakes, insects, frogs, and owls--that all
depend on tortoise burrows and surrounding habitat to survive. In 2022,
the USFWS found that the eastern population of the gopher tortoise did
not warrant listing. Data and habitat information provided by NAFO
members showed that the open-canopy forest conditions on sustainably
managed private working forests across the range of the gopher tortoise
had provided high-quality habitat that conserved more gopher tortoises
than scientists originally anticipated. The survey work leading to the
USFWS decision was conducted through the WCI.
A second example of WCI success is the red tree vole--a small,
furry mammal that nests in forest canopies and feeds almost exclusively
on Douglas-fir needles. Just a few weeks ago, the USFWS decided not to
list the red tree vole under the ESA and credited the WCI as a factor
in its decision. The WCI identified the red tree vole as a species of
common interest, and the WCI supported the resultant inventory work
with funding. Ultimately, the USFWS' Species Status Assessment cited
valuable information from NCASI and WCI researchers as the USFWS made
its ``not warranted'' decision.
Through our ground-breaking WCI work, we are developing new and
unprecedented tools and approaches that were not possible eight years
ago. For example, a NAFO member company will soon conduct a zero-
baseline or ``no-risk'' reintroduction of a listed species, the
flatwood salamander, on its land in the Florida panhandle.
Additionally, we are working with the USFWS on a pioneering cooperative
agreement to provide data and research on several bat species,
including the northern long-eared bat. The agreement will allow the
USFWS to conduct surveys and research on private forests owned by NAFO
members who volunteer to participate and will safeguard covered forest
management activities.
These conservation achievements, and many others, are only possible
because of a fundamental, profound culture shift within the forest-
owner community and the State and Federal agencies. Trust and
collaboration are replacing cynicism and conflict. Through the WCI, we
are demonstrating that culture is more powerful than law or policy and
that proactive collaboration is far more effective than reactive
regulation.
Collaborative Conservation Leads to Enduring Success

In the interest of advancing enduring conservation solutions, like
the WCI, we support every legislative effort to make voluntary,
collaborative conservation more accessible to, and effective for, all
private landowners, including the America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act and the Recovering America's Wildlife Act.

A number of provisions in the America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act, which the Committee is considering today, help
advance voluntary, collaborative conservation on private working lands.
These include:

Providing funding to State fish and wildlife agencies and
tribes. States and Tribes can use such funding for
voluntary, collaborative conservation work with willing
landowners.

Waiving public disclosure requirements when landowners
voluntarily share species data with USFWS. Protecting
proprietary data and information will encourage landowners
to provide sensitive, yet vital data on threatened and
endangered species more freely with their Federal partners.
Such data is crucial to Species Status Assessments and
listing decisions. Protection from disclosure will also
enable more targeted and robust collaborative conservation
efforts to occur on private land.

Precluding critical habitat designations from occurring on
private lands with tailored land management plans.
Extending Sikes Act authority applied to Department of
Defense land to private landowners willing to follow the
same process and abide by the same criteria will enable
private landowners to work with the USFWS to develop land
management plans to protect listed species in ways that are
significantly more efficient and impactful than simply
designating critical habitat.

Codifying and Expanding the Candidate Conservation
Agreements with Assuarances (CCAA) Program. CCAAs encourage
landowners to voluntarily work with the USFWS to develop
and implement conservation plans for declining species
prior to listing decisions. NAFO members have used CCAAs
for years and are now developing new and innovative
cooperative agreements with the USFWS that we believe will
be even more effective than CCAAs. We welcome the
opportunity to work with the Subcommittee staff to provide
technical suggestions to strengthen this section.

Extending Good Neighbor Authority to the USFWS. Allowing
the USFWS to enjoy the same successes enjoyed by the Bureau
of Land Management and the Forest Service will benefit
wildlife. Authorizing the USFWS to collaborate with their
State, local, and Tribal partners to help improve land
management by leveraging more resources for habitat and
species recovery projects will have a significant, positive
impact.

Conclusion

NAFO supports every effort that will enable private landowners to
conserve species, prosper as land stewards, and provide other public
benefits to communities and the Nation. We encourage Committee members
to seek common ground and to work with their House and Senate
colleagues to advance policy approaches that encourage and reward
voluntary, collaborative conservation and that foster positive cultural
change among Federal and State agencies, landowners, stakeholders, and
affected communities across the Country.
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in this hearing.
We appreciate the Subcommittee's commitment to species conservation,
and we stand ready as a resource to you and your staffs as we work
together on enduring solutions for America's wildlife.

______

Mr. Bentz. Thank you. I want to thank the witnesses for
their testimony. We will now recognize Members for 5 minutes
each for questions. We will begin with Congresswoman Radewagen.
You have 5 minutes.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Talofa lava.
I have a couple of questions for you, Mr. Booth. As you
know, discussions about spending and the budget have impacted
nearly every committee over recent months and years. One
provision of this bill requires states to submit reports on
results of activities carried out with the funds provided by
this bill's programs. Can you talk about how this aligns both
good stewardship of taxpayer resources, while also effectively
highlighting the great work being done at the state and local
level?
Mr. Booth. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question.
When we look at the long-term success of conservation, one
of the resources that we believe is most important to us,
whether we are in Arkansas or the Samoan Islands, is the
support from the people. And we think one of the best ways to
maintain that long-term support for conservation is by showing
people how we are shepherding and using their taxpayer dollars.
We try to operate, whether it is Pittman-Robertson dollars,
or our own license fees, or in Arkansas our conservation sales
tax dollars, we always try to utilize those with transparency
and accountability to the public.
Will these reporting requirements be an administrative
burden? Maybe to some extent. But if it ensures that we can
maintain some of the long-term support for conservation with
the public by showing them how we are utilizing these dollars,
and also the confidence of members from this body when it comes
time for annual appropriations, then I think that is time and
effort well spent.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. For my next question, Mr. Booth,
America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act makes changes to
this formula that is one-half based on the land area of a
state, one-quarter based on a state's population, and one-
quarter based on the number of species in a state listed under
the ESA.
Would taking the number of listed species in a state into
account when awarding funds, rather than solely factoring in
population and land area, serve as a more effective way of
awarding grant dollars to conserve wildlife?
Mr. Booth. I think so, ma'am.
If you look at Arkansas, compared to some of our neighbors,
we are a lot smaller than Texas in both surface area and
population, and we can probably say the same thing for our
wonderful competitor, partner, and neighbor to the north,
Missouri. So, yes, we think that looking at what the actual
qualitative conservation challenges every state or territory is
up against is a good way to analyze it.
Mrs. Radewagen. And as a follow-up, would this allow us to
more effectively use taxpayer resources to address endangered
and threatened species?
Mr. Booth. I would defer to some of my other colleagues,
ma'am, but from my perspective the answer is yes.
If you look at the amount of taxpayer dollars that we are
able to allocate towards this challenge right now, it is very
low. I meant what I said in my opening remarks, that the most
compelling reason to support H.R. 7408 is the urgency that we
see every single day on the landscape. And we believe that is
the case, and that H.R. 7408 would go a long way to do that.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Ranking Member
Huffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chair Westerman's
press release claimed this bill ``will invest $320 million
annually in grant funding to states for wildlife habitat
conservation,'' and ``provides additional resources for state
governments.'' To be clear, that is not exactly true.
This bill doesn't invest anything because it doesn't
appropriate any additional money. And in the unlikely event
that it became law, anyone who thinks that this Republican
Majority would actually appropriate $320 million without
draconian cuts to other environmental and conservation
programs, probably thinks that this pretend money that we have
printed up is real, and you can go buy stuff with it.
So, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record a
stack of pretend money, we affectionately call it ``Bruce
bucks,'' as evidence of the actual value of the investments
from this legislation.
And the interesting thing about these Bruce bucks, and
Chair Westerman, I am feeling especially generous, so I have a
large stack of these for you, the interesting thing about them
is they have negative value. The Fish and Wildlife Service has
actually done an estimate of the impact of this bill, which
claims to increase wildlife funding. They found that it, in
fact, decreases funding for 38 out of 56 states, territories,
and the District of Columbia, including the state of Arkansas,
where Mr. Westerman, I believe, has some explaining to do.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the record the
spreadsheet of these cuts to wildlife funding in most states
and territories.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Huffman. Thank you. I would like to ask the witnesses
about the question of permanent funding, which was in
Representative Dingell's RAWA, consistent with the blue ribbon
panel's recommendations, versus the hollow authorization that
we get in this bill.
And Mr. Olson, I want to make it very simple for you. Would
you rather have $1.3 billion of guaranteed funding every year,
or $320 million in discretionary authorizations, which is not
guaranteed, for 5 years and then it sunsets?
Mr. Olson. We would prefer the $1.3 billion of dedicated
funding annually.
Mr. Huffman. Even if I throw in a stack of Bruce bucks?
Mr. Olson. Yes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Huffman. Mr. Strickler, same question for you.
Mr. Strickler. Representative Huffman, the Department feels
that the greater amount of dedicated funding would be better
for long-term planning and species recovery.
Mr. Huffman. And Mr. Booth, would you prefer $1.3 billion
in guaranteed permanent funding over the authorization in this
legislation? Simple question.
Mr. Booth. We would take whatever tranche of funding makes
its way to the state, sir.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Mr. Strickler, whether or not
states get the full $320 million, we know for sure that under
this bill there are going to be some cuts: $1.4 billion
rescinded from the IRA and IIJA. In other words, even if a
future Congress never appropriates any money under this bill,
those cuts are going to happen.
What specific conservation programs at DOI would get
defunded to offset this legislation?
Mr. Strickler. Representative Huffman, specifically, the
largest amount of funding that is proposed to be rescinded in
this bill is for the Bureau of Reclamation focused on its aging
infrastructure program. That is funding that goes to do things
like line canals, replace water infrastructure, and farm
infrastructure to help with irrigation in the West. And then
there is additional funding for their aquatic ecosystem
restoration efforts that is rescinded along with a pot of NOAA
money.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Thank you. We asked NOAA a similar
question and got a similar answer.
The moral of the story here is this bill would pull back
hundreds of millions of dollars in funding for wildlife and
habitat conservation. It would rescind nearly $400 million in
tribal wildlife priorities, including recovering endangered
Pacific salmon, and rescind hundreds of millions for coastal
habitat resilience, red snapper, North Atlantic right whale,
oyster reefs, and more. Again, the bill would do more harm than
good for wildlife.
And to the organizations here that have either grudgingly
or otherwise seen fit to say nice things about this bill, I
want you to know that I get it. When the Chairman of the
Natural Resources Committee proposes a bill, there is a certain
amount of courtesy and deference involved. But when he tells
you that wet stuff coming down on your head is rain, you really
should smell it a little. It is not rain, folks.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman Duarte for 5
minutes.
I recognized him, but he is not here. The Chair recognizes
Congresswoman Kiggans for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am proud to co-
sponsor this important legislation to promote habitat
conservation from the ground up by enabling our state agencies
to take reins while providing them with the resources they need
to do so.
Mr. Booth, I understand that the vast majority of lands in
your home state of Arkansas are privately owned. I represent
the Commonwealth of Virginia, and while Virginia is home to 22
of our nation's beautiful national parks, most of the forest
land and working forests are privately owned, as well. This
means that state agencies have a major role to play in
conservation and habitat management. Can you speak to the work
that your agency does to partner with private landowners in
Arkansas to conserve species on the endangered species list,
and how this bill will encourage more of that work?
Mr. Booth. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for the question. Like
Chairman Westerman said this morning, it was Aldo Leopold that
taught us that the ultimate success of conservation will be how
we reward private landowners for the public interest. We
certainly see that ethos in H.R. 7408, and that is one of the
reasons why we think the legislation would be a great thing for
conservation.
Arkansas Game and Fish Commission has had a private lands
biologist within our agency since the 1950s. We have kind of
reinvigorated that the past 2 years, and basically created our
own private lands division. As we try to resource and elevate
that division by focusing on private landowner conservation
throughout Arkansas, which, as you mentioned, ma'am, is over 90
percent privately owned, we see three things.
No. 1, we see a huge need for private lands conservation
around Species of Greatest Conservation Need.
The second thing that we see is a tremendous amount of
interest from landowners. People in Arkansas want to do the
right thing for the natural resources.
And the third thing that we see is an immense gap in
resources. This legislation would go a very long way in filling
that resource gap to make sure that we can maximize the human
capital that we have in Arkansas, that passion for the natural
resources.
One of the ways that we see our Species of Greatest
Conservation Need flourishing in Arkansas through private
landowners is around quail. This was once a native ground
nesting bird to Arkansas that has recently had some challenges.
Through our own private lands division, our quail program, we
get lots of landowners that are very interested in quail, and
this legislation would help us make them more of a priority.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Strickler, Virginia's 2nd District is home to nine
national wildlife refuges, including Back Bay, Great Dismal
Swamp, and Chincoteague, all administered by your agency. It is
obvious that the Fish and Wildlife Service understands and
appreciates the vital role state wildlife agencies play in
active forest and habitat management, and this bill strengthens
the Service's contracting authority to work with non-Federal
partners.
Can you speak to how Title III will improve the working
relationship between state and Federal agencies and their
shared goal of habitat management and conservation?
Mr. Strickler. Representative Kiggans, thank you for the
question. It is good to see you again. As one of your
constituents from Northampton County, Virginia, I am very
familiar with, particularly, the wildlife refuges on the
Eastern Shore. Fisherman's Island in the Eastern Shore of
Virginia are my home refuges.
And as a former natural resources Secretary of the
Commonwealth, I can definitely speak to the importance of
partnerships with the states in the Fish and Wildlife Service,
partnerships with private landowners and the states in the Fish
and Wildlife Service, et cetera. And the concepts of
stewardship, contracting authority, and Good Neighbor Authority
are certainly things that the Department supports.
And we have worked with Chairman Westerman on the language.
We have some technical assistance we would like to provide to
maybe tighten things up a little bit, but certainly appreciate
the spirit of that language. And definitely it is authority
that we think we could use positively to benefit National
Wildlife Refuges.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Representative
Dingell for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have tremendous respect for the Chairman of this
Committee, and appreciate his focus on habitat conservation.
However, I must disagree today that the America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act is the best approach, and I am
concerned that this bill does not address the biodiversity
crisis with the urgency, the resources, or funding it requires.
Many of you know, I lead the Recovery in America's Wildlife
Act, or RAWA, which is legislation that was based on the
recommendations from the Blue Ribbon Panel on Sustaining
America's Diverse Fish and Wildlife Resources. This panel was
convened in 2015, and was made up of a group of national
business and conservation leaders, not a radical group, a group
of business and conservation leaders across the political
spectrum to recommend a new mechanism to sustainably fund fish
and wildlife conservation.
The enactment of RAWA remains one of my top priorities in
Congress, which is why I want to use my time to better explain
why I believe RAWA is the best path forward, and why, with
great respect but strong disagreement, the Chairman's bill does
not meet the mark. I am going to address my questions to Mr.
Olson, who was on the blue ribbon panel.
In March 2016, the blue ribbon panel recommended creating a
dedicated funding stream to support the implementation of State
Wildlife Action Plans in every state, territory, and the
District of Columbia. Mr. Olson, is it true that the Chairman's
bill does not include a permanent and dedicated funding stream,
but rather authorizes up to $320 million annually, and let me
emphasize ``up to,'' since this bill's funding is
discretionary, and that it sunsets after 5 years?
Mr. Olson. Yes, that is true.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. In contrast, RAWA would allocate
nearly $1.4 billion annually, and permanent mandatory funding
for state and tribal fish and wildlife management agencies, per
the blue ribbon panel's recommendations.
Mr. Olson, why is permanent, dedicated funding so important
when it comes to wildlife and habitat management?
Mr. Olson. Well, it takes a long time to conserve species
and to arrest the decline of declining species. The Audubon
Society, along with the Fish and Wildlife Service, opened the
Condor Recovery Office in 1980 with 22 birds. It is North
America's largest flying bird. There were 22 birds left in the
wild. We are now up to 300. And this is nearly, what, 44 years
later. It is still in danger. They are breeding in the wild
successfully. They have been restored into Utah, Arizona, and
northern Mexico, and they are breeding successfully throughout
Southern California and the Coast Range. It just takes a long
time.
The peregrine falcon, the bald eagle, extraordinary success
stories from the Endangered Species Act. But it was a concerted
effort. State and Federal agencies, the Peregrine Fund, Audubon
Societies. We completely eliminated as a breeding species
peregrine falcons in the eastern United States. There were two
pair left in the Rocky Mountains sitting on addled eggs because
of DDT, eggshell thinning, and two pair in California.
It is an extraordinary thing. We now have 250 pairs of
peregrine falcons in California, but it has taken 20 to 25
years. And it is dedicated funding, so that the state agencies
can hire people and realize that you are not on a temporary
assignment, and next year your appropriation is gone, and we
are out of doing the business. It just takes dedicated funding
and significant funding.
We can avert the biological crisis. One in four birds in
North America is no longer here. We have lost 3 billion birds
in the last 50 years. It is on our watch.
Mrs. Dingell. I agree with you. I am going to ask you just
to answer this question shortly. And it is why RAWA matters.
Is it also true that the Chairman's bill rescinds funding
for programs managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration and the Bureau of Reclamation under the
Inflation Reduction Act and the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act, which includes funding for tribes to cover the cost
of the discretionary funding that may or may not be
appropriated for this bill?
Mr. Olson. It is true.
Mrs. Dingell. Thank you. It is especially troubling to
learn how these clawbacks impact tribes, since it is my
understanding how many feel that they have been left out of
this process.
I just, in my remaining time, want to emphasize the strong
support RAWA has earned over the years. I really want to work
with the Chairman, but I cannot support the America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act because, simply put, it doesn't meet
the recommendations laid out by the blue ribbon panel.
And I would like to ask for unanimous consent to insert in
the record a number of documents. The first would be the
bipartisan co-sponsor list for last Congress' version of RAWA;
this year's bipartisan Senate co-sponsor list; and the
bipartisan vote for RAWA on the House Floor during the 117th
Congress. The recommendations of the blue ribbon panel
outlining the need for $1.3 billion and permanent mandatory
funding, along with the list of panelists on the blue ribbon
panel, spanning the ideological spectrum representing
conservation, sportsmen, scientists, states, businesses, and
more. The House-passed H.R. 2773, Recovering America's Wildlife
Act, which would provide almost $1.4 billion of permanent
mandatory funding for states and tribes to carry out wildlife
conservation. Support letters for RAWA from 61 Tribal Nations
and thousands of business and conservation interests. And
lastly, a Committee Report from the 116th Congress showing the
markup vote count on RAWA. The Chairman voted for RAWA at that
time.
Mr. Bentz. Without objection.

[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD006.pdf

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The full bill is available for viewing on Congress.gov at:

https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/
2773

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.
All of the letters of support for RAWA are available for
viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD008.pdf
The letters of support are from the following tribes:

Native American Fish &
Wildlife Society              Point No Point Treaty Council

Oneida Nation                 Pueblo of Santa Ana

Menominee Indian Tribe of
Wisconsin                     Santee Sioux Tribe of Nebraska

Swinomish Indian Tribal
Community                     Quileute Tribal Council

Eastern Band of Cherokee
Indians                       1854 Treaty Authority

Chippewa Ottawa Resource
Authority                     Keweenaw Bay Indian Community

Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe    Northwest Indian Fisheries
Commission

Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes               Walker River Paiute Tribe

Grand Traverse Band of
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians   Makah Tribe

The Hope Tribe                Stillaquamish Tribe of Indians

Lower Brule Sioux Tribe       Northern Cheyenne Tribe

Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe     Southwest Tribal Fisheries
Commission

Quinault Indian Nation        Confederated Tribes and Bands of
the Yakama Nation

Lummi Indian Business
Council                       Yurok Tribe

Osage Nation

------

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

.

The Committee Report on H.R. 3742 is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD010.pdf

------

Mrs. Dingell. And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Representative
Hageman for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am grateful for
all of the work that has gone into this bill, and more
particularly for the discussions that I have had with Chairman
Westerman in developing this legislation.
I also want to thank each of the witnesses for their
willingness to testify in front of this Subcommittee. We deeply
value your input, knowledge, and your expertise.
I have one quick question for Mr. Strickler, and that is,
Mr. Strickler, are you aware of which agency created one of the
worst environmental disasters in U.S. history?
Mr. Strickler. Representative Hageman, I am not entirely
sure, but happy for you to enlighten me.
Ms. Hageman. Well, it was the EPA, and the EPA blew out the
Gold King Mine in 2015, and released 800,000 pounds of heavy
metals and other things into the Animas River, turning the
Animas River yellow. And in doing so, they destroyed hundreds
of miles of rivers, fisheries, wildlife, and other things down
in southwestern Colorado and in the remainder of the Animas
River. No one has ever been held responsible for that.
So, I think that it is very important that we understand
who actually has the skin in the game for conserving our
natural resources and our wildlife.
Wildlife habitat, water, and resource conservation is
extremely important to the state of Wyoming. Almost a year ago,
we had the privilege of hearing from the Director of Wyoming
Game and Fish in this Subcommittee as we spoke on my bill, the
Grizzly Bear State Management Act. Mr. Brian Nesvik, the
Director of the state agency, spoke on the timeline of the
Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem grizzly bear listing and
attempted delistings. He made it very clear in his testimony
that it is our state and local managers who are putting in the
hard work on the ground and who best understand our local
ecosystems.
In fact, Wyoming has spent over $59 million on grizzly
recovery, whereas the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has spent
only in the thousands. States have the responsibility,
expertise, and incentives to conserve the species within their
borders. And, in fact, many states take an outsized role in
managing listed species.
One of the things that we discussed as we were going
through the bill for the grizzly bear delisting is how the
Endangered Species Act actually works, and it is the states
that do so much of the heavy lifting in terms of protecting our
wildlife. Like in my home state of Wyoming, the Greater
Yellowstone grizzly bear, the gray wolf, et cetera have been
highly successful, but that is because of state management.
Mr. Booth, do you believe that the greater regulatory
opportunities that are afforded to states under this bill will
empower you to command more resources at the state level to
conserve species in your state?
Mr. Booth. Yes, ma'am, we do, relative to some of the
modest ESA reforms that are in this bill.
Really, what it does is it perfectly captures the already
healthy, productive, and ongoing relationship that we are very
proud of in Arkansas that we have with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service. We work every single day with our partners at
our 10 refuges, and these people have dirt on their hands and
smoke in their hair, and we are really, really proud of it.
Ms. Hageman. So, Mr. Booth, when the Fish and Wildlife
Service has given states, landowners, and conservation groups
clear recovery targets, do you believe that that has motivated
the recovery efforts?
Mr. Booth. Yes, I do.
Ms. Hageman. And when those recovery targets have been met,
but yet it takes even perhaps years to get regulations in place
or delisting to occur, how does that affect states' and
landowners' incentives to invest in recovery efforts?
Mr. Booth. It is often disheartening for landowners to see
that regulatory changes or improvements move slower than
putting habitat down on the ground. It ultimately erodes long-
term support for conservation.
Ms. Hageman. Mr. Bronson, I would like to direct some of
these questions to you, as well. When you have clear recovery
targets from the Fish and Wildlife Service, do you believe that
that motivates recovery efforts?
Mr. Bronson. Yes.
Ms. Hageman. And when a species is recovered, don't you
believe that it also incentivizes people to work with more
species when the Fish and Wildlife Service actually moves
forward successfully with delisting a recovered species?
Mr. Bronson. Absolutely. When you have success, it breeds
more and additional success. But when you are locked in and
can't move forward, on gray wolves, for instance, in the Great
Lakes region, or grizzly bears in your state, it just
frustrates all the managers involved in the process, all the
way down the line for other species down the road.
Ms. Hageman. It disincentivizes participation with the
program entirely, doesn't it?
Mr. Bronson. Correct.
Ms. Hageman. Thank you.
Again, I want to thank each of you for being here today and
providing the testimony that you have, working with us to put
forth a bill that is actually going to succeed at recovering
species, rather than being used as a zoning mechanism to
control land and water use. Thank you.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congresswoman Hoyle from
Oregon for 5 minutes.
Ms. Hoyle. Thank you, my fellow Oregonian and Chair. I
would like to yield my time to Representative Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. I thank the gentlelady from Oregon.
Mr. Strickler, I want to come back to you because you were
just asked about the 2015 toxic spill into the Animas River. I
am old enough to remember that incident. And it seems to me
that this was not EPA's mine. As I recall, there was a deadbeat
mine owner, a problem we have faced throughout the country with
abandoned mines and deadbeat mine owners.
What are we missing in the exchange that you just had with
the Congresswoman from Wyoming? Not that any of it is relevant
to this bill.
Mr. Strickler. Representative Huffman, with great
trepidation, and not wanting to get in between you and Ms.
Hageman here, and wanting to keep the focus on the topic of the
hearing, I do believe that your recollection of that is
accurate.
Mr. Huffman. Right. It was a deadbeat mine owner.
OK. Mr. Olson, under RAWA, state agencies would receive
nearly 25 to 30 times the current funding levels. Is that your
understanding?
Mr. Olson. Yes.
Mr. Huffman. For wildlife conservation, which would be a
great benefit to their work. What kind of impact would infusion
of resources like that have on America's wildlife?
Mr. Olson. Well, I think I have this correct. I think even
the smallest states, Rhode Island would get a minimum of $15
million a year focused on implementing their State Wildlife
Action Plans and focused on those declining species. And with
the dedicated funding, that means you could really implement a
long-term plan to recover these species and keep them off the
endangered species list.
Keeping it is like preventative health care for wildlife
versus putting them in the emergency room. And I think part of
the reason we had two oil company presidents, Shell Oil North
America and Hess Oil's president, on the committee was the fact
that they wanted long-term assurances of not having to get to
the emergency room and start paying all the lawyers and all the
delays, the train wrecks that happen when you do get in that
situation. And the National Association of Realtors and the
U.S. Chamber of Commerce endorsed that concept. Let's keep
species out of the emergency room.
I think this bill focuses a lot on the Endangered Species
Act, and I think that is fine. But what we were trying to do
was prevent the endangered species becoming endangered.
Mr. Huffman. Right. Thank you for elaborating a little bit
on the actual composition of the panel, the reason it was
formed. Could you say a little bit more about the panel's
actual recommendation?
And then, listen, I want you to go woodpecker watching with
Mr. Westerman, as well, but I need you to just give a cold-
blooded comparison between this current bill, which is a hollow
authorization of $320 million offset by cuts to other programs
that help wildlife, versus the almost $1.4 billion in
guaranteed annual funding that RAWA recommended.
Mr. Olson. Yes. Well, I think everybody here wants to keep
species from being listed. And we felt like taking a long-term
dedicated funding approach reaching 12,000 species would be the
best way to go about averting the crisis and beginning to
recover from the crisis.
With Mr. Westerman's bill, I appreciate the fact that it is
collaborative, that it sends funds to the state, but it is not
dedicated funding, and it is not clear that it would even be
reauthorized or that $300 million would be appropriated on an
annual basis.
Mr. Huffman. And with the sunset, it actually takes you
backward, right?
Mr. Olson. Yes, after 5 years.
Mr. Huffman. Look, the main point, I believe, correct me if
I am wrong, but the main point of the blue ribbon panel was
this guaranteed annual funding, and the level of guaranteed
annual funding needed to do the job.
Mr. Olson. Yes, that is exactly right.
Mr. Huffman. And Mr. Westerman's bill, for whatever other
provisions it might have in it, doesn't include that. In fact,
it puts us on a weaker financial footing going forward. Is that
fair to say?
Mr. Olson. That is fair.
Mr. Huffman. Thanks, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. The Chair recognizes Congressman Duarte for 5
minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate it.
In the state of California, healthy forests are very
important, our way of life. This Cottonwood Decision has caused
a state of paralysis in managing our Federal forests by
requiring forest plans to go through new ESA consultations
every time a new species is listed. For that reason, I have
been a consistent supporter of legislative efforts to provide a
fix to the detrimental Cottonwood Decision.
Mr. Bronson, I have heard critics of reversing the
Cottonwood Decision state that ESA consultation is a quick
process that can be completed in a few days. Has that been your
experience?
Mr. Bronson. Mr. Chairman, Representative Duarte, no, that
hasn't been our experience.
When we look at the very first consultation that was
required from the original court case, that took 400 person
days for the Forest Service to do the review. It took over 12
months and it cost $250,000. And since that time, most
reconsultations have been on par with that.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. Again, Mr. Bronson, as a state
outside the Ninth Circuit, and therefore not currently
prioritizing reversing the Cottonwood Decision, what is at play
there? What do you know about that?
Mr. Bronson. The original ruling affected the Ninth
Circuit, and it actually conflicted with a ruling that had been
made in the Tenth Circuit. So, what we have is a situation
where there is uncertainty for the rest of the country. Which
precedent is going to take effect? Is reconsultation required,
as the Ninth says, or is it not required, as the Tenth says?
So, that is a big part of the concern about uncertainty.
An injunction was put in place in an Arizona court, which
is in the Ninth Circuit, but that affected forests that were in
New Mexico, including the forests that were affected by the Hay
Creek Fire, the massive, world-record-setting wildfire. There
was an area of treatment that didn't get treated for over a
year because of a Cottonwood injunction, even though New Mexico
was outside of the Ninth Circuit. So, this is having impacts
beyond that.
But I think the biggest concern that states outside of the
Ninth Circuit should have is that this is costing the Forest
Service a lot of time and money that is taking their people
away from active forest management across the country. It is
reducing budgets for needless litigation.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Tenny, you work with a lot of forest owners. Forest
management, whether public or private lands, has conjunctive
uses that we all value: habitat, watershed logging, grazing,
recreation. How does preservation wilderness fit into that
conjunctive management scheme, and does it have a place and can
it be balanced?
Mr. Tenny. Well, yes and yes. What we find with private
forest owners is their primary interest is to find that
balance.
Our member companies in the West have shared thousands of
miles of boundary with the National Forest System lands, so
what we focus on in that relationship is to maintain the health
of the land on those boundaries because we have to. Now, those
boundaries are usually distant from preserved areas, and those
preserved areas provide a lot of benefit to a lot of people for
a variety of reasons. We focus our attention on those areas
that need to be managed to preserve both the benefits on the
Federal land, which everybody needs, and the benefits on the
private land, which everybody needs.
Mr. Duarte. What is your experience with the history of
catastrophic wildfire when it comes across the private lands
that are managed as private lands for conjunctive benefits, and
of public lands that are held as preservation wilderness, and
basically unmanaged, overgrown, oftentimes very high fuel
density?
Mr. Tenny. Well, I would be lying if I said I didn't have a
little PTSD on some of that, because we have seen some very
difficult fire situations in recent years, and we know that. We
have seen them in California, we have seen them in Oregon.
There is no doubt that fire does not know boundaries.
So, what we are doing with the Forest Service, in fact, we
just signed an MOU with the Forest Service last week that will
enable our private forest owners to extend fuel breaks onto
Federal land, and to cooperate in these adjacent areas so that
we can address that very issue.
It is a start.
Mr. Duarte. One last question. Comparative habitat value
between the private lands and the preservation wilderness lands
and public ownership.
Mr. Tenny. It varies from place to place, but I can tell
you that where we are managing, I will give you an example of
owls. Owls is a good example that you will understand. Owls
need places to sleep, they need places to forage. And when you
have a mosaic of forest types, you can provide that.
Because we are managing our lands on a continuous rotation
of young, older, and then mature forests, we are providing that
mosaic of habitat that owls need, and this carries over to a
whole variety of other species, whether it is tree voles or
Pacific fishers, a whole variety of other species that we have
been able to manage without the need for listing because of the
way we manage.
Mr. Duarte. So, actively-managed forest lands generally
have higher habitat value than preservation wilderness forest
lands.
Mr. Tenny. We know from our experience that they provide
the habitat that the species need. And what happens on the
Federal land, it is variable.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you. The Chair recognizes himself for 5
minutes.
Mr. Booth, the leverage, the synergy, the compound return
of private landowners working with agencies, that, to me, seems
to be one of the most important parts of this bill. And the
reason it is so important is because we don't have enough
money, as we have heard over and over again, to do all the work
that needs to be done. So, leveraging that private landowner
involvement is key because we don't have all the money in the
world, as has been suggested by folks on the other side of the
aisle, perhaps the gentleman sitting to my left.
So, my question to you is, do you see this bill as a means
of prompting local landowners with their millions of acres of
land working with agencies? Do you see this bill as a prompt to
have that actually happen?
Mr. Booth. Without question. We see landowners in Arkansas
with a very deep desire to do the right thing for the natural
resource, but they are normally lacking in either two things:
knowledge or resources. This important legislation will help us
establish a conduit with these private landowners to help give
them both.
Mr. Bentz. It seems to me that, without the involvement of
the private landowner, we are not going to be successful in
recovering these species. We simply are not.
I viewed this bill based upon conversations with people
like you and also back in my home state of Oregon, where I
assisted as a lawyer in many ranches entering into CCAAs. And
there was great fear in that space that this bill actually
would address. And to me, getting people who do have thousands
of acres of sagebrush land enthusiastic about entering into
arrangements with the government that actually help and don't
threaten is so important, and this bill does exactly that.
Mr. Strickler, I read with interest your testimony,
particularly page 2, where you talk about new approaches in the
Klamath. And I was just wondering if you were referring to the
holes blown in those dams that are now allowing all kinds of
sediment to rush down the river and kill thousands, tens of
thousands, if not millions, of fish. And I wonder if that was
one of the new approaches.
And I am being mean about this, Mr. Strickler, I know you
didn't have much to do with what is going on there. But I must
say, when I went through your assertion that the money being
spent in the BIL and the IRA, the assertion is almost as
though, if this bill were to pass, all of those trillions would
be sucked up by this bill. And that is not the case at all, is
it?
This bill suggests $300 billion a year. Those two bills are
in the trillions, am I right?
And why would you make such a suggestion, that somehow this
bill would rob those two pieces of legislation of their money?
Mr. Strickler. Chairman Bentz, thank you for the question.
It is good to see you again, and happy to talk to you about
Klamath dam removal or otherwise.
The legislation states clearly that there would be funds
from Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Inflation Reduction Act
rescinded, I think, ostensibly as an offset for the funding
authorized, spending authorized in this legislation. It is not
the entire amount, obviously, of those large pieces of
legislation, but it would be significant funding for the
programs we mentioned earlier.
Mr. Bentz. All right. Well, I just want to say that that
wasn't what I heard in your initial testimony. And I was taken
aback by your statement that taking money from the Inflation
Reduction Act is counter-productive, particularly where this
bill promotes this leverage, this compounding, this synergy we
just heard about from Mr. Booth.
So, if we are getting this kind of compound return on that
which this bill suggests, as opposed to whatever it is that is
currently happening, wouldn't you agree that if we can get more
money, more bang for the buck, if you will, under this bill
than under these other two Acts you referenced, we should be
trying to figure out how to better use those funds. Wouldn't
you agree?
Mr. Strickler. Mr. Chairman, I think the ``if'' there is
important. I don't believe that we would get more bang for our
buck by rescinding that funding and putting it towards
different purposes.
I think to the point that others have made today, let's do
both. I think the purposes of the funding that has been
appropriate under BIL and IRA is really important.
Mr. Bentz. I am going to be out of my own time here in a
second.
I appreciate your answer, but it is no surprise to me that
my Ranking Member brought this fake money in, because if we
don't get control of our spending this is what our dollars are
going to be worth. So, the question becomes, how do we
appropriately use that which has already been allocated better?
And I am looking forward to hearing what Chair Westerman
has to say. And since I am now going to recognize him for 5
minutes, we will get to hear that now.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Chairman Bentz, and thank you to
the witnesses today.
There has been a lot of talk about the blue ribbon
commission and the recommendations. And I will admit
Recommendation No. 1 says Congress dedicate up to $1.3 billion
annually. And Mr. Olson, I know you were on the blue ribbon
commission.
Mr. Strickler, you talked about the blue ribbon commission.
Mr. Olson, if this language had the $1.3 billion permanent
mandatory spending in it, what would be your position on it?
Would you support it if it had the $1.3 billion of permanent
mandatory annual funding?
Mr. Olson. Well, that is a strong component of what we
would like to see in the bill.
We would also like to probably, I think, take a look at the
endangered species provisions. We love the idea of having
private landowners in the states building a working
relationship and a partnership.
I think our concern is that Federal authority of the
Endangered Species Act, there are issues with grizzly bears and
wolves.
Mr. Westerman. I need to move on here.
Mr. Olson. OK.
Mr. Westerman. I only read the first phrase in
Recommendation No. 1. Can you finish Recommendation No. 1?
And I read, ``Congress dedicate up to $1.3 billion
annually.'' Do you know how that recommendation ends?
Mr. Olson. To fund state agencies, wildlife agencies, and
tribal governments to be able to develop conservation plans----
Mr. Westerman. You are missing it a little bit. Let me just
read it.
Recommendation No. 1, ``Congress dedicate up to $1.3
billion annually in existing revenue from the development of
energy and mineral resources on Federal lands and waters to the
Wildlife Conservation Restoration Program.'' Do you remember
that?
Mr. Olson. That is correct.
Mr. Westerman. Did the bill from last Congress, the RAWA
bill, have offsets from development of energy and mineral
resources from Federal and----
Mr. Olson. No, it did not.
Mr. Westerman. No, it was coming straight out of the
Treasury with no offset.
And Mr. Strickler, you seem to think we need the $1.3
billion annually, but you don't think it is more important than
the NOAA and the Bureau of Reclamation provisions that, quite
frankly, aren't being used out of IIJA and the IRA. Where would
you find the money?
Mr. Strickler. Chairman Westerman, thank you for the
question. There is a reason there was nothing about where we
should find the money in my testimony, because that is not for
me to say.
Mr. Westerman. So, we are borrowing it from our kids and
our grandkids. And with no offsets to it, that is pretty
irresponsible. And it will make the money turn into play money,
the value of the U.S. currency that is already being devalued
with high inflation.
Mr. Bronson, you represent elk. If there is good elk
habitat, does Mr. Olson get good songbird habitat? Do they
usually go hand in hand?
Mr. Bronson. Mr. Chairman, Representative Westerman, yes,
normally.
We work on elk primarily, but we also work on other
wildlife, and we care about a lot of species. So, good quality
sage for elk is good quality sage for sage-grouse.
Mr. Westerman. So, it is really not about a species, it is
about habitat. And this bill is focused on restoring habitat,
not somehow magically waving a wand and recovering a species.
It all comes back to habitat.
Mr. Booth, let's get a little bit specific about what is in
the bill. We know Arkansas has 10 percent public lands, and
part of that is state lands. The private lands there, if
landowners wanted to manage for wildlife habitat and your
agency was available to send biologists and foresters out to
meet with them and tell them that if you implement this plan,
which most of the time it is going to require thinning their
forest to get the basal area right, and probably some kind of
controlled burns, do you think people would do that?
Mr. Booth. Without question, Congressman. We have people
jumping over themselves to do it right now.
Mr. Westerman. And when you thin land in Arkansas, you sell
the timber off. They could use that to pay for the work that is
done on it, so there is no cost to the program, and the
landowner might even get money back, which is a benefit for
everyone.
Now, when you go to the Federal lands, which are in the
same condition, and this has been proven with the red-cockaded
woodpecker habitat, when you go in and manage those lands and
sell the timber from the thinnings, you get to put that back in
the pot. I think under RAWA you would have about $13 million a
year, but you probably have the potential to generate $30 or
$40 million a year to do wildlife management where you don't
have something like a timber resource to pay it back.
So, as far as funding goes, this is actually extremely more
innovative than just saying, oh, we are going to pull $1.3
billion out of the air from our kids and our grandkids and
shove it down to the states with no responsibility.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bentz. Thank you, and I thank the witnesses for their
testimony and the Members for their questions.
The members of the Committee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
these in writing. Under Committee Rule 3, members of the
Committee must submit questions to the Subcommittee Clerk by 5
p.m. Eastern Time on Monday, March 11. The hearing record will
be held open for 10 business days for these responses.
Without objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[ADDITIONAL MATERIALS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD]

Statement for the Record
National Marine Fisheries Service
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
U.S. Department of Commerce
on H.R. 7408

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is
responsible for the stewardship of the nation's living marine resources
and their habitat. Backed by sound science and an ecosystem-based
approach to management, NOAA Fisheries provides vital services for the
nation, including sustainable management of our fisheries, ensuring
safe sources of seafood, and the recovery and conservation of protected
species and healthy ecosystems. The resilience of our marine ecosystems
and coastal communities depends on healthy marine species, including
protected species such as whales, sea turtles, salmon, and corals.
The Endangered Species Act

Under the Endangered Species Act (ESA), NOAA Fisheries works to
recover marine and anadromous species while preserving robust economic
and recreational opportunities. There are more than 160 endangered and
threatened marine and anadromous species under NOAA's jurisdiction. Our
work includes listing species under the ESA, monitoring species status,
designating critical habitat, implementing actions to recover
endangered and threatened species, consulting with other Federal
agencies to insure their activities are not likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of listed species or destroy or adversely modify
critical habitat, developing ESA policies, guidance, and regulations,
and working with partners to conserve and recover listed species. NOAA
Fisheries shares the responsibility of implementing the ESA with the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (hereafter referred to as the Services).
Recognizing the value of our natural heritage, Congress enacted the
ESA nearly unanimously in 1973, in acknowledgement of the broad public
support for the prevention of species extinction and the conservation
of ecosystems and biodiversity. The ESA is the nation's foremost
conservation law for protecting wildlife and plants in danger of
extinction. It plays a critical, science-based role in preventing the
extinction of imperiled species, promoting their recovery, and
conserving their habitats. It has been extraordinarily effective at
preventing species from going extinct and has inspired voluntary action
to conserve at-risk species and their habitat before they reach the
point where they would qualify to be listed as threatened or
endangered.
Since it was signed into law, more than 99 percent of the species
listed have been saved from extinction.
We offer the following comments on HR 7408.
HR 7408--America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act

HR 7408 would amend the Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act
to authorize supplemental funds for management of fish and wildlife
species to States and Tribes. It would authorize the Department of the
Interior to allocate these funds to accounts established under the
Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act and to issue grants. Because
NOAA Fisheries does not provide or receive funds under the Pittman-
Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act, this part of the legislation does
not pertain to NOAA Fisheries.
HR 7408 would also amend several provisions of the ESA including
provisions pertaining to listing species, designating critical habitat,
and promulgating protective regulations under section 4(d) for
threatened species. NOAA has several concerns with these provisions and
opposes these sections of HR 7408.
Listing Determinations [Section 401]

HR 7408 would amend the ESA to require the Services, when
determining whether to list a species, to take into account the net
conservation benefit of any ``Candidate Conservation Agreement with
Assurances'' or ``Programmatic Candidate Conservation Agreement with
Assurances'' for that species. Candidate Conservation Agreements with
Assurances are voluntary agreements that are used to provide incentives
for non-Federal landowners to conserve candidate and other unlisted
species. The Services currently enter into these agreements when we
determine that the conservation measures that will be implemented
address key current and anticipated future threats that are under the
property owner's control and will result in a net conservation benefit
to, and improve the status of, the covered species.
This bill's definition of ``net conservation benefit'' differs from
that in the 2016 joint NOAA Fisheries and U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service candidate conservation agreement with assurances policy (81 FR
95164). The policy provides a clear definition of the term ``net
conservation benefit'' that specifically refers to cumulative benefits
of the conservation measures and describes how the benefits are
measured. Consistent with the policy's definition, the conservation
measures and property-management activities covered by the agreement
must be designed to reduce or eliminate those key threats on the
property that are under the property owner's control in order to
increase the species' populations or improve its habitat. HR 7408
defines ``net conservation benefit'' as the net effect of the agreement
by comparing the situation of the candidate species with and without an
agreement, rather than the cumulative benefits to the species
referenced in the policy. As such, the bill would allow for exemption
from future listing based on a lower standard than currently
applicable, undermining the ability of the ESA to prevent extinction.
In addition, it is not clear how the requirement to take into account
the net conservation benefit of any ``Candidate Conservation Agreement
with Assurances'' or ``Programmatic Candidate Conservation Agreement
with Assurances'' would apply to NOAA Fisheries, as various subsections
of the bill establish responsibilities for the ``Secretary''--a term
that includes both Services--and the Director of the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, which would exclude NOAA Fisheries from the bill's
application.
Critical Habitat [Sections 402]

Existing section 4(a)(3)(B)(i) of the ESA precludes the Secretary
from designating as critical habitat lands or geographical areas owned
or controlled by the Department of Defense that are subject to an
integrated natural resources management plan prepared under the Sikes
Act, if the Secretary determines that the plan provides a benefit to
the species. Section 402 of HR 7408 would prohibit the Services from
designating as critical habitat lands that are privately owned or
controlled, and that are subject to a land management plan that the
Secretary determines is similar to an integrated natural resource
management plan under Section 101 of the Sikes Act. Privately
controlled land is not defined.
While some of this provision in HR 7408 is similar to Section
4(a)(3)(B)(i) of the ESA, HR 7408 includes additional requirements and
findings that would be very difficult to produce within the time frames
the ESA requires for critical habitat to be designated. For example,
section 402 provides that one way for a land management plan to be
prepared is in cooperation with the Services and each applicable State
fish and wildlife agency. The resource-intensive task of preparing and
assessing potentially multiple plans in multiple states for wide-
ranging species would strain the Services' limited resources, and cause
delay. Even if land management plans are prepared independently of a
multi-agency cooperative process, assessing plans that are otherwise
developed and submitted to the Services would also be time-consuming
and resource-intensive. In assessing those plans, the Services would be
required by this bill to determine, among other things, whether the
plan would result in an increase in the population of the species or
would maintain the same population as the population that would likely
occur if such land or other geographical area were designated as
critical habitat. Such an analysis would be difficult to conduct.
Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management Plans [Section 501]

HR 7408 would revise the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
and Planning Act and the Federal Land Policy and Management Act to
expressly provide that reinitiation of consultation under Section
7(a)(2) of the ESA and its related implementing regulation, 50 CFR
402.16, would not be required on approved, amended, or revised U.S.
Forest Service (USFS) land management plans or Bureau of Land
Management land use plans when new species are listed, new critical
habitat is designated, or new information regarding listed species or
critical habitat becomes available.
The USDA, Department of the Interior (DOI), and NOAA are committed
to continuing to work together towards a legislative solution that
allows for timely decision making, while maintaining the important
wildlife protections afforded by the Endangered Species Act. As
drafted, the Administration has concerns with this section of HR 7408
and looks forward to working with the Committee and the bill sponsor to
address concerns with the bill. We want to ensure clarity on how
consultation for specific actions or projects facilitates the agencies
fulfilling their responsibilities to protect listed species and
designated critical habitats while providing the many benefits we gain
by managing our forests.
Protective Regulations for Threatened Species [Section 601]

Section 9 of the ESA lists seven specific prohibited actions with
respect to endangered species, which include prohibitions on import,
export, interstate and foreign commerce, and take of endangered species
of fish and wildlife. The Section 9 prohibitions for endangered species
do not automatically apply to threatened species.
The ESA recognizes the different status of threatened and
endangered species and provides greater flexibility in the conservation
and management of threatened species under Section 4(d). NOAA Fisheries
has utilized section 4(d) to provide a flexible, targeted approach to
the management and conservation of threatened species.
HR 7408 would amend Section 4(d) of the ESA to require that, when a
4(d) rule for a threatened species prohibits an act in Section 9(a) of
the ESA, the Services develop incremental recovery goals for that
species and provide for the stringency of the regulation to decrease as
those recovery goals are met. In addition, under this bill, States
could develop a recovery strategy for threatened or candidate species
that the Service would adopt as the 4(d) rule within that State if
certain criteria are met. These provisions may be difficult to
implement because the recovery goals for a threatened species may not
be known or may have not been identified at the time of listing the
species, and undertaking the activities required by the bill could
result in delays in putting protective regulations in place for
threatened species. The development of recovery goals and strategies is
best done through the development of a recovery plan under Section 4(f)
of the ESA. Recovery plans include comprehensive recovery criteria,
goals and strategies developed through a collaborative, inclusive
process. The additional requirements and the process of reviewing and
approving State recovery strategies required by the bill would be a
resource-intensive effort that could divert NOAA Fisheries' resources
from implementing conservation actions for the species and delay
activities that could prevent a species from declining to the point
where the statute requires listing it as endangered. Moreover, the
petition process also appears to limit the public's ability to provide
substantive input in the informal rulemaking process to adopt a 4(d)
rule if a state's petition is approved.
IRA Rescissions Impacts to Coastal Communities and NOAA Facilities
[Section 701]

NOAA opposes this provision. At this critical time in our planet's
history, HR 7408's rescission of funds allocated in Public Law 117-169
would divest resources from coastal, fishing, and Tribal communities
across the nation and jeopardize critical NOAA facilities and
infrastructure, affecting U.S. communities' resilience to extreme
weather and climate change. Furthermore, NOAA is already actively
soliciting contract and grant applications in order to comply with the
Public Law 117-169, or the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA).
Coastal communities contribute approximately $400 billion annually
to the U.S. economy and house facilities and infrastructure critical to
the U.S. economy and national security, such as ports and military
installations. Through the historic funding made available through the
IRA, NOAA is supporting community resilience through funding and
technical assistance for capacity building, transformational adaptation
and resilience planning, conserving and protecting fisheries and other
critical resources, supporting Tribal nation priorities, creating high
quality climate-ready jobs, and improving delivery of climate services
to communities and businesses.
To that end, NOAA is investing $575 million through the Climate
Resilience Regional Challenge (CRRC) to support holistic approaches to
building community resilience at the regional scale. These investments
are critically needed, as communities across the nation are
experiencing increasing impacts from extreme weather and climate
change, such as flooding, wildfires, drought, extreme heat, and more.
NOAA received nearly 870 letters of intent and more than 33 letters of
support from Members of Congress requesting more than $16 billion in
funding through the CRRC program, which amounts to 28 times more in
requests than we have in available funding. NOAA is working to meet the
needs of communities and build resilience along our nation's coasts;
however, the bill's rescission of funds puts the success of these
projects (which we expect to announce in the coming months) in peril.
Additionally, NOAA is investing $349 million to support Climate
Ready Fisheries to strengthen the agency's science, management, and
survey enterprise to build a dynamically managed fisheries system. As
with all of NOAA's plans for IRA funds, this funding has been fully
planned and work is underway to execute funds to invest in advanced
data technologies and modern infrastructure, to support the critically
endangered North Atlantic Right Whale, to implement improvements in
recreational fishery surveys for red snapper, among other things.
Reversing these plans would threaten NOAA's efforts to provide real-
time advice and long-range projections to inform and support fishery
management decisions for affected sectors and communities. In addition,
rescissions through the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act
would impact $390 million in investments that are directly responsive
to priorities identified by Tribes in our March 2023 consultation
sessions and written comments. These priorities include support for
restoring Pacific salmon and fish passage to help Tribal communities
enhance their resilience to impacts from extreme weather and climate
change.
NOAA is investing IRA funds to help organizations recruit, train
and place workers in climate resilience fields and catalyze public-
private partnerships to develop and bring to market the next generation
of innovative new products and services to solve challenges related to
impacts from extreme weather and climate change. This work will
contribute to economic development and growth while developing and
growing new businesses and putting Americans to work in high-paying
jobs across the country.
Finally, NOAA's facilities portfolio is vast with over 620
facilities, including over 400 owned properties, and an estimated
replacement value which exceeds $3 billion. Each facility requires
financial investments for maintenance, repairs, modernization, and even
replacement to effectively sustain and evolve NOAA's science
capabilities to support current and future missions. Sections 40001 and
40002 of the IRA provide funding for necessary updates to NOAA
facilities and infrastructure to continue to operate our science and
research missions. The rescission of funds through the America's
Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act would disrupt the success of NOAA's
overarching science priorities and service to the public by canceling
investments for the Northwest Fisheries Science Center, fishery survey
vessels' mid-life repair, and marine sanctuary facilities across the
country.
Conclusion

NOAA is proud to continue to be a leader in conducting ocean
science, serving the nation's coastal communities and industries, and
ensuring responsible stewardship of our ocean and coastal resources. We
value the opportunity to continue working with this Subcommittee on
these important issues. NOAA shares and supports many of the goals
identified in the legislation, including conserving and restoring
species' habitat, recovering listed species and preventing the need to
list species under the ESA. However, NOAA opposes the proposed funding
offsets and many of the provisions related to ESA implementation.

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Westerman

Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission

Tallahassee, Florida

March 4, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Committee on Natural Resources
1324 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Westerman:

The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) is
pleased to support H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act.

H.R. 7408 would provide a much-needed investment in America's
habitat and wildlife conservation. Throughout the nation, and here in
Florida, America's wildlife and their habitats need help. The State of
Florida has committed significant resources to the conservation of our
fish, wildlife and habitats and leads the nation in our programs for
land acquisition and to keep working lands working. Management of these
lands is critical to maintaining their value for fish and wildlife.
According to Florida's State Wildlife Action Plan (2019), 690 animals
are listed as Species of Greatest Conservation Needs. We must continue
to restore and provide ongoing management of habitats to prevent more
species from being listed as Threatened or Endangered and aid in the
recovery of species that are already listed.

The America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act is a step to
provide immediate funding assistance to these habitats and species. As
you know, the America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act would provide
$300 million each year for five years to the states for habitat and
species conservation.

Thank you for introducing H.R. 7408, and FWC looks forward to
working with you to advance this legislation and improve our country's
natural resources.

Sincerely,

Rodney Barreto,
Chairman

______

National Cattlemen's Beef Association

and

Public Lands Council

March 6, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chair
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Natural Resources Committee
Washington, DC 20515

Chairman Westerman, Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Grijalva, and
Ranking Member Huffman:

Livestock producers conserve and enhance millions of acres of high-
quality wildlife habitat on both public and privately owned land across
the United States. These farmers and ranchers treat against invasive
plant species, cultivate and restore native grasslands, mitigate the
risk of wildfire, work with state and federal authorities to support
migration corridors, and participate in voluntary conservation
agreements to support wildlife recovery, all while raising high-quality
protein to feed our nation. The National Cattlemen's Beef Association
(NCBA) is the oldest and largest trade association representing the
American cattle industry, with roughly 26,000 individual members and
more than 178,000 members through 44 state affiliate organizations. The
Public Lands Council (PLC) is the only national group dedicated solely
to representing the ranchers who hold roughly 22,000 federal grazing
permits and steward more than 220 million acres of public lands across
the West. United in our goal of providing healthy, green, open acres of
habitat on productive working lands for a host of different wildlife
species, we write today in support of H.R. 7408, the America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act, and urge members of the Committee to vote Yes
on the bill.

Despite the best original intentions of Congress to enact
protections and leverage federal resources to recover imperiled
species, the Endangered Species Act (ESA) has become an endless source
of bureaucratic delay, federal government overreach, and frivolous
litigation by extreme activist groups. In response to the urgent need
for commonsense ESA reforms, H.R. 7408 provides commonsense solutions:

Vital, statutory certainty for landowners who make essential,
voluntary investments in conserving wildlife habitat on private land.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) cannot achieve their goals
without the participation of private landowners; by their own estimate,
two-thirds of all species listed under the ESA have some habitat on
private acres.\1\ Producer participation in voluntary agreements can be
an incredibly powerful tool. For example, across the range of the
lesser prairie-chicken, more than 1.8 million acres of habitat was
enrolled in the Conservation Reserve Program, more than 1.6 million
acres of agricultural land was enrolled in the Working Lands for
Wildlife initiative, more than 2 million acres were enrolled by
ranchers in New Mexico under Candidate Conservation Agreements (CCAs)
and Candidate Conservation Agreements with Assurances (CCAAs), and more
than 1 million acres were enrolled by landowners in Texas and Oklahoma
under their respective CCAAs.\2\ Despite these efforts, the lesser
prairie-chicken was listed anyway, and an overreaching 4(d) rule issued
for the threatened population soured many farmers and ranchers on any
future intent to conserve habitat for the species. After years of this
broad-brush, one-size-fits-all approach by USFWS, many producers and
landowners are understandably skeptical of enrolling in these voluntary
agreements in the first place if they ultimately won't count as
``real'' habitat management in the eyes of the agency. H.R. 7408 would
codify CCAs and CCAAs, and prevent landowners from falling under a
critical habitat designation if they are already implementing habitat
conservation and restoration work for the species. This is essential to
incentivizing continued participation in these efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``ESA Basics: 50 Years of Conserving Endangered Species.'' U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service. February 1, 2023.
\2\ ``Partners in lesser prairie-chicken conservation.'' U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service.

Robust funding for states and tribes to implement their own
wildlife habitat conservation and restoration plans, rather than a top-
down federal approach. USFWS has a track record of imposing species
management plans on specific areas without local buy-in. For example,
the agency is pursuing translocation of grizzly bears to the North
Cascades Ecosystem despite years of objections by local ranchers,
families, and elected officials. H.R. 7408 empowers states and tribes
to implement their own plans for species--especially predator species--
without having to cave to a federal initiative cooked up a thousand
miles away. This local leadership is key in ensuring durable solutions,
as local communities and experts are ultimately those responsible for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the factors that are able to ensure long-term species conservation.

Mechanisms to curb the overreach of ``blanket 4(d)'' rules and to
force USFWS to set concrete, incremental recovery goals that trigger
state management of the species when met. Over the past half-century,
the ESA has become a waiting room for species rather than a dynamic,
tool for listing, recovery, and delisting. This legislation would
restore the distinction between threatened and endangered listings--per
Congress's intent in the Act--and create a structure by which USFWS
would be held accountable for timely delisting when a species hits its
recovery goals.

Flexibility for limited take of a threatened species at the
discretion of the Secretary of the Interior, allowing for management of
species that are abundant but not yet delisted. This is another key
measure that will help livestock producers and rural families live with
listed species--particularly apex predators--with as little danger to
human life and as little destruction of livestock and property as
possible. Species recovery plans must be adaptable enough to respond to
changing conditions and respond to potential dangers, to both humans
and the species. Unfortunately, today's rigid approach far too enough
leads to avoidable social and ecological conflict.

An overdue correction of the inflated ESA consultation burden that
has fallen on the U.S. Forest Service as a result of Cottonwood
Environmental Law Center v. United States Forest Service (2015.) The
wildfire crisis continues to ravage the West each spring, summer, and
fall, and catastrophic fires are moving further East with each passing
year. The U.S. Forest Service continues to face budget shortfalls and
staffing shortages post-COVID-19, and their limited resources must be
focused on the most immediate threat to the nation's forests. Diverting
the agency's attention to needless, bureaucratic hoop-jumping shows
reckless disregard for the critical role national forests play in
providing wildlife habitat, timber production, grazing land, carbon
sinks, and headwaters.

Authority for the National Wildlife Refuge System to leverage
public-private partnerships to address ecosystem challenges and
conserve habitat. Extending Good Neighbor Authority to USFWS will
encourage the maintenance of contiguous habitat, and minimize red tape
to expedite much-needed range improvements and recreation
infrastructure.

Wildlife conservation is a mission that American farmers and
ranchers hold dear. The presence of healthy wildlife populations brings
revenue to rural communities through hunting, angling, and tourism.
Healthy, balanced populations support the health and resiliency of the
pastures and rangelands that livestock graze for the majority of the
year. And for many livestock producers, the beauty and enjoyment
brought by native wildlife is one of the things they love most about
living, working, and raising their families in rural America. H.R. 7408
represents a landmark step forward in improving broken aspects of ESA
implementation and ensuring that the Act can endure for another 50
years. We urge the Committee to favorably report the America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act so that the historically fruitful partnership
between livestock producers and state, Tribal, and federal authorities
can continue to yield durable conservation results.

Sincerely,

National Cattlemen's Beef
Assoc.                        Public Lands Council

______

Property and Environment Research Center

March 4, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chair
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Natural Resources Committee
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Westerman, Ranking Member Grijalva, Chairman Bentz,
Ranking Member Huffman, and members of the House Natural Resources
Committee--Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries Subcommittee:

Since the Endangered Species Act became law five decades ago, most
species listed under it have avoided extinction. Only a tiny fraction
of listed species, however, have ever recovered and come off the list.
The vast majority remain at risk, not quite plunging over the cliff to
extinction, but not backing away a safe distance from the edge either.
The key challenge in the Endangered Species Act's second half-century
will be to dramatically boost the rate at which endangered and
threatened species recover.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``A Field Guide for Wildlife Recovery,'' PERC Report
(September 2023).

The Property and Environment Research Center (PERC) is the national
leader in market solutions for conservation, with over 40 years of
research and a network of respected scholars and practitioners. Through
research, law and policy, and innovative applied conservation projects,
PERC explores how aligning incentives for environmental stewardship
produces sustainable outcomes for land, water, and wildlife. We have
emphasized the importance of making species an asset rather than a
liability and the dire consequences for wildlife when we get the
incentives wrong. PERC has also studied how policies can encourage
collaboration between federal and state wildlife agencies, private
landowners, and conservation organizations--or can create endless and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
counterproductive conflict if done wrong.

The America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act (H.R. 7408) is an
important proposal to promote recovery by fostering collaboration
between these stakeholders. It recognizes the necessary role of states,
tribes, and private partners in conserving wildlife. This bill pairs
$1.6 billion in additional funding for state and tribal wildlife
conservation efforts with policy reforms that would improve incentives
for habitat restoration and species recovery efforts. These
improvements include:

Incentivizing proactive habitat restoration by rewarding
progress toward a species' recovery with incremental
regulatory relief.

Removing duplicative and unnecessary red tape that delays
forest restoration and leaves wildlife habitat at risk of
catastrophic wildfire.

Authorizing the Fish and Wildlife Service to partner with
states, counties, and tribes to restore habitat in national
wildlife refuges.

Codifying several existing U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
policies that have helped encourage voluntary species
recovery efforts on private lands.

When it comes to wildlife, we can and should do better. With
wildlife conservation, the ``how'' is just as important as the ``how
much.'' By improving incentives for proactive species recovery and
habitat restoration, America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation Act
contains several smart ideas for making conservation dollars go further
for wildlife. These policy reforms have also been supported by
Republican and Democratic administrations, as well as a large number of
conservation organizations.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Jonathan Wood, ``America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation
Act, Explained,'' (February 2024).

Amidst so much conflict over wildlife policy, this bill is a real,
substantive, and serious solution that addresses real conservation
challenges. It is an important step to improving the future of species
recovery. Congress should take this opportunity to support the future
of wildlife conservation with the America's Wildlife Habitat
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conservation Act.

Sincerely,

The Property and Environment Research Center

______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The full document is available for viewing at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/II/II13/20240306/116892/HHRG-
118-II13-20240306-SD018.pdf

------

Outside Groups Supporting H.R. 7408

Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies

Boone and Crockett Club

Congressional Sportsmen's Foundation

ConservAmerica

Delta Waterfowl

Ducks Unlimited

Property and Environment Research Center

Federal Forest Research Coalition

National Alliance of Forest Owners

Safari Club International

Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission

Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation

National Cattlemen's Beef Association

The Public Lands Council

______

Associated Builders and Contractors

Washington, DC

March 6, 2024

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chair
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Natural Resources Committee
Washington, DC 20515

Dear Chairman Bentz, Ranking Member Huffman and Members of the
Committee on Natural Resources Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and
Fisheries:

On behalf of Associated Builders and Contractors, a national
construction industry trade association with 68 chapters representing
more than 23,000 members, I write today to thank you for holding a
legislative hearing on H.R. 7408, America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act. ABC is thankful for the subcommittee's continued
examination of how the Endangered Species Act is implemented by federal
agencies, its practical impacts on the American people, how litigation
is driving ESA decision-making and how success is defined under the
ESA.

ABC supports the ESA's purpose of protecting species threatened
with extinction and recognizes the need for science-based, data-driven
actions that conserve those species and the habitats on which they
depend. ABC believes that reforms to modernize the ESA, including
efforts to make the act's consultations more efficient and effective,
are needed as the Biden administration implements over $1 trillion in
federal spending for critical infrastructure, energy and technology
projects throughout the country.

The AWHCA would require the federal government to establish
objective, incremental recovery goals for species listed under the ESA
and provide relief from regulations when those goals are met. By
investing $320 million annually in grant funding to states for wildlife
habitat conservation, this bill gives states a more active role in
regulating species, allowing them to better develop their own recovery
strategies that may become the governing regulations for these species.
This creates a path toward state management of at-risk species when
federal goals are met, leading to more efficient delisting of species
that no longer require federal protections. Additionally, the bill
provides $20 million in funding for habitat restoration projects and
forest management on tribal lands and encourages private partners to
conserve listed species.

ABC understands that a collaborative effort among states, tribes,
private landowners and the federal government will lead to a more
efficient ESA designed to better serve our nation's communities and
endangered species. By providing these partners with the proper tools
and incentives, the AWHCA will streamline the ESA, reduce regulation
and remove unnecessary permitting hurdles that a one-size-fits-all
federal government approach has proven incapable of doing. ABC hopes
that the AWHCA will lead to better outcomes for species and, in turn,
reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens on our nation's builders and
contractors and their construction services clients.

ABC encourages the consideration of H.R. 7408 and further efforts
to improve and modernize the ESA. ABC members stand ready for the
opportunity to build and maintain America's infrastructure to the
benefit of the communities that it will serve and appreciates your
consideration of our concerns.

Sincerely,

Kristen Swearingen,
Vice President, Legislative & Political Affairs

______

Submissions for the Record by Rep. Huffman

March 5, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Opposition to H.R. 7408, the ``America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act''

Dear Chairman Westerman and Ranking Member Grijalva:

On behalf of our 70+ organizations and our millions of members and
supporters, we write to express our strong opposition to H.R. 7408, the
America's Wildlife Habitat and Conservation Act. This bill is a
transparent attempt to weaken the Endangered Species Act and hamstring
the conservation of our most imperiled species and their habitats. It
also undermines a years-long bipartisan effort to pass the Recovering
America's Wildlife Act (``RAWA''), which would provide $1.4 billion to
address extinction and biodiversity loss in the United States and is
widely supported by many Members of Congress from both parties, States,
Indigenous communities, and conservation and sporting groups. Unlike
RAWA, however, H.R. 7408 is a partisan bill that was introduced with
little to no input from impacted stakeholders, including state wildlife
agencies. This bill would also cut over a billion dollars in Inflation
Reduction Act funding for NOAA, the Council on Environmental Quality,
and the Bureau of Reclamation, further harming habitat and wildlife by
taking away vital habitat restoration resources. Thus, we urge you to
oppose H.R. 7408.
H.R. 7408 would authorize $300 million per year for the next five
years for state wildlife conservation. This comes far short of the
funds needed to stop the decline of at-risk species across the country.
Based on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's own estimates, it would
cost approximately $1.6-$2.3 billion to save federally listed species
alone. An exponential increase in funding--on par with RAWA--is needed
to save the thousands of additional unlisted species that continue to
decline across the country. Further, H.R. 7408 does not guarantee
funding, but rather makes it dependent on sufficient Congressional
appropriations. Given Congress' polarization and difficulty passing
annual appropriations bills, it is highly unlikely that Congress would
ever allocate the full $300 million. Moreover, the bill would only make
it significantly harder to address the wholly inadequate level of
annual appropriations for the Endangered Species Act, a problem which
our organizations strongly support remedying. The bill also drastically
cuts funding for tribal wildlife conservation from $97 million in RAWA
to only $20 million.
H.R. 7408 would also gut critical protections for hundreds of
threatened and endangered species across the country, and undermine
basic scientific processes. For instance, Title V includes the Forest
Information Reform (FIR) Act, which eliminates reinitiation of
consultation requirements under the Endangered Species Act designed to
ensure that federal land management decisions are not driving species
toward extinction. Specifically, this section expands the 2018
``Cottonwood'' rider--which exempts land management agencies from
updating their plans when a species is newly listed under the Act or
when critical habitat is designated--to now exempt those agencies from
updating their plans based on ``new information'' about the harm
occurring to endangered species that live on public lands.
Such new information often includes the increasingly severe impacts
of climate change, including drought and uncharacteristic forest and
grassland or sagebrush fires, which are rapidly degrading and
destroying endangered species habitat. Reinitiation of consultations at
the plan level is extremely rare but incredibly important. The Forest
Service's own data show that compliance with existing law is not a
burden. In fact, there were only four instances in 2022 where a
national forest was required to reinitiate consultation on a forest
plan--and none were based on any of the three reasons above.
Additionally, H.R. 7408 includes an extreme provision which would
strip protections for threatened species by allowing states to develop
their own recovery strategy for the species, which can then be used as
the basis for an individual 4(d) rule under Section 4 of the Act--even
if such strategy is not based on the best available science. The bill
would further weaken 4(d) rules by forcing the Services to build in
provisions to those rules that weaken protective regulations as the
species meets recovery goals, forcing the agencies to sabotage their
own recovery goals as they achieve success. The bill also weakens
protections for more than 70% of listed species that depend on private
lands by severely limiting when the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service can
designate critical habitat on such lands, and codifies into law a
wholly inadequate process for protecting ``candidate'' species, which
are plants and animals that warrant protections under the Act but are
precluded by higher priority listing activities.
Title III of H.R. 7408 would extend Good Neighbor and Stewardship
Contracting Authorities (GNA) and Stewardship End Results Contracting
(SA) to lands managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, non-
Federal land, and land owned by an Indian Tribe ostensibly for
``restoration'' and recreation activities. However, the bill
fundamentally changes these authorities in a manner that subverts the
authority of the Secretary of Interior, creates perverse incentives
that can lead to damaging activities, and waives relevant laws.
Specifically, for GNA contracts, the bill allows for commercial logging
in exchange for conducting restoration activities. Logging may occur on
federal lands and appears to not be limited to Service lands. The bill
also requires the Secretary of Interior to approve logging
prescriptions on all timber sale projects, relinquishing her authority
to approve or modify logging prescriptions. Even more concerning,
revenue from commercial logging activities can be retained by the
governor, county or tribe. Retaining revenues to generate funds for
restoration creates a perverse incentive to increase commercial
logging, which most often harms ecosystems.
Title III also allows for Stewardship Contracts including logging
``without regard to any other provision of law.'' This could result in
logging of mature and old growth forests, logging of other sensitive
habitat as well as building new and temporary roads which most often
fragment and degrade habitat and water quality as well as contribute to
elevated fire risks. GNA are also available for recreation activities
which may be harmful to or not compatible with lands managed by the
Service, including shooting ranges, permanent paved roads, and other
infrastructure.
For these reasons, we urge you to oppose H.R. 7408.

Sincerely,

Center for Biological
Diversity                     Natural Resources Defense Council

Alameda Creek Alliance        New Hampshire Audubon

Alaska Wilderness League      North Central Washington Audubon
Society

American Bird Conservancy     Northern California Council, Fly
Fishers International

Animal Legal Defense Fund     NY4WHALES

Animal Welfare Institute      Oceanic Preservation Society

Born Free USA                 Oregon Wild

Cetacean Society
International                 Predator Defense

Christian Council of
Delmarva                      Project Coyote

Creation Justice Ministries   Project Eleven Hundred

Defenders of Wildlife         Resource Renewal Institute

Earthjustice                  Save Animals Facing Extinction

Endangered Habitats League    Save the Manatee Club

Endangered Species
Coalition                     Sierra Club

Environmental Law & Policy
Center                        Silvix Resources
Environmental Protection
Information Center-EPIC       Southern Environmental Law Center

FOUR PAWS USA                 Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance

Friends of the Earth          The #RelistWolves Campaign

Friends of Wisconsin Wolf
and Wildlife                  The Conservation Angler

Humane Action Pennsylvania    The Urban Wildlands Group

Humane Action Pittsburgh      Trap Free Montana

Inland Ocean Coalition        Turtle Island Restoration Network

Interfaith Power & Light      Voice for Animals of Maine and
New Hampshire

International Marine Mammal
Project of Earth Island
Institute                     Washington Wildlife First

Kentucky Heartwood            Waterkeeper Alliance

Klamath Forest Alliance       Western Nebraska Resources
Council

Klamath Siskiyou Wildlands
Center                        Western Watersheds Project

League of Conservation
Voters                        WildEarth Guardians

Los Angeles Audubon Society   Wilderness Watch

Los Padres ForestWatch        Wilderness Workshop

Maine Audubon                 Wolf Conservation Center

Marine Mammal Alliance
Nantucket                     World Animal Protection

Mass Audubon                  Wyoming Untrapped

National Ocean Protection
Coalition                     Wyoming Wildlife Advocates

National Wolfwatcher
Coalition                     Xerces Society for Invertebrate
Conservation

Natural Resources Council
of Maine

______

March 6, 2024

Hon. Bruce Westerman, Chairman
Hon. Raul Grijalva, Ranking Member
House Natural Resources Committee
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chair
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Natural Resources Committee
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Council on Environmental Quality Funding Cuts in H.R. 7408,
America's Wildlife Conservation Act

Dear Chair Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

We are writing to express our strong opposition to provisions in
H.R. 7408, America's Wildlife Conservation Act,'' that will completely
rescind critical funding to the White House Council on Environmental
Quality (CEQ). Under the guise of wildlife conservation legislation,
provisions in this bill would fundamentally undermine CEQ's ability to
ensure federal decisionmaking adequately and efficiently considers not
only wildlife conservation, but also critical issues related to
environmental justice, public health, and environmental consequences of
essential infrastructure and energy development across the federal
government.
Section 701 of Chair Westerman's bill would repeal $62 million in
funding to CEQ allocated under sections 60401 and 60402 of the
Inflation Reduction Act (Public Law 117-169) (IRA). The IRA rightly
made historic investments across the federal government to facilitate
timely, efficient, and meaningful environmental reviews. Congress
established CEQ in the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) to not
only serve as the President's and the nation's foremost environmental
advisor, it also charged CEQ with overseeing the environmental review
and public engagement process under NEPA for over 80 federal agencies.
Recognizing the critical role CEQ plays in ensuring the federal
government meet national conservation and climate goals, Congress
allocated money to CEQ fulfill its considerable statutory mandates.
Specifically, the IRA allocated $32 million to support data
collection and disclosure of disproportionate impacts of climate change
as well as the cumulative impacts of pollution and temperature rise. An
additional $30 million was provided to provide CEQ with the resources
necessary to carry out efficient environmental reviews, enhance
government transparency, and improve community engagement. These
investments in CEQ, which historically has had an anemic budget of
around $3 million dollars, could transform the efficiency and quality
of agency decisionmaking across the federal government. Withdrawing the
funding at a time when the Nation is making historic investments in
infrastructure and a clean energy economy will only serve to slow down
permitting, sideline meaningful public input, ossify historic
environmental injustices, and codify climate denial in to agency
decisionmaking.
We strongly urge you to oppose this legislation.

Sincerely,

Center for Biological
Diversity                     Oxfam
Earthjustice                  Sierra Club
Environmental Law & Policy
Center                        Southern Environmental Law Center
GreenLatinos                  Union of Concerned Scientists
League of Conservation
Voters                        WE ACT for Environmental Justice
Natural Resources Defense
Council

______

March 6, 2024

Hon. Cliff Bentz, Chair
Hon. Jared Huffman, Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Water, Wildlife and Fisheries
Natural Resources Committee
Washington, DC 20515

Re: Coastal Resilience Funding Cuts in H.R. 7408, America's Wildlife
Habitat Conservation Act

Dear Chair Bentz and Ranking Member Huffman:

We are writing to express our strong opposition to Congressman
Bruce Westerman's H.R. 7408, ``America's Wildlife Habitat Conservation
Act'' with specific concern about the provision that would rescind
critically needed funds for coastal resilience at the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). This bill is posing as wildlife
conservation legislation, when further inspection shows that this bill
is instead working to revoke funding from critical programs for
conservation.
In regard to the ocean specifically, Chair Westerman's bill would
repeal $700 million in funding allocated to the NOAA under Section
40001 of the Inflation Reduction Act (Public Law 117-169) (IRA). The
IRA was the most significant investment in climate and clean energy in
our nation's history. The funding to NOAA was essential to combating
the climate crisis and readying our nation to be resilient against
increasing climate impacts. Unfortunately, Chair Westerman's bill is
hardly unique as we have seen Republican Members of Congress make
numerous attempts to undo IRA provisions since it was passed in 2022.
We applauded the Inflation Reduction Act's historic investment of
$2.6 billion for NOAA to invest in coastal communities and climate
resilience. This funding was intended to be used for conservation,
restoration, and protection of coastal and marine habitats and
resources, including fisheries, to enable coastal communities to
prepare for extreme storms and other changing climate conditions, and
for projects that support natural resources that sustain coastal and
marine resource dependent communities.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CleanEnergy.gov. Building a Clean Energy Economy: A Guidebook
to the Inflation Reduction Act's Investments in Clean Energy and
Climate Action https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/
Inflation-Reduction-Act-Guidebook.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ocean and coastal impacts of climate change are already
impacting daily activities in communities across the US. Warming
oceans, rising sea levels, shifting fish stocks, melting sea ice, ocean
acidification, frequent and intense floods, severe storms, and droughts
all require building resilience. Sea levels are expected to rise up to
a foot along the U.S. coastlines in the next 30 years, with damaging
flooding expected to occur more than 10 times as often as it does
today. This will create a profound shift in coastal flooding, causing
tide and storm surge heights to increase and reach further inland.
Failing to curb future emissions could cause an additional 1.5-5 feet
of rise. Flooding already exacerbates racial and social inequality,
with a history of disproportionate harms for communities of color.
Coastal flooding will become an increasingly severe environmental
justice issue as sea levels rise.
The ocean and coasts are critical to all Americans as ports of
commerce, food sources, carbon sinks, and more. Resilience investments
create a multitude of co-benefits such as creating jobs, reducing
disaster losses, protecting critical habitat, and supporting US
innovation. An investment in coastal resilience is an investment in
America's future.
Coastal resilience funding at NOAA is already making its way into
communities and regions around the country that need it most. The
Climate Resilience Regional Challenge and Climate-Ready Workforce
funding opportunities will build historic workforce capacity and
implement adaptation actions which will protect communities, military
bases, and ecosystems.\2\ The Climate Resilience Accelerator is funding
critical private sector solutions, demonstrating the power of public-
private partnerships and creating jobs for Americans. Climate-Ready
Fisheries investments are currently protecting and managing America's
iconic fish populations. The $2.6 billion invested in the US coastal
regions by Congress is already making a difference by building more
resilient economies, ecosystems, and communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Inflation
Reduction Act: Climate-Ready Coasts and Communities https://
www.noaa.gov/inflation-reduction-act/inflation-reduction-act-climate-
ready-coasts-and-communities
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These projects will create new jobs in a wide variety of sectors,
from construction to fishermen to planners to engineers, for coastal
restoration requires specialized skills that cannot be mechanized or
exported. The surrounding coastal environments also benefit from
restored natural infrastructure like salt marshes, mangroves, and
seagrass beds, which remove carbon from the atmosphere, reduce storm
impacts, and provide habitat for fish and wildlife. Trying to reverse
this funding now would be a detriment to constituents, districts, and
states around the country.
The bill's funding cut to NOAA will have severe ocean and
environmental justice implications, with Indigenous communities facing
a particularly acute impact. Within the $2.6 billion to NOAA from the
IRA, NOAA has stated they will provide approximately $390 million for
tribal priorities that incorporate comments received during the IRA
tribal consultation. Without this funding, technical assistance and
capacity building will be reduced, perpetuating environmental
injustices. Tribes and Tribal communities have stewarded the ocean
since time immemorial and must continue to rely on it for subsistence,
food security, and traditional ways of life and culture.
Clawing back $700 million of Inflation Reduction Act funds
designated for coastal resilience funding at NOAA, as Rep. Westerman's
bill attempts to do, would move us in the wrong direction toward
preparing our coastal communities for climate impacts and advancing
environmental justice. In fact, grant applications for NOAA show that
this program is dramatically underfunded, with a recent request for
proposals generating 869 eligible letters of intent requesting
approximately $16 billion in funding. It is clear that ocean, coastal,
and Great Lakes communities across the nation urgently need this
funding and they are ready to implement it now.
We urge you to consider the severe implications of this bill in the
Water, Wildlife, and Fisheries Subcommittee hearing, ensure this bill
does not move forward to a markup, halt the bill from being reported
out of committee, and vote no on H.R. 7408, America's Wildlife Habitat
Conservation Act, if it reaches the House floor.

Sincerely,

Alaska Wilderness League      Milwaukee Riverkeeper

Animal Welfare Institute      Mystic Aquarium

Azul                          National Marine Sanctuary
Foundation

California Environmental
Voters                        National Ocean Protection
Coalition

Californians for Western
Wilderness                    Natural Resources Defense Council

Center for Biological
Diversity                     New York League of Conservation
Voters

Center for the Blue Economy   Ocean Conservancy

Cetacean Society
International                 Ocean Conservation Research

Chispa Texas                  Ocean Defense Initiative

Clean Water Action            Oceana

Climate Law & Policy
Project                       Oceanic Preservation Society

Coastal Quest                 Pacific Environment

Coastal States Organization   Patagonia

Cooperative Energy Futures    Rachel Carson Council

Creation Justice Ministries   Restore America's Estuaries

EarthEcho International       Sachamama

Earthjustice                  Save the Manatee Club
Endangered Species
Coalition                     Seattle Aquarium

Florida Wildlife Federation   Shedd Aquarium

FOUR PAWS USA                 Sierra Club

Friends of the Earth U.S.     Sustainable Ocean Alliance

Friends of the Mariana
Trench                        Southern Environmental Law Center

Georgia Interfaith Power
and Light                     Surfrider Foundation

Gotham Whale                  Sustain Cities

GreenLatinos                  The #RelistWolves Campaign

Healthy Ocean Coalition       The Ocean Project

Inland Ocean Coalition        Union of Concerned Scientists

Interfaith Power & Light      Urban Ocean Lab

League of Conservation
Voters                        Waterfront Alliance

Marine Conservation
Institute                     Waterkeeper Alliance

Marine Mammal Alliance
Nantucket
