- HOW BUSINESS TAX REFORM CAN ENCOURAGE JOB CREATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HOW BUSINESS TAX REFORM
CAN ENCOURAGE JOB CREATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 2, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-884                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of June 2, 2011, announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Ashby T. Corum, Partner, KPMG LLP................................     6
Walter J. Galvin, Vice Chairman of the Board, Emerson Electric
Co.............................................................    11
Judy L. Brown, Executive Vice President & Chief Financial
Officer, Perrigo Company.......................................    16
James H. Zrust, Vice President, Tax, The Boeing Company..........    23
James Misplon, Vice President, Tax, Sears Holdings Management
Corporation, Hoffman Estates, IL, testifying on behalf of the
National Retail Federation.....................................    30
Mark Stutman, National Managing Partner of Tax Services, Grant
Thornton.......................................................    40

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Mr. Levin, Question..............................................    75
Walter J. Galvin.................................................    75
Judy L. Brown....................................................    76
James H. Zrust...................................................    80
James Misplon....................................................    82
Research and Development Incentives in the U.S. and Abroad.......    84
Aerospace Industries Association.................................    88
The Depreciation Fairness Coalition..............................    92
President and CEO, South Carolina Small Business Chamber of
Commerce.......................................................    96
American University Kogod School of Business.....................   102
Retail Industry Leaders Association..............................   111

HOW BUSINESS TAX REFORM
CAN ENCOURAGE JOB CREATION

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 2, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave Camp
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Camp Announces Hearing on How Business Tax Reform Can Encourage Job
Creation

May 26, 2011

Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on major
business and corporate tax issues and how changes to those aspects of
the Tax Code, as part of comprehensive tax reform, might promote job
creation and economic growth. Whereas the two most recent Committee
hearings on the business aspects of tax reform focused on international
taxation, this hearing will address the taxation of domestic business
operations. The hearing will take place on Thursday, June 2, 2011, in
Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:00
A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

At a combined federal-state rate of over 39 percent, the United
States has the second-highest corporate income tax rate in the
developed world, trailing only Japan. The average for countries in the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) is only
25.5 percent. And as the Committee learned at its May 24, 2011, hearing
on foreign tax systems, the Japanese Government intends to reduce its
corporate rate by five percentage points, which soon will leave the
United States with the highest corporate rate among our major trading
partners. Extensive economic research, meanwhile, has found that most
of the burden of corporate tax rates is borne by workers. Furthermore,
pass-through entities pay tax at the individual income tax rates, and
uncertainty surrounding the individual rate structure after 2012 has
serious implications for business planning and job creation.

In addition, the Committee must consider a number of issues related
to business taxation as part of comprehensive tax reform. These issues
include differences between tax accounting and financial accounting,
the treatment of inventories and depreciable property, and trade-offs
between marginal tax rates and targeted business tax preferences. The
Committee must investigate the purposes behind these various rules and
provisions, and whether such rules and provisions serve their intended
purpose. The fact that the United States is an outlier with respect to
the rates at which it taxes business income, combined with the
complexity of the rules governing business taxation, make it important
for the Committee to explore whether tax reform that broadens the base
and lowers marginal rates could benefit the U.S. economy and American
workers.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``While our major
trading partners have spent the last two decades reducing their
corporate tax rates, the U.S. corporate rate is actually higher than it
was 20 years ago, and the rates that apply to small businesses are
scheduled to go up in the near future rather than down. At the same
time, the Tax Code is full of tax preferences that attempt to pick
winners and losers rather than just allowing the most promising
business investments to flourish. As the Committee continues to
investigate how best to reform the tax system for American families, we
also need to take a close look at the major elements of business
taxation and evaluate those elements against the principles of
simplicity, fairness, stability, and economic growth.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will inquire about the potential benefits to companies
and workers of lowering marginal tax rates on business income, and the
trade-offs that such companies might be willing to make given current
fiscal constraints. The hearing also will examine major elements of
business and corporate taxation in anticipation of future efforts to
evaluate policy options that might encourage job creation in the United
States.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Thursday, June
16, 2011. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail
policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries
to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman CAMP. The hearing will come to order.
Good morning. And thank you for joining us today for
another in a series of hearings on comprehensive tax reform.
Whether at the full committee, the subcommittee, or the
Joint Committee on Taxation, this committee has been actively
engaged in a systemic review of the Tax Code for a very simple
reason: Today's Tax Code is preventing, not promoting, job
creation. And on the eve of what is widely expected to be a
disappointing jobs report, this committee remains focused on
what action must be taken to reform our Tax Code and make
America a more attractive place to invest and create the jobs
we need.
Today's hearing will examine the potential benefits to
companies and workers of lowering marginal tax rates on
business income. The hearing also will look at major elements
of business and corporate taxation to evaluate policy options
that can encourage job creation here at home.
The challenges created by the Tax Code for job creators of
all sizes are many: high statutory rates, compliance and
administrative burdens, the impact of temporary and expiring
tax provisions, just to name a few. And pile on top of that a
dizzying array of credits, deductions, exemptions, and it is no
wonder that the Tax Code is distorting economic behavior.
America's high and uncertain tax rates are barriers to
growth and competition. With a combined Federal-State corporate
tax rate of 39.1 percent, we are well above the average of the
rest of the industrialized world.
Some might find comfort in the fact that the December tax
relief package prevented an immediate tax hike on job creators
organized as passthroughs, who pay their taxes at the
individual rate. These employers are primarily small
businesses. But that relief will be fleeting, as they again
face higher taxes in less than 2 years unless Congress acts.
The uncertainty surrounding their future tax rates makes it
even harder for them to plan, invest, and create jobs.
Consider this fact: Over 200 Federal tax provisions are
scheduled to expire between 2010 and 2020, whereas in 1998
there were only 50 such expiring provisions. With uncertainty
at every turn, it is no wonder that the optimism of small
employers remains at recessionary levels, according to NFIB's
Small-Business Optimism Index. And, today, through the
testimony of both job creators and tax practitioners, we hope
to gain insight into how the current structure of taxation
affects the ability of businesses to invest, grow, and create
jobs.
Before we move to our panel and begin our discussion on tax
reform, I want to make one final comment. Tax reform cannot and
should not be confused with increasing taxes. It must be done
in a revenue-neutral manner. We will not grow if Washington is
taking an ever-increasing share of economic output in the form
of Federal taxes. We do not have a vibrant economy when we
increase taxes on job creators. We have a vibrant economy when
we get spending down, keep taxes low, and get Washington out of
the way of our entrepreneurs. As we discuss tax reform, I
intend to move the dialogue in that direction.
I look forward to the testimony of today's witnesses. Thank
you all for being here.
I will now yield to the ranking member, Mr. Levin, for his
opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, all the witnesses, for coming. Many of you
have Michigan roots. In fact, I think that is the majority. And
I want to put on the record that this is not a result of a
grand conspiracy between Mr. Camp and myself.
Shall I yield to you for a special word?
Chairman CAMP. That is fine.
Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Camp and I join together in welcoming
everybody, whether you are from Michigan or not.
In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp indicated that it
would include an examination of, and I quote, ``the tradeoffs
that companies might be willing to make given current fiscal
constraints,'' end quote. I think most of us agree that a lower
corporate rate is desirable, but--and I emphasize this--the
tradeoffs involved in getting there truly matter.
We have learned in our prior hearings that businesses seem
generally to agree that tax reform should be revenue-neutral.
The inevitable consequence of that would be a shifting of the
burden of current level of taxation, and there would be winners
and losers. We must now examine the true impact on domestic
companies if we repealed important tax benefits that encourage
investment in jobs in our country.
Considering that we have spent the last four full committee
hearings on tax reform, mostly at a 30,000-foot level, we
welcome this opportunity to move beyond generalities and
examine the benefits that companies would be willing to give up
in order to achieve the goal laid out in the Republican budget
of a top corporate and individual tax rate of 25 percent.
We, indeed, need to carefully examine these issues so that
we can reform our Tax Code and our corporate Tax Code in a way
that encourages economic growth, investment, and job creation.
With that in mind, I join my colleagues in looking forward
to your testimony.
If I might, Mr. Chairman, I would like to add just a word.
Mr. Neal, our colleague, was surely planning to be here, but he
will not be, because he has returned to his district because of
the tornado that occurred there in western Massachusetts.
If I might add on another personal note, the father of
Allyson Schwartz, who has been a member of this committee,
passed away over the weekend. I think she will be here today,
and, if so, I think you might want to give her a special hello
and a special hug.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you.
We are pleased to welcome our panel of experts, all of whom
have either extensive experience as tax practitioners or have
handled tax matters for American businesses. I believe that
their experience and insight will be helpful as we focus on the
potential benefits to businesses and workers of lowering
statutory income tax rates.
First, I would like to welcome and introduce Ashby Corum, a
partner at KPMG in Detroit, Michigan. Mr. Corum is an expert on
the relationship between tax and financial accounting. And
since joining the Detroit office in 2003, he has been actively
involved in resolving accounting-related income tax issues for
major corporations.
Second, we will hear from Walter Galvin, the Vice Chairman
of the Board at Emerson Electric Company in St. Louis,
Missouri. In his current role, he is responsible for Emerson's
financial planning and financial services. Until February of
last year, Mr. Galvin served as Emerson's chief financial
officer, a position he held for 17 years.
Third, we welcome Judy Brown, the Executive Vice President
and Chief Financial Officer of Perrigo Company in Allegan,
Michigan. Perrigo is the world's largest manufacturer of over-
the-counter pharmaceutical products for the store brand market,
and Ms. Brown is responsible for all aspects of the company's
corporate financial management.
Fourth, we will hear from James Zrust, the Vice President
of tax for the Boeing Company in Chicago, Illinois. With 30
years of tax experience, Mr. Zrust has spent considerable time
working on all aspects of Federal and State income taxes, as
well as major international transactions.
And, fifth, we welcome James Misplon, the Vice President of
Tax for Sears Holdings Management Corporation in Hoffman
Estates, Illinois. Mr. Misplon is responsible for the design
and implementation of comprehensive structural and
nonstructural tax strategies for Sears. Today, Mr. Misplon is
testifying on behalf of the National Retail Federation and is
the chair of the federation's Taxation Committee.
And, finally, we will hear from Mark Stutman, the National
Managing Partner of Tax Services for Grant Thornton in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. In that role, Mr. Stutman has
overall responsibility for the quality of services, the
profitability of operations, and the welfare of clients for
Grand Thornton's core and specialty tax practices.
Thank you all again for your time today.
The committee has received each of your written statements,
and they will be made part of the formal hearing record. Each
of you will be recognized for 5 minutes for your oral remarks.
And, Mr. Corum, we will begin with you. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ASHBY T. CORUM, PARTNER, KPMG LLP

Mr. CORUM. Good morning, Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin, and other Members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today as an invited witness to
assist the committee in understanding the importance of
financial accounting and the relationship between tax and
financial accounting, particularly as affected by changes in
tax law. The views expressed here are my own and do not
necessarily reflect the views of KPMG.
The accounting and reporting of income taxes by corporate
enterprises in their financial statements is a critical element
of their overall reporting to stakeholders. Income tax expense
is often a significant expense for an enterprise, and it can
have a major impact on earnings. Accordingly, investors,
analysts, and other stakeholders monitor the income tax amounts
reported by businesses closely and make assumptions about the
long-term trends of the reported amounts.
The Internal Revenue Code specifies how an enterprise's
annual Federal current income tax liability is determined.
Accounting standards provide for the financial accounting and
reporting of the effects of income taxes that result from an
enterprise's activities during the current and preceding years.
The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to:
recognize the amount of income taxes payable or refundable for
the current year; and recognize deferred tax liabilities and
assets that reflect the future tax consequences of events that
have been recognized in the enterprise's financial statements
or tax returns.
Total income tax expense of an enterprise consists of both
the current tax expense and the deferred tax expense or benefit
associated with changes in the balance of the deferred tax
liabilities and assets. The result of dividing total income tax
expense by pretax accounting income is commonly known as the
``effective tax rate'' and may differ substantially from the
statutory tax rate of a group's parent company or the rate of
current tax paid.
Financial statement pretax income for a global enterprise
can differ substantially from taxable income in a particular
jurisdiction. Most of these differences are attributable to:
when income or expense is recognized for tax purposes versus
when it is recognized for financial reporting; items of income
or expense that are permanently allowed or disallowed for
taxable income purposes; and the allocation of income to
different jurisdictions around the world with different
statutory tax rates.
Changes to the tax law often produce financial accounting
consequences, some of large magnitude. I will read to you a
single example of the impact of a change in tax law. My written
testimony provides other examples.
If an enterprise were to have a post-retirement obligation
for which a pretax book expense of $100 was recognized in a
prior period but for which a tax deduction is not permitted
until the liability is settled, the entity would have a
deferred tax asset of $35. If the statutory tax rate were
reduced from 35 percent to 25 percent, then the applicable rate
used to measure the deferred tax asset would be adjusted
downward since the company would now expect to receive a
smaller future tax benefit upon settling the liability.
This would result in a reduction of the deferred tax asset
from $35 to $25 and an income tax expense of $10 in the period
of enactment. In other words, an enterprise's book net income
for the period of enactment would be reduced by $10. The
opposite effect would occur in the period of enactment for an
enterprise's deferred tax liabilities, where a reduction in tax
rates would result in an increase in book net income.
In future periods, that same enterprise may have reduced
income tax expense due to the reduced statutory rate--that is,
a rate reduction will impact book income for the period of
enactment to the extent that existing deferred tax assets and
liabilities are remeasured and for the effects of retroactive
provisions. That is why the enactment of a rate change for
future periods does not necessarily affect the current tax
position of the company during the period of enactment and may
have a significant effect on reported earnings.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Corum follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Galvin, your written statement is also part of the
record, and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WALTER J. GALVIN, VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD,
EMERSON ELECTRIC CO.

Mr. GALVIN. Good morning, Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin, and Members of the Committee. I am Walter Galvin, vice
chairman and former CFO of Emerson, a $25 billion global
manufacturing company based in St. Louis.
With 57 percent of our sales outside the United States,
operations in more than 150 countries, and over 130,000
employees, Emerson is a large U.S. taxpayer. Last year, we paid
U.S. income taxes of approximately $500 million, with an
effective tax rate on U.S. profits of 36 percent.
In the words of former Secretary of State Dean Rusk, one-
third of the world is asleep at any given time and the other
two-thirds is up to something. Indeed, much of the world is up
to something. They are reworking their Tax Codes to boost
international competitiveness. We need to wake up and join them
if we want the U.S. to stay competitive.
There are three specific challenges that place Emerson and
American jobs at a substantial disadvantage: The first is our
worldwide system of taxation. The second is the high U.S.
corporate income tax rate. And the third is the lopsided
incentives in our Tax Code, encouraging foreign companies to
take a huge amount of debt in the United States.
The first disadvantage is that most of our foreign
competitors don't pay a significant second tax on non-U.S.
earnings repatriated to their home countries. The U.S., on the
other hand, taxes the worldwide profits of American companies
at the high 35 percent rate, minus credits to any foreign taxes
paid.
I know the committee recently held hearings on this issue,
so I would just point out some practical consequences that for
Emerson are very real.
In 2006, Emerson sought to buy APC, a Rhode Island-based
company that produces high-tech electronic equipment. Over 50
percent of APC's earnings came from outside the United States.
We competed against Schneider Electric, a French company, to
buy APC. Emerson offered $5 billion, but Schneider ultimately
acquired the company by offering $6 billion. Why was Schneider
willing to pay more? Quite simply, APC profits were worth more
to Schneider because, as part of a French company, APC's
dividend sent to France would be taxed at under 2 percent.
Another important impact of the worldwide system is the
incentive to keep the profits we make in our international
locations. Last year, Emerson bought a company in the U.K.
called Chloride for approximately $1.5 billion with cash we had
earned abroad and kept abroad. We considered other options for
that cash, such as bringing it to the U.S., but the U.S. Tax
Code would charge us an extra 10 to 15 cents in taxes on every
dollar. Where is our return higher, a dollar invested in the
U.K. or 85 cents in the United States?
Secondly, we, as a country, have been tinkering with
credits and deductions that, while well-intentioned, have done
little more than encourage complex tax planning. Eliminating
the bulk of deductions and credits, exchanged for a lower
corporate tax rate, will keep U.S. companies competitive and
create jobs.
Third, I would like to address the lopsided incentive to
debt-load in the United States. In recent years, countries
around the world have been tightening tax rules, regulating a
company's ability to load up on debt, take huge interest
deductions, and lower their tax liabilities. These strict
regulations prevent multinational companies, for example, from
using excessive leverage financed by debt to acquire other
companies.
If Emerson wants to acquire a company in India or China, we
must generally come to the table with cash, not debt. If one of
their companies or other international companies want to
purchase an American company, U.S. tax law encourages them to
finance that acquisition with debt. Foreign corporations
typically load up on debt in the U.S. and enjoy the interest
expense deduction, thereby minimizing U.S. taxes paid to the
Federal Government.
America's high corporate tax, worldwide system, and
lopsided incentives to debt-load contributed to the 2008
acquisition of Anheuser-Busch by Belgian-based InBev in
Emerson's home city of St. Louis. At the time of the
acquisition, Anheuser-Busch paid over $900 million in taxes.
InBev loaded up on debt to acquire Anheuser-Busch and are now
enjoying huge tax deductions. Based upon my experience, I would
suspect InBev won't pay much in income taxes to the Federal
Government on the U.S. profits it earns from Anheuser-Busch for
at least a decade.
The prospect of tax reform is an opportunity to level the
playing field with our international competitors, but I urge
the committee to keep two things in mind. First, U.S. tax
policy should be equitable so as not to distort business
decisions. Equitable tax policy treats all business income
equally notwithstanding the industry, how a company is
structured, or whether it is headquartered in the U.S. or
offshore. Second, tax reform should be revenue-neutral. Our
fragile economy would likely react negatively to a large money
grab through higher corporate taxes.
In closing, we can't create jobs at home if we punish those
who are headquartered here rather than overseas. There is no
reason why American companies should not be able to compete and
win anywhere in the world, but we need a level playing field.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Galvin follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
And, Ms. Brown, you also have 5 minutes. Thank you, and
welcome.

STATEMENT OF JUDY L. BROWN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER, PERRIGO COMPANY

Ms. BROWN. Thank you.
Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and distinguished
Members of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to
share my views on how business tax reform can encourage job
creation.
Before doing so, I would like to first provide an overview
of Perrigo's business and how we are creating many new jobs
today. Then I will address the role that taxes play in our
decision-making processes.
Perrigo was founded 124 years ago in the small town of
Allegan, Michigan, where we still maintain our global
headquarters today. Our mission is to provide quality,
affordable health care, and we do so through our unique
offering of store-brand pharmaceutical and infant-nutrition
products in the over-the-counter, or OTC, space.
Our products are comparable in quality and effectiveness to
nationally advertised brand products, but the cost of our
products to the retailer is significantly lower, as is the
price the consumer pays. Therefore, the retailers are happy and
consumers are happy. We estimate that our business model saves
consumers approximately $1.5 billion annually in their health-
care spending.
Perrigo is sometimes referred to as the largest health care
company you have never heard of. But most Americans have at
least some of our products in their cabinets. Each year, we
produce over 44 billion tablets and over 350 million liquid
doses. Simply stated, this means that every second of every
day, 1,400 Perrigo tablets are being taken.
No one has more products requiring FDA approval in the OTC
universe than Perrigo. Our more than 450 products are custom
labeled and packaged under the names of all major drug, club,
and supermarket chains in the U.S., which means we have a
tremendously complex supply chain. And, yet, we believe we are
one of the most cost-effective health-care manufacturers in the
world. We have benchmarked our labor and plant efficiencies
against competitors in so-called low-cost countries, like India
and China, and still believe that our plants in Michigan, South
Carolina, Vermont, Florida, Ohio, New York, and soon Minnesota
can compete with anyone, all while maintaining high product
quality under strict American standards.
Over 70 percent of our revenues and earnings before tax
come from U.S. activity, although we are looking to expand into
new markets globally. Although we export some products from the
United States and do import others from international
operations, the majority of our products are manufactured in
the countries in which they are sold to end consumers.
We have grown from approximately $1 billion in revenue in
2005 to nearly $3 billion in 2011, an 18 percent compound
annual growth rate. In that time, we have invested over $2
billion in 12 acquisitions, two-thirds of which were in the
U.S., adding manufacturing footprint and employee head count
along the way. Today, we employ over 8,000 people globally,
with more than 5,000 in the U.S. and over 3,500 of them in
Michigan.
Through the success of our business model and acquisitions,
our total U.S. employment has grown 57 percent over the last 6
years. I would like to note that Perrigo's growing global
footprint has increased the need for many well-compensated
scientific, managerial, and other white-collar roles at our
global headquarters in Michigan.
Now, with that brief background on our business, let me
switch to the topic at hand, taxes, which is, without question,
an important issue for us. One of the top strategic issues I
face as CFO of Perrigo is the increasing disparity of the U.S.
corporate tax rate relative to other countries and the impact
this disparity has on our long-term decision-making.
Perrigo is currently looking to invest tens, if not
hundreds, of millions of dollars in the next few years to build
manufacturing capacity to meet the strong demand for our
quality, affordable health-care products. We would prefer to
invest those dollars in the most optimal place for our supply
chain--that is, close to our distribution centers and our
customers, which, as I indicated, is mostly in the United
States.
When we consider where to make an investment that could be
made in either the U.S. or abroad, we model our return on
invested capital on an after-tax basis. In such an analysis,
for a foreign investment we use the statutory rate imposed by
the foreign jurisdiction and assume the earnings will not be
repatriated to the United States.
When we model a U.S. investment, we used the statutory
Federal income tax rate, plus the applicable State and local
tax rates, because they are a real cost and impact cash flow.
While Congress cannot change State and local rates, any
discussion regarding tax reform should take into account the
reality of these other increasing tax burdens, as well.
These models show that the tax rates we have to pay on a
U.S. investment are now much higher than what we would pay on a
foreign investment. In light of this, our return on invested
capital tells us that foreign investments need to be taken ever
more seriously, even where our first preference would be to
continue investing in the United States. As a CFO, I don't
believe that taxes should be the main strategic driver of our
next investment dollar.
In summary, I am acutely aware of our national budget
situation and the need to make difficult choices on revenue and
expenditures. Perrigo believes that increased transparency,
simplification, and certainty are desirable and, in fact, worth
paying for. We do not need the world's lowest rate to compete,
but our increasingly disparate rate is putting us at a
disadvantage.
We want our business model to continue to shine on its own
accord, as it saves U.S. consumers billions of dollars while,
at the same time, providing attractive shareholder returns. We
want to continue to compete well in a global economy by being
able to bid competitively against foreign players. And,
therefore, we support an overall lower corporate rate, combined
with a territorial model that would enable better use of global
capital, thereby ensuring the continued positive effects of
investment and job creation in the U.S.
On behalf of Perrigo, I would like to thank the Ways and
Means Committee for the opportunity to provide our views on the
impact of business taxation on job creation, and look forward
to working with all of you and other tax policymakers on this
and other related issues.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brown follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Zrust, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES H. ZRUST, VICE PRESIDENT OF TAX, THE BOEING
COMPANY

Mr. ZRUST. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and Members
of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on
the need for business tax reform.
I have worked in corporate tax for over 30 years, and I can
say unequivocally that the U.S. corporate tax system must be
reformed to ensure that U.S. companies are not put at a
disadvantage when competing in the global marketplace with our
foreign counterparts.
First, I would like to provide a brief overview of The
Boeing Company. The Boeing Company is the world's largest
aerospace company, the largest U.S. manufacturing exporter, and
leading manufacturer of commercial jetliners and defense,
space, and security systems. With our corporate headquarters in
Chicago, Illinois, Boeing has over 160,000 employees in the
U.S., with major operations in 34 States.
Boeing is organized into two business units: Boeing
Commercial Airplanes and Boeing Defense, Space, and Security.
Importantly, The Boeing Company contributes more than $1
billion each week into the U.S. economy. In 2010, Boeing paid
over $32 billion to more than 22,000 U.S. businesses,
supporting an additional 1.2 million supplier-related jobs
across the country.
The Boeing Company is proud to have customers located in
more than 90 countries. Historically, 70 percent of the
commercial airplane business is derived from outside the United
States, and we are rapidly growing our defense business outside
the U.S.
Although a significant portion of our customers are outside
of the United States, our employees, manufacturing and support
operations, research and development activities, and
intellectual property are predominantly located in the U.S.
Over 95 percent of our net income is attributable to these
domestic activities. Unlike other large multinational
companies, almost all of our current worldwide income is
subject to U.S. tax, and our effective rate is generally
between 31 and 33 percent.
In addition to a significant percentage of our customers
being outside the U.S., many of our competitors are, as well.
It is well-known that our largest competitor is located in
Europe, and new competition is rapidly emerging from China,
Canada, Brazil, and Russia, all with lower combined Federal and
local statutory rates than the U.S.
Everyone here today is well-aware that the combined U.S.
statutory tax rate is almost 15 percentage points higher than
the average combined rate of other OECD member countries. It is
our view that significantly reducing the corporate tax rate
will improve U.S. competitiveness. We believe lowering the
corporate rate would dramatically reduce tax policy pressure
and rhetoric by ensuring that U.S. companies are competitive
and, importantly, would not tip the scale in favor of foreign
production.
Recently, a commercial aircraft customer located in the
Middle East approached Boeing with a concern regarding the lack
of U.S. companies willing to bid on a contract in that region.
The general sentiment is that price bids received from
companies based in Asia, Europe, and Australia are consistently
lower than those made by U.S. aerospace companies due to our
tax system and high corporate rate.
This is not the outcome we should want. We believe that a
concerted effort to enact a corporate rate reduction to ensure
that the U.S. remains competitive and an attractive place to do
business in the global marketplace needs to be made now.
We appreciate the current deficit position and are not
asking Congress to ignore the costs associated with a
meaningful rate reduction. Like many of the bipartisan
proposals outlined recently, we agree that tax expenditures
should be on the table if a meaningful rate reduction is
considered. It is our position that we could support
eliminating tax expenditures in order to obtain a meaningful
lower corporate tax rate.
Turning toward the issue of the complexity, I often tell my
team, ``Complexity breeds opportunity.'' This is not an ideal
situation for either the government or the taxpayer. The
complexity of our present tax system leads to considerable
uncertainty with regard to issue resolutions and is burdensome
in terms of the cost of compliance.
Each year, we spend millions of dollars to comply with the
complexities of the U.S. tax system. This entails detailed
analysis of the over 500 book tax accounting differences in our
Federal income tax return. In addition, the determination of
the R&D credit, the domestic manufacturing deduction, and the
U.S. taxation of foreign activities involve incredible degrees
of complexity.
Our compliance obligations not only include the filing of
our Federal tax return but also the continuous audit by the
Internal Revenue Service. The IRS has over 30 agents assigned
to our case and maintains permanent offices in 3 of our
locations. Our most recent case to be resolved covered the
years 1998 to 2003 and was only concluded in December of last
year.
Compliance is built in to Boeing's business culture. While
compliance is and should be a crucial element to all
businesses, a less complicated system will inherently increase
transparency and result in improved productivity.
In conclusion, over the course of several decades, U.S.
competitors, both new and old, have lowered their corporate tax
rate, but the U.S. corporate tax rate has remained virtually
unchanged. In today's global economy, now is the time to act to
ensure that the U.S. is a place where companies want to do
business from as well as in. We believe a meaningful lower rate
and a less complex system would make U.S. companies like Boeing
more competitive with the rest of the world.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zrust follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Misplon, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES MISPLON, VICE PRESIDENT, TAX, SEARS HOLDINGS
CORPORATION, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL RETAIL
FEDERATION

Mr. MISPLON. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of the Committee, my name is Jim Misplon. I am vice
president of tax for Sears Holdings Corporation, parent company
of Sears, Roebuck and Co., Kmart and Lands' End.
Sears Holdings has 280,000 employees and over 3,500 stores
in the United States. We have stores in all 50 States, as well
as Puerto Rico, U.S. territories, and Canada. Like most
retailers, the vast majority of our operations are domestic.
I am the chair of the National Retail Federation's Taxation
Committee and am testifying today on behalf of the National
Retail Federation. Accompanying me today is Rachelle Bernstein,
vice president and tax counsel for the NRF. We appreciate the
opportunity to present the views of the retail industry on the
subject of corporate tax reform.
The NRF supports business tax reform that will lower
corporate tax rates and broaden the tax base. We believe this
type of income tax reform will be good for the retail industry
and good for the economy as a whole.
Sears Holdings and other members of NRF believe that the
most important aspect of any tax reform measure is its impact
on the economy and jobs. We believe that the reform of the
income tax, by providing a broad base and lower rates, will
bring the greatest economic efficiency to the Federal tax
system. These changes will lead to greater investment, more
jobs, and greater economic growth.
Tax reform must be applicable to all businesses, not just C
corporations. The retail industry has one of the highest
Federal effective tax rates of any industry. Because their
industry is so competitive, NRF believes that most of the tax
rate reduction will be passed forward to consumers through
lower prices. As a result of this price cut to consumers,
retailers will increase sales, hire more employees, and
purchase more inventory, all of which will increase investments
and jobs.
Lower tax rates will create more investment opportunity. If
the corporate tax rate is lowered, investment proposals will
more likely meet a company's required internal rate of return,
and a decision to invest will more likely be made. These
investments, like building or improving stores and distribution
centers, the investment in online and mobile shopping
platforms, create jobs both within and outside the retail
industry.
In addition, lower tax rates reduce incentives for entering
into tax-motivated business strategies. This will also
eliminate much of the tax complexities from the business tax
system and reduce controversy between the taxpayer and the IRS.
Any new tax system will need to provide for the recovery of
the cost of capital assets and inventories. We recognize and
support the tax reform goal of substituting lower tax rates for
tax incentives. However, the new tax system should also not
burden investments by extending the tax write-off of an asset
beyond its economic life.
These rules must be applied fairly so that similarly
situated taxpayers are not treated differently. Thus, any new
tax system should eliminate the current tax law bias that
provides more favorable depreciation rules for taxpayers that
lease their property than for taxpayers in the same industry
that own their own property.
In the retail industry, tax rules relating to inventories
and depreciation create the greatest compliance burdens. If the
rules are to be changed, we urge that every effort be made to
keep the new system as simple as possible. We recognize that
the specifics of inventory and depreciation reform are not the
subject of today's hearings; however, because these issues are
so important to the retail industry, we respectfully request
the opportunity to offer our views on these issues when the
committee considers them in more detail.
Finally, one of the most harmful things that could be done
to our economy at this time would be to place a direct Federal
tax on consumption. A recent study performed for the NRF by
Ernst & Young and Tax Policy Advisors found that if a VAT were
adopted in addition to income tax, economic growth would
decline for several years. It would cause a loss of 850,000
jobs in the first year and 700,000 fewer jobs over the long
term.
In conclusion, the NRF urges the committee to move forward
with business income tax reform. This will encourage
investment, create jobs, and simplify administration of the tax
system.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to express
NRF's views on business tax reform, and we would be pleased to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Misplon follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stutman, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK STUTMAN, NATIONAL MANAGING PARTNER OF TAX
SERVICES, GRANT THORNTON

Mr. STUTMAN. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and other members of this
distinguished committee, it is an honor to appear before you
and participate in this hearing on comprehensive tax reform and
the role it can play in promoting job creation and economic
growth.
My name is Mark Stutman, and I am the tax practice leader
for Grant Thornton LLP, the U.S. member firm of Grant Thornton
International, one of the six global accounting tax and
business advisory organizations. Grant Thornton helps thousands
of the most dynamic and entrepreneurial businesses in America
to budget and plan their business activities, report their
earnings to creditors and shareholders, and fulfill their
Federal, State, and local tax obligations.
Grant Thornton supports tax reform aimed at lowering
effective business tax rates in order to promote global
competitiveness for U.S. businesses. Low effective tax rates
encourage investment and business activity, spur job creation,
and, ultimately, increase national wealth.
Tax reform should benefit the dynamic businesses that are
the backbone of American economic growth and the driving force
behind expanding employment. Included in this category are many
privately held businesses, the Russell 2,000, and similar
groups.
I urge Members of the Committee to make their highest
priority those tax reform proposals that will lower effective
business tax rates, will preserve valuable incentives for
domestic business activity, and will not disproportionately
burden any one segment of the business community.
It is important for policymakers to focus on effective
business tax rates, not just the statutory corporate tax rate.
The effective tax rate measures how much tax is actually paid
and is a true measure of the burden taxes place on business
activity.
Much has been made of the fact that the U.S. has a higher
statutory corporate tax than many of our trading partners. The
statutory corporate tax rate is an important factor in
determining the effective rate a business must pay, but it is
by no means the only factor. Rules that produce an unintended
or inappropriate result are properly called ``loopholes.''
Where these rules serve a specific and intended policy goal,
they are better described as ``tax expenditures.''
It is also important to consider the presence of other
taxes that apply to business activity. Virtually every country
with a statutory corporate tax rate lower than the U.S. also
burdens business activity with some form of a value-added tax.
The effective business tax rate can only be measured by
considering all of these factors, not just the statutory
corporate tax rate.
Many reform proposals envision going significantly beyond
loopholes to cover some or all of the costs of a statutory
corporate tax rate reduction by eliminating existing business
tax expenditures. This may result in a lower statutory
corporate tax rate but will not necessarily improve effective
business tax rates. If the committee chooses to reduce or
eliminate tax expenditures, caution should be exercised so as
not to unduly burden domestic business activity.
Existing business tax expenditures are predominantly
directed at encouraging investment, production, and research in
the U.S. According to a December 2007 Treasury Department
report, the three largest business tax expenditures in the
Internal Revenue Code are accelerated depreciation, the
domestic production activity deduction, and the research
credit. Each of these is an incentive to domestic economic
activity. The tax benefits realized by dynamic organizations
through these incentives are significant drivers of domestic
economic growth and job creation. A reduction in these tax
expenditures, even if combined with a reduction in statutory
rates, could result in an increase in the effective rate on a
domestic business activity.
In a recent Grant Thornton national survey of 318 U.S. CFOs
and senior comptrollers, over 60 percent of respondents said
they would prefer to retain their existing tax benefits unless
the statutory corporate tax rate was reduced to 25 percent or
lower, and 17 percent preferred keeping their incentives
regardless of the size of the rate cut.
I also urge the Members of the Committee not to consider
tax reform proposals that would disproportionately burden any
one segment of the business community. Dynamic organizations,
frequently organized as passthrough entities, are the backbone
of American economic activity and a driving force behind
expanding American employment. Passthrough businesses represent
an ever-increasing share of the U.S. economy and are
responsible for an increasing proportion of all business
receipts, rising from 7 percent in 1980 to over 30 percent in
2007.
The earnings of passthrough businesses, such as S
corporations and partnerships, are generally taxed at
individual rates. Any tax reform proposal that eliminates
business tax benefits but provides only a statutory corporate
tax rate reduction would significantly increase the effective
tax rate on many dynamic passthrough companies.
In conclusion, Grant Thornton supports tax reform efforts
that seek to reduce effective business tax rates. Low effective
business tax rates encourage investment and business activity,
spur job creation, and, ultimately, increase national wealth.
Reducing statutory corporate tax rates can be an important
part of reducing effective business tax rates. However, it is
important to remember that other factors contribute to
determining the effective tax rate of any business. I urge the
Members of the Committee to support tax reform proposals that
will lower effective business tax rates, preserve valuable
incentives for domestic business activity, and not
disproportionately burden any one segment of the business
community.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to share this
information with the committee, and I am pleased to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stutman follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Stutman.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for their testimony.
Now, we will move into the question period, and each Member
will have 5 minutes to ask questions. I will begin.
I have a question really for Mr. Galvin, Ms. Brown, Mr.
Zrust, and Mr. Misplon, if you would all give me an answer down
the line.
We heard from several of you that the U.S. has a high
corporate tax rate, the second highest in the world except for
Japan, and Japan is in the process of lowering their rate. We
will be the highest after that occurs. In this world of
increasingly mobile capital--and I think everyone would agree
that capital is mobile--how does this high rate, this high U.S.
corporate tax rate, make business investment and job creation
decisions in the U.S. more difficult for your companies?
And if you could each just comment on that, I would
appreciate it.
Mr. Galvin, why don't we you start with you?
Mr. GALVIN. Well, certainly, the high corporate U.S. tax
rate makes us less competitive with competing companies around
the world. And, in that context, Emerson's major competitors
are large companies based in Germany and Switzerland. And the
risk you have, if the U.S. is not put on a level playing field,
is that more and more smaller-cap U.S. companies will be
acquired, perhaps, by large international companies in Europe
and probably, in a few years, by Asian-domiciled companies.
When you have those acquisitions made, you tend to lose a
significant number of jobs, as we have seen in St. Louis as
Anheuser-Busch was acquired or in the acquisition of APC.
Generally, when a company is acquired, the headquarters staff
jobs are lost. So not having a competitive tax rate with the
rest of the world causes more and more jobs to be lost.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Brown.
Ms. BROWN. Certainly.
For the committee to understand, as a CFO I spend a lot of
time meeting with the investment community. And, interestingly
enough, I spend about half of my time in many conversations
talking about our tax rate.
Our business model has been very successful, and our income
statement is very attractive to investors, all the way through
operating margins. So we have been very good at delivering
profitability for shareholders, and, as I mentioned, adding a
considerable amount of jobs--57 percent employment growth in
the last 5 years.
However, the one area where we are not competitive versus
our Swiss, Israeli, Canadian, European--I can go down the
list--competitors is on the tax line. And so we get questioned
very frequently on why can't we be more like them, to which I
have to respond that we have a different tax rate because we
compete in different jurisdictions and are heavily U.S.-focused
today. Our business model is focused there, too.
And combined with the fact that, as we are making
investment decisions, our investment decisions are based on
where we need to be to serve our customers, where our global
supply chain is based. And that means that, today, as we go
through a portfolio of investment decisions, we want to make
decisions based on the talented people that we can get to work
in our factories, the supply chain and marketing expertise that
we need to run our business. And we think that that can be done
very, very well right here in the U.S. We have great people
doing that.
However, when the model gets run and we look at a return on
invested capital, the tradeoff between making the next dollar
investment in the U.S. versus somewhere else, unfortunately,
many times comes back to the beneficial tax impact that we
would have as a company and for our shareholders and owners by
being in a more multi-jurisdictional footprint globally.
So it very much comes into play as we talk about decisions
with our analysts.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Zrust.
Mr. ZRUST. As I mentioned before, we are facing new
competition from countries like China, Canada, Brazil, and
Russia in the single-aisle space. And all of those countries
have considerably lower tax rates than the U.S.
And so, one of the decisions we are going to have to make,
or our businesses are going to have to make, and they have
publicly talked about, is a decision as to when they are going
to build a new airplane in the single-aisle space. And to the
extent that the U.S. lowers the tax rate and is competitive
with countries like that, down into the mid-20s, I think that
is going to make that decision easier and allow us to be more
competitive going forward.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Misplon.
Mr. MISPLON. As you know, the National Retail Federation
and the companies that it represents are predominantly
domestic. Sears Holdings' effective tax rate averages between
38 and 36 percent, which is an extremely high effective tax
rate, which really is a barrier to additional investment.
To the extent that we would need a return on investment of
a certain percentage to build a new store, build a new
distribution center, the impact of a 38 percent effective tax
rate on that decision makes many of the investment decisions
decline, in that they just are not returning the sufficient
amount of income.
Chairman CAMP. Some have suggested, Mr. Misplon, that the
U.S. should adopt a national consumption tax or a VAT to either
bring additional revenue to the Federal Government or to pay
for corporate rate reduction.
You mentioned in your testimony the impact that a
consumption tax would have on the U.S. economy and,
particularly, jobs. And I wondered if you could just explain in
more detail why, from your perspective, the consumption tax
would be problematic and what its potential impact on the U.S.
economy would be.
Mr. MISPLON. Well, first off, we certainly think that a VAT
tax is a regressive tax and puts more of the tax burden on the
low- to middle-income families.
But, that said, the studies show that, since it is a direct
impact on consumers, which really is the engine that drives our
economy, and that higher prices resulting from the VAT tax
would lower consumer spending, which is going to put a real
dampening effect on our economy--there is actually a very close
example of what happens with a VAT, and that is up in Canada,
where, 10 or 15 years ago, a VAT was instituted in Canada, and
Sears Canada, from that day forward, for the next 5 years, lost
money, and the Canadian economy did very poorly over that same
period of time.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
And I have one just last question for the four of you, Mr.
Galvin, starting with you.
There has been some testimony today about the positive
impact on your companies and your employees from a lower
corporate tax rate in exchange for specific tax preferences
being given up. Can you explain how this kind of tradeoff might
benefit your company, if it did not necessarily reduce your
effective tax rate?
Mr. GALVIN. Well, certainly, Emerson is at a competitive
disadvantage with our worldwide competitors who have a much
lower tax rates. We would be in favor of eliminating all or
substantially all tax credits and deductions, including the
manufacturing and R&D tax credits. I do favor the 199 section.
But, clearly, because of the complexity of the current Tax
Code and system, you have a lot of unintended consequences. A
lot of money is spent, that is not necessarily productive, on
tax lawyers, tax planning, and other factors.
Get rid of as many as you can, lower the rate, and keep the
revenue across all corporate America revenue-neutral. We would
then be more competitive with our international competitors,
and this country would be much better off in preserving jobs.
Having a noncompetitive tax rate hurts U.S.-headquartered
companies.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Ms. Brown.
Ms. BROWN. Certainly. I will answer this building off of my
earlier statement, which is, for us, we would be open to
eliminating expenditures. We utilize today the R&D credit and
the 199 manufacturing credit. But to make the tradeoff to
reduce our overall tax burden and to make our system, our tax
rate more comparable to the international competitors that our
analysts are comparing us to today anyway, have a lower overall
tax burden, reduce the complexity, as my colleague just noted
as well, and be able to then make investment decision much more
elegantly based on the real returns of the business decision,
as opposed to defaulting so much--or placing so much weight on
financial matters like tax.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Zrust.
Mr. ZRUST. As I mentioned in my statement, there is
incredible complexity associated with putting together the
information to comply with respect to the R&D credit, the
domestic manufacturing deduction, and with the U.S. taxation of
foreign income tax, in particular.
And so, from our standpoint, though we spent last year $4
billion in R&D, given the way the R&D credit is administered
right now and the fact that the renewal is constantly in
question, we would certainly, in return for a significantly
lower rate, give up the R&D credit, even given the magnitude of
our spend. We would certainly, given the fact we are a large
manufacturer--and we would also give up the domestic
manufacturing deduction.
And I think, though the complexity is not in the same
arena, I think another thing that could go on the table is
something along the lines of bonus depreciation. So, I mean, in
return for complexity--or, in return for simplicity, we would
like to get rid of the complexity.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
And, finally, Mr. Misplon.
Mr. MISPLON. As I mentioned, the retailers traditionally
have a very high effective tax rate to start with. So,
certainly, in the spirit of tax reform and the lowering of
rates, we understand that other tax preferences to be subject
to change, as well, and we would welcome that.
The other panelists also mentioned simplicity and the lack
of complexity, and that really is another important issue, in
that it is such an adversarial relationship between the
taxpayer and the IRS. And to eliminate much of the complexity
and have, actually, the IRS and the taxpayer work together for
a change, as opposed to oppose one another, would be welcome
change.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Levin may inquire.
Mr. LEVIN. Let me just ask a few questions. Time is
limited. I don't want to only ask questions of the witness we
invited. I think it is useful to have as much back and forth as
possible. So I want to try to do that.
I just want to say to Mr. Misplon, it is true that the
retail industry has the highest effective tax rate generally.
But remember, in countries that have a lower effective tax
rate, they have a value-added tax. And that has been, more or
less, the tradeoff.
And as we talk about lowering tax rates, we have to look at
the tradeoff. And I think you would not trade off a lower tax
rate for a value-added tax, would you?
Mr. MISPLON. We believe that the problem is going to be
that the dampening effect on the economy for the first 10
years, in the present state of our economy, would be extremely
damaging and that our economy could not support the increase in
prices that would go along with a VAT tax.
Mr. LEVIN. All right. So I think your answer is ``no.'' And
I think that is understandable.
Let me just ask Ms. Brown, what is the effective tax rate
for your company?
Ms. BROWN. Our global effective tax rate today is
approximately 30 percent, excluding one-off items.
Mr. LEVIN. Excluding what?
Ms. BROWN. Any one-off items.
Mr. LEVIN. But you can't exclude.
Ms. BROWN. Okay. So last year's rate was approximately 30
percent. We paid 38 percent in the United States.
Mr. LEVIN. Okay. I think we need to look at that, because
the information we have is quite different. So I think all of
us should take a look at effective tax rates, and our
information is that yours was considerably lower.
You are a Michigan company. I want to treat you gently.
Ms. BROWN. Yes. We are a Michigan company. So we have
approximately 70 percent of our earnings before tax are in the
U.S., heavily domiciled in Michigan. Our U.S. rate, again, is
approximately 38 percent, including State and local, and then
less the, give or take, about 2-percentage-point credit we get
between the R&D credit and manufacturing credit. The remaining
30 percent of our earnings before tax are from international
locations.
So the weighted average rate over the last several years
for our company has been high 20 percent or approximately 30
percent. So that is the basket of overall tax rates that we are
paying globally.
Mr. LEVIN. Uh-huh. Okay. And so we will talk about that
further.
Mr. Galvin, let me just ask you about your statement. At
the end, you say, ``U.S. tax policy should be equitable so as
not to distort business decisions. Equitable tax policy treats
all business income equally notwithstanding the industry, how a
company is structured, or whether it is headquartered in the
U.S. or offshore.''
So let me just ask you, if you can operate overseas and
bring back the income without paying any tax, why wouldn't that
be an incentive to move operations overseas?
Mr. GALVIN. The major reason that our operations are
overseas are, in fact, because 57 percent of our sales are
overseas.
And as you look at Emerson today and also for the last 3
years, if you look at Emerson's U.S. exports to third parties
and to our subsidiaries overseas and compare that to our
international subsidiaries' imports into the United States and
what they ship to third parties into the U.S., we, in fact,
export more than we import from our subsidiaries.
And we look at things according to our after-tax return on
investment. And while tax needs to give us a level playing
field with our competitors----
Mr. LEVIN. You say ``level playing field,'' but consider
your competitors who are domestic. If you can operate overseas
and bring back the income without any taxation, how does that
effect the competition between you and somebody who is
domestic?
Chairman CAMP. And if you could just answer briefly,
because time has expired.
Mr. GALVIN. Fine.
We would be quite competitive, yes, if the repatriation
rate were similar to the international companies of 2 percent,
yes.
Mr. LEVIN. I am asking about your domestic competitors.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. Herger is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question I would like to address to Mr. Galvin,
Ms. Brown, Mr. Zrust, and Mr. Misplon.
The United States will soon have the highest corporate tax
rate among the OECD countries. Most analysts would agree that
that is a problem for U.S. competitiveness. However, some have
argued that the key factor is the average or effective tax
rate, not the marginal rate. They contend that the effective
rate for U.S. companies is comparatively low.
I assume that as you try to expand your company, multiple
investments opportunities are competing for the same resources.
When you are deciding to build a plant or make an acquisition,
do you factor taxes into your analysis, and if so, do you look
more at your marginal rate or your overall average tax rate and
why?
And Mr. Galvin, beginning with you, please.
Mr. GALVIN. Thank you.
Yes, we look at the marginal rate and we also look at our
effective rate. For Emerson, for the last 3 years, our U.S.
effective rate has varied between 35 and 37 percent, so it is
not a big difference. As we look at our return on where we
decide our plants should be, we first determine where
manufacturing locations are closest to the customer.
We also have to consider that while taxes are important, if
you look at Emerson's P&L in round numbers and $100 of sales,
35 percent of our costs are material costs. Often having the
locations closer, and the competitiveness on material costs
dictates where the production goes.
Secondly important is compensation costs. About 25 percent
of sales dollars is in compensation, about 20 percent is in
other expenses, in manufacturing, administrative costs,
marketing costs, et cetera. Our taxes represented as a percent
of sales, even being a large taxpayer, is 4 percent. Where we
have a problem is taxes, we can be competitive with our
competitors on material, on compensation, other expenses--
freight is also a factor, we spend 3 percent of sales on
freight, being closer to our customers reduces our rate costs.
With taxes, we can't be competitive at the current time with
the U.S. corporate tax rate.
Mr. HERGER. Ms. Brown.
Ms. BROWN. In Perrigo, as I mentioned, we do a vast
majority of our manufacturing in the United States. And we also
believe having benchmarked globally that our operations are
absolutely unequivocally competitive, if not lower cost,
because of the tremendous labor force we have, our people and
the technology that we have invested in the United States.
That being said, we have gotten to a place because when we
model, we model on a return on investment capital, and we are
in fact right now live in the process of looking at investing
in additional manufacturing capacity because the tremendous
success of our business model. What does that mean?
We have to now consider, where do we place that plant, and
we have to think about the return after tax in reference to the
comments already made, which are where ending cash flows are
going to be generated. So we take into consideration the rate
in each jurisdiction that we would be looking at. The effective
rate is great on a global basis. It is a general rate for us,
and we look at the competitiveness of that line. But we are
really looking at the after-tax return against the different
plants.
So we will start first with the supply chain, and that has
got to be the key driver. But that marginal rate that we would
have to pay at each location comes into play, and right now, we
are pulling the tax rate into our consideration because it is
just not competitive for us in the U.S. on that line item.
Mr. HERGER. Mr. Zrust.
Mr. ZRUST. When we make additional investments, we also
look at the marginal tax rate, and thus we look at things on an
after-tax basis.
And so from a competitive standpoint, I mean, the high U.S.
rate puts us at a disadvantage against some of our competitors.
As I mentioned, the new competition that we are facing on the
single aisle is a good example of that.
Mr. MISPLON. For a retailer, the marginal tax rate and the
effective tax rate are virtually the same and any ROI
calculation would use either one of those in the comparison of
whether it will meet the threshold.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson may inquire.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Zrust, in your testimony you say each year Boeing
spends millions of dollars to comply with the complexities of
our tax system. And you mentioned you are continuously under
audit by the IRS. I was amazed by the number of people you have
there. As you know, many of our corporate structures have to
provide office space for the IRS. And then the IRS turns around
and sues you, don't they? So, first of all, can you quantify
what your company spends just to comply with the corporate Tax
Code?
Mr. ZRUST. We haven't quantified that in terms of a hard
number, but I think it is certainly safe to say it is well into
the millions of dollars, if not maybe--I can say it is well
into the millions of dollars in terms of wages of Boeing
employees, both in the tax area and then within the business
units in the finance area. And then to deal with the complexity
of the law, we also have, we also have a high degree of spend
with tax consultants as well to help us wade through the
complexities of the existing law.
Mr. JOHNSON. So the guys sitting in your building don't
help you, the tax guys?
Mr. ZRUST. The in-house guys do. The IRS guys, no, they
don't help us.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. I am aware of the companies in
Dallas griping at me about that, too. It is a shame you all
didn't move there. You know you had the opportunity.
As a matter of curiosity, do you know what your expense is
to house those IRS agents.
Mr. ZRUST. I am sorry, could you repeat that?
Mr. JOHNSON. Yeah. Do you know what your cost is to house
the IRS guys?
Mr. ZRUST. I don't.
Mr. JOHNSON. But it is significant?
Mr. ZRUST. Typically, as I said, we have IRS agents in
three locations. And there, depending upon the given day, there
is in excess of 30 agents in the aggregate at the three
locations.
Mr. JOHNSON. Maybe we ought to cut the IRS by about 20
percent. What do you think?
Second, can you tell me, the committee, what the impact the
cost of compliance has had on your bottom line or your ability
to grow?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, again, on an annual basis, we spend
millions of dollars in order to comply.
And I think that those funds, to the extent that we could
reduce the complexity associated with the compliance effort,
would be better put to investment in new products and jobs.
Mr. JOHNSON. I know. Sell airplanes. So you talk about
battling the IRS over the R&D tax credit. I know you have had
some problems with that. Has your experience made the company
more cautious toward using that tax credit?
Mr. ZRUST. I can't say that we are going to be more
cautious in using it. I can say that since it is less certain
as to what the incentive is, because of the complexity and
because of the--let's call it the ongoing battle with regard to
quantifying that credit, and so it does have an impact. And the
ongoing complexity is considerable.
Mr. JOHNSON. Does it hamper your R&D work?
Mr. ZRUST. I don't think it has a direct impact on the
engineering or anything, no.
Mr. JOHNSON. Okay. In the context of reform, do you have
any suggestions of what we can do to ease the compliance burden
associated with the R&D tax credit, and would you consider
doing away with the credit in return for a lower rate?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, if you we look at our, at our competing
countries, I mean, many of these countries, in addition to
having lower rates, do incentivize research and development.
Because of the way the R&D is presently structured, I think we
would be in a position, and because of the lack of certainty
associated with the ongoing legislation of that credit, we
would be willing to take a rate reduction and in return give up
the R&D credit, given the way it is presently structured.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. McDermott may inquire.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for gathering this
panel together.
Mr. Galvin, I want to understand, if we lower the tax rate
to 25 percent, will you stop laying off people in the United
States? Will that make you competitive so you don't have to lay
off anybody here? Because everybody here is worried about jobs.
I have been waiting for six months for a jobs bill, and
they keep saying if we lower the tax rate to the corporations,
somehow we will get jobs in this country. So I want to hear you
tell me that you will stop laying people off in Alabama and
other places.
Mr. GALVIN. Certainly the issue is very complex, as you
understand, and we have no crystal ball on the economic
outcome. And the unfortunate situation that occurred in 2008
with the financial crisis, when our underlying sales declined
13 percent between 2008 and the middle of 2009, we had to
reduce our employment in the U.S., in Europe, in Asia. In fact,
the reductions actually are higher in Asia because of the
commodity.
So I have no crystal ball as to the sales revenue we will
have with the state of the economy.
I can say this: If the state of the U.S. economy improves
and there is higher growth in the U.S., we will obviously grow,
but I have no crystal ball as to that.
You said Alabama. I assume it is in Huntsville.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Yes.
Mr. GALVIN. That is a difficult market with a lot more
incoming products, and that acquisition we made about a year
and a half ago.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, the reason I ask the question is
because today's Washington Post says: ``U.S. Economy:
Manufacturing Slowdown the Latest Sign Recovery is Faltering.''
So lowering the tax rate is not going to stop the faltering
of the manufacturing in this country, is it? Or do you think if
we lowered it quickly down to 25 we would have no loss in jobs.
Mr. GALVIN. I think there are many factors that need to be
considered, and there is not one single silver bullet that will
help.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I get that, because you gave me some data
that I thought was very interesting, and I appreciate your
candor, 25 percent for material.
Mr. GALVIN. No. I think what I said was 35 percent is
material costs; about 25 percent is compensation costs.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. That is 60 percent.
Mr. GALVIN. Yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And then 4 percent was taxes?
Mr. GALVIN. Yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So we are talking about the tail wagging the
dog here, aren't we?
Mr. GALVIN. No. The reason is when you look at material
costs in a competitive environment, we can be competitive with
any country, any competitor around the world on material
purchases of buying from suppliers in a competitive fashion. We
can be competitive on compensation with companies like Germany
and others by basing it in the same locations as they do.
But we cannot be competitive against the Chinese, which
have a much lower tax rate, and Germany, Switzerland and other
countries that are not competitive.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Let me ask you a question. You said that--I
mean, everybody graciously has said we want to have revenue-
neutral. I like that idea. I like that idea that somebody else
is going to pay it, because you are going to get a 5 percent
reduction or a 10 percent reduction. Whose taxes are going to
go up in this process?
Mr. GALVIN. Well, certainly. You as Members have often
talked about the effective tax rate of U.S. companies being
much lower than our current rate.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. But tell me who is going to pay more taxes
if we take away those.
Mr. Stutman, can you give me an idea who is going to pay
more taxes? Who is it shifted to if it is a zero-sum game here?
Mr. STUTMAN. Well, if it is a zero-sum game, you are
absolutely right that you don't get to zero sum by everybody
having the same result.
But in fact, when we look at Grant Thornton and our client
base, and we have what I would call not just a horse in this
race but 10,000 horses in this race relative to our client
base, we know that they are each in different places. The
tradeoffs that are made affect each taxpayer differently.
So the only thing that we can urge the committee on is to
be fair and equitable relative to how you balance and measure.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I want to stop you there because my time is
almost up.
I hope the chairman will have another hearing where we get
a hearing from the squealing ones who have gotten bit by this
new getting rid of all the tax credits and lowering the rates.
There is going to be somebody in this country who is going to
squeal, and I want to hear from them as well, Mr. Chairman.
I hope we will have that. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership. Great witnesses. Little time, so much to talk
about.
Thank you for your testimony. Mr. Levin may have missed
last week with respect to the VAT issue. Clearly, at our most
recent hearing there were witnesses from other countries who
said that the VAT issue and the corporate tax reduction were
two separate issues, so I just want to remind everybody of the
testimony from last week's hearing.
Mr. Stutman, your testimony on pass-through entities is
right on. I hope you have some influence at Treasury and can
talk to them about their thoughts on pass-through entities. In
Ohio, we have lost a ton of jobs, 400,000 jobs, 600,000 jobs in
the last 4 years. We have lost corporate headquarters in Ohio.
The new Governor has stopped that. We are open for business
again. So we are not only competing against India; we are
competing against Indiana.
And by the way, for the two of you from Illinois, we are
open for business. You can come look at Ohio to headquarter as
well. Don't just look at Dallas.
Mr. Galvin, what great testimony, all of you. But I want to
follow up on what Mr. McDermott said. Because the bumper
sticker, the bumper sticker, the easy issue out there that
everyone kind of points to is you go overseas because you want
to avoid taxes.
And that is so far from the truth in terms of the policy.
And you talked about that today. In fact, our Tax Code and I
want you to expand upon this, because you are a U.S. company
and your major competitors from what I understand, are foreign
competitors, when you had an opportunity to acquire a U.S.
company, it was acquired ultimately by a foreign company, and
you were at a competitive disadvantage because of the double
taxation issue.
Can you expand upon that quickly for the members of this
committee: How the Tax Code actually hurt a U.S. company from
acquiring another U.S. company?
Mr. GALVIN. In my testimony, I talked about the acquisition
of a company formally headquartered in Providence, Rhode
Island- APC in 2006. In that year, or in the previous 3 years,
in excess of 50 percent of APC's earnings -because it is an
electronics company -was outside the United States.
When Emerson looks at acquisitions, we look at the after-
tax cash flows as the money comes back eventually to the U.S.
So even though their tax rate was much lower, in our discounted
cash flows, we assumed that that cash eventually would come to
the U.S. and be taxed at the 35 percent rate, even though the
Asian taxes were much lower. And we priced that out. We bid up
into the $5.2 billion, $5.3 billion. Schneider, the French
company, paid in excess of $6 billion range. We looked at the
difference in the cash flows of the international earnings in
perpetuity from our estimate, and it would have exceeded $800
million. Because if you have a 10 percent tax rate in Asia, we
would have been paying an additional 25 percent tax rate,
bringing the cash back to the U.S.
Mr. TIBERI. Because of repatriation.
Mr. GALVIN. Because of repatriation. We assume in all
transactions cash eventually comes back to the U.S.
Mr. TIBERI. The French company didn't have that issue?
Mr. GALVIN. The French company, you are correct, didn't
have that issue. The French tax law exempts 95 percent of
dividends, and so the effective tax rate in France is about 1.5
percent.
Mr. TIBERI. So that company that you looked at acquiring is
now a French company?
Mr. GALVIN. Correct.
Mr. TIBERI. So the headquartered corporate jobs that were
in Rhode Island are now in----
Mr. GALVIN. In France. And the engineering R&D also shifted
to consolidation within France.
Mr. TIBERI. All those jobs are gone. So you in St. Louis,
where are your best jobs for Emerson, that is your 130,000
jobs?
Mr. GALVIN. As you know, we employ a lot of people in Ohio.
Mr. TIBERI. Your best jobs?
Mr. GALVIN. Our best jobs are----
Mr. TIBERI. Are they in France?
Mr. GALVIN. No.
Mr. TIBERI. Where are they?
Mr. GALVIN. Our best jobs would probably be in the U.S.
with the competitiveness of high-tech areas.
Mr. TIBERI. So when a corporate headquarters leaves, their
best jobs leave. Have you seen that in St. Louis?
Mr. GALVIN. We have seen that in spades in St. Louis.
Somebody can just look at what has happened; when a company is
acquired the headquarters jobs are lost.
Mr. TIBERI. If the Federal Government, if we, Congress,
don't do something about the current Tax Code, is Emerson, are
your three companies, at risk from a foreign competitor at some
point in time?
Mr. GALVIN. At some point in time, but I would certainly
think smaller companies would be acquired first. Our market cap
currently exceeds $40 billion.
Ms. BROWN. I would say any company is always at risk of
takeover. You always have to worry about that. But because of
the comparative disadvantage that the American bidders in an
acquisition would go through because of the net after-tax cash
flow, certainly we would be at risk. We would all be thinking
about that.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Your time has expired.
Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, you know, what we are all trying to do and I have
said this as an opening part of my statement each hearing we
have is we are all trying to work hard to make American
companies successful and create jobs for people here in the
United States.
And part of that process is listening to all of you and
trying not to make this a partisan issue where some are intent
upon doing that.
So I really appreciate the presence of all of you here, and
I thank the chairman for his, and the ranking member, for
putting this hearing together. I represent a district that has
22,000 Boeing workers, so you can see where my focus might be
going this morning.
It is a pleasure to have you and see you again, Mr. Zrust.
And I want to ask the question about your future competition
and how you plan to face that, because you and I have talked
about that future competition for Boeing in connection with the
tax structure. How do you plan to face that competition if the
structure essentially stays the same?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, historically, our European competitor in
Boeing have dominated the single-aisle airplane space at 100
passengers or greater. And a number of companies--a number of
countries have built airplanes at the size of less than 100
passengers. And what is happening, as I mentioned, the
Canadians, the Russians, the Chinese and the Brazilians are
starting to move up into and have indicated that they are
moving up into, let's say, into the space that has historically
been dominated by both our European competitor in Boeing.
And as I mentioned in my statement, all of those new
competitors reside in countries where the tax rate there is
considerably less than the U.S. rate, and so that is going to
present an issue for us in terms of competition. Because the
decision we are going to have to make at some point is, what
are we going to do to face that new competition and where are
we going to get the capital in order to compete with that new
competition. And to the extent that we are put on a level
playing field with that new competition in terms of tax, that
is going to free up capital and allow us to put more jobs in
the U.S. and potentially more bricks and mortar, because as you
know, all of our manufacturing facilities are in the U.S., and
the vast majority of our jobs are in the U.S. as well. And the
intention is to keep it that way for now.
Mr. REICHERT. So freeing up capital----
Mr. ZRUST. That is right.
Mr. REICHERT [continuing]. With a different tax structure
is what you are hoping?
Mr. ZRUST. That is right.
Mr. REICHERT. And to follow up on Mr. Tiberi's questioning,
could you explain how Boeing might face foreign companies or
competition even in the U.S. markets and how the tax laws
affect you and your ability to compete against foreign
companies right here in the United States? So your major
competitor----
Mr. ZRUST. Well, our major competitor, obviously, is in
France. I mean, the rate with France is slightly less than that
of the U.S. I think to the extent that they are putting bricks
and mortar in the U.S., I think we are probably on a level
playing field. But if we look at right now who is buying
airplanes, the customers for the most part are outside the
U.S., and so we are dealing with issues, you know, the
interaction of the U.S. tax laws with the income that we are
driving outside the U.S.
So I think so long as our competition would stay with our
one European competitor, let's say, in the twin aisle planes--
--
Mr. REICHERT. Last week, for example, I flew on an Airbus--
usually Boeing.
Mr. ZRUST. I mean, the bottom line is, it goes to freeing
up capital and keeping--trying to get the U.S. rate down to a
level that is consistent with where our competition is.
Mr. REICHERT. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Becerra is recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your testimony, I appreciate it. And
hopefully, we are able to use some of your testimony in the
future as we try to move forward on a reform of the Tax Code.
I thought, Mr. Galvin, you made a statement that I think
perhaps encapsulates this entire discussion and, quite
honestly, this entire debate about how we reform the code. And
you said something, I caught just this part of it where you
said, in response to Mr.--I think it was Mr. McDermott, who was
asking questions about jobs, because there is no easy yes or no
answer to anything, and you said, there are many factors that
need to be considered. You went on to say other things.
But again, if we lower rates tomorrow, will you be able to
retain employees tomorrow. Lots of things have to be considered
beyond the code. And so as we go about trying to figure out
what to do, lots of things have to be considered, not just the
rates, the corporate rates.
You mentioned--you used two very good examples of the
competition you lost with a French company for a particular
firm you were looking to buy. And you mentioned how their
territorial rates make it easier for them to compete with you
and prices that we would have to pay under our worldwide rates
of corporate taxation. Lots of things have to be considered.
That French company takes advantage of their corporate
rates, their territorial rates. France has a 19 percent VAT, a
VAT. Would you ask us to have a 19 percent tax on every product
that the end stream for Americans to pay on top of what they
pay today for milk, clothes and the rest?
Mr. GALVIN. That is also, again, unfortunately, a
multifaceted question. I think for the short-term, overall
corporate tax reform needs to be addressed.
Mr. BECERRA. Let me hold you there because I am going to
run out of time, and we will keep talking, but my point is
this: Lots of things have to be considered.
The French are able to charge a lower rate on corporations
for work and business that is done abroad through their
territorial rates because they probably have done other things
to make up for that.
Mr. GALVIN. Correct.
Mr. BECERRA. One of those is the VAT, which--the value
added tax--which a French citizen will pay at some point, in
this case, it is about 19 percent. They also have income tax
rates that are in the 40s, high 40s. I imagine if I asked you,
would you want Americans to have income tax rates that go up
into the high 40s, you would probably say lots of things have
to be considered, but you probably wouldn't be all that excited
about having Americans' income tax rates go up as well.
Mr. GALVIN. I would say, again, in the short-term this
committee is on the corporate tax side. A VAT or a national
sales tax is a later discussion.
Mr. BECERRA. Let me stop you there because, see, we won't
have an opportunity if we don't deal with this entire subject
matter together, we may push one side and not realize the pull
on the other, and we have to take all those things into
consideration. So, in reforming the code, obviously, we are
talking today about corporate rates.
Mr. GALVIN. Right.
Mr. BECERRA. But whatever we do on corporate rates may have
an impact, as I think Mr. Stutman tried to make the case, on
individual rates, whether it is because of these pass-through
entities and otherwise. And so we will have to have a fuller
discussion.
But your points are all very well taken that we have to
figure out a way to reduce the rates and let you be more
competitive.
I think the operative word here is competitive. Because
most American companies, I think you will all agree, are still
able to compete with anyone so long as the playing field is
equal, and I think that is what you all would like.
Let me move on. I would love to let you have more time, but
I need to move on because I am going to run out of time. One of
the other issues that affects Americans' perception of what we
are doing is they get the sense that we are not doing this for
them but for others. For example, today we are giving oil
companies tax breaks to go search for oil and drill for oil.
And they wonder what the heck do we need to do that for when
they are making tens of billions of dollars in profits and
charging us over $4 a gallon in some places for gasoline? But
we do that.
The second thing they see is that in the 1990s, we were
creating jobs in America at the same time that a lot of our
companies were also creating jobs in other parts of the world
outside of the U.S. But in the 2000s, the first decade of the
21st century, we created more jobs, our American companies
created more jobs abroad than were created in the U.S.
Essentially, there was a flight of jobs by American companies.
So it is all an issue of how the American people perceive
what we are trying to do. I appreciate your testimony, and I
hope what we can do is be able to incorporate everything you
said to come up with that solution that deals with the whole
mix of things.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the time, and I thank the
witnesses for coming.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing. I also would like to thank all of our
panelists today for being here.
I would like to, Mr. Stutman, talk to you on some of your
testimony you gave today. It is basically about pass-through
entities. I represent the Tampa Bay area, the Sarasota
community. But also being the only member of Ways and Means
from Florida, I look at it in terms of the impact on pass-
through entities. In Florida alone, there are 600,000 S corps,
and I am sure a lot of LLCs and partnerships. Would you agree
that we need to keep these small businesses in mind when we do
any kind of tax reform?
Mr. STUTMAN. Well, as I mentioned in my testimony, the
proliferation of pass-throughs over the course of the last 15
to 25 years has been dramatic and significant. And they are
more a part of the business community than ever before. And I
tend to stay away from classifying pass-throughs by reference
to size, because we have some small, as you referenced. But we
have some really significant and large partnerships and S
corporations that would rival some of the companies perhaps
that have testified here today and before.
And it is pretty clear that they are drivers of the
economy. They are drivers of jobs, and therefore, they need to
be included in the debate. And therefore, if we are talking
simply corporate rate reduction, there is an element for which
then caution needs to be exercised around how we handle pass-
throughs. They will continue, I believe, to grow in size and
numbers as we continue to have alternate structural entities
that allow for corporate liability protection at the same time
being able to accommodate the pass-through nature of the tax
laws.
Mr. BUCHANAN. My understanding in terms of flow-through or
pass-through entity businesses compared to C corporations, is
that they employ more workers in 48 out of 50 States in our
country. But yet there is some discussion of the possibility,
even within the Administration--the President mentioned it
yesterday at our conference that he is interested in lowering
corporate rates, which I think we need to do, whether that
number is 25 percent or another number. But there is, at the
same time, a sense of increasing taxes on individuals, and a
lot of them that make over $250,000 are job providers. Are you
concerned also about the impact that would have if you raised
individual rates and lowered corporate rates, what that would
do to jobs?
Mr. STUTMAN. Well, certainly in the context of pass-through
entities, you know, as long as you follow the current construct
of the Internal Revenue Code, they are taxed at individual
rates in terms of the owners of those entities. And so if you
have a pure corporate rate reduction and either neutrality or
rate increase for individuals or do not somehow cover pass-
throughs as businesses within the context of a corporate rate
reduction, then yes, there is a high level of concern,
especially in terms of our client base.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Again, as a past chairman of the Chamber in
Florida, 99 percent of businesses that are registered in the
State of Florida are small- and medium-size businesses. They
create probably 70 percent of the jobs, probably not just in
Florida but around the country. So that is why I am concerned.
I would love to see us deal with the C corp rate, but I don't
know how you deal with the C corp rate without dealing with
also the pass-through entities. It all has to be looked at.
And that is why if you raise the personal income tax rate
and lower the corporate rate, you are going to have a lot of
people in the same industries that are going to have a huge
advantage over another business. Because I just recall back in
the 1980s, everybody had a C corp. Then it went to an S corp.
Then everybody was doing LLCs. But all this has to be taken
into consideration, don't you agree?
Mr. STUTMAN. Yes. I think in terms of the testimony that I
presented is about there are multiple moving parts relative to
this issue. And we have talked about the various components,
including corporate rate, including tax expenditures, including
the impact of the burdensome reference to the possibility of
any particular segment of our taxpaying business community, and
right now in terms of certainly what you are saying would go to
the pass-throughs.
Mr. BUCHANAN. And Mr. Corum, do you want to add something
to that as a tax specialist?
Mr. CORUM. I am here really to look at the financial
accounting impacts of that. Those pass-through entities don't
necessarily reflect taxes in their own separate financial
statements because the taxes are borne by the owners and the
shareholders of it. So therefore, a corporate rate change
affects corporate financial statements primarily.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our panel for sharing their expertise. We
have been reading more and more about companies with either a
zero effective tax rate or close to it. And I was wondering if
any of you would care to speculate on what would be in it for
companies such as those with the currently low effective tax
rate, if they would perhaps see their effective tax rate go up,
could there still be some benefit to public policy in a bigger
picture? Maybe no one wants to answer that, but Mr. Galvin.
Mr. GALVIN. With a high effective tax rate, I guess I am a
safe person to answer. In the newspapers, and it has been on a
lot of different shows on TV, certainly one thing to consider
is that sometimes the press stories are rather one-sided and
misleading.
So while they might be technically correct, they are
definitely misleading when you look at the complexity of the
Tax Code and the fact that the effective tax rate was negative
over the last 3 years. It goes to show why we need U.S.
corporate tax reform, because you have all these complexities,
unintended consequences. And I am sure all of them, from what I
have heard from the companies, fully comply with the U.S. tax
law. It is an example that U.S. tax reform on the corporate
side is needed so we don't have these unintended consequences.
And there is added complexity with getting refunds over a
3-year period. Some of the staffers in the back could be paying
more in taxes than the corporations. I mean, it is a very
unfortunate situation. It just proves that corporate tax reform
for simplification is needed.
Mr. SMITH. And I will let anyone else who----
Mr. ZRUST. I might comment on that. As I mentioned in my
statement, at the Boeing company, we have over 500 differences
between how we account for items in our financial--in our
annual report for financial reporting and then how we reflect
those same items on our tax return.
And many of these items result in differences of
recognition of income and expense, differences in just periods;
it is timing, not permanent. So when we talk about effective
tax rates from a tax standpoint, people look at things of a
permanent nature; R&D credit, how you affect States, State
income taxes, the interaction of U.S. income and foreign
income. Those things--domestic manufacturing deduction--those
things are of a permanent nature. But there are distortions in
cash taxes paid, and it is a difference in periods.
For instance, funding a pension in a given year results in
a current tax deduction and may result with the drop in the
markets the last few years in a large current deduction, but
yet for financial reporting, that does not result in a current
reduction in book income. And so there is an appearance that
something is wrong because there might be a large amount of
book income but yet there are no taxes paid when it is simply
due to the differences in tax accounting between what happens
for GAAP, Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, and then
what the Internal Revenue Code mandates.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you.
Shifting gears just a bit, we heard earlier that it is
oftentimes wise that the manufacturing be done close to the
customers. That makes sense. In fact, we are already seeing a
lot of that type of policy taking shape in terms of energy
conservation and even incentives.
And we know that a good portion of the world's population
lives and works outside of the borders of the United States. We
have seen companies obviously from overseas locate here in
America and hiring Americans. I see that as a positive thing as
well.
But I was wondering, Mr. Stutman, if a company that is
based in the U.S. hires people overseas, or opens a plant that
is closer to their customers, would you characterize that as
jobs fleeing the shores of America.
Mr. STUTMAN. In terms of answering the question, if in fact
we have a global economy and we know that some of what we do is
capable of being done in the U.S. and some of which is capable
of being done across border, you know, it is really a function
of, you know, in terms of your question, whether or not there
are skills or reasons, such as being closer to your customers,
or other factors that will come into play relative to
ultimately making the determination of where to create those
jobs.
As I think most of the panelists talked about, there is a
return-on-investment calculation that they all go through that
relates to making those determinations. I would not suggest
that automatically you come to a conclusion that by going
overseas that you are taking jobs away from America.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank the panel for their input to this hearing. I am
going to ask the chair to insert in the record the Citizens for
Tax Justice initial report on 12 corporations that pay a tax
rate of a negative 1.5 percent on $171 billion in profits and
got $62 billion in tax subsidies, which does happen to include
Boeing. And in the report, it says that Boeing made a profit of
almost $4.5 billion in 2010 and had negative Federal taxes. The
same held true for 2009 and 2008. And over those 3 years,
Boeing made almost $10 billion and had a negative tax rate of
1.8 percent.
And I think in testimony that I heard earlier from Mr.
Zrust that Boeing would like a lower tax rate. So how much
lower a tax rate should we give Boeing and why?
Mr. ZRUST. So Mr. Stark, let me address that. Over the last
3 years, we have not paid a----
Mr. STARK. How much lower rate do you need now to survive?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, let me talk about what that is
attributable to.
Mr. STARK. I know what it is attributable to.
Mr. ZRUST. Well, it is attributable to new products and it
is investments in our workforce, so there are three things: One
is contributions to our pension plan. As we know, there are two
major development programs.
Mr. STARK. All companies do that. That is not unusual. But
how much lower rate do you need to survive?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, what will happen with those items, as I
mentioned before, there are things of a permanent nature and
there are things that are temporary. So those same things that
gave rise to low tax payments in the last 3 years are going to
reverse in the next few years and result in considerable tax
payments.
Mr. STARK. Oh, yeah? We are going to get more from Boeing
in the next few years?
Did you know that, Mr. McDermott?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I didn't know that.
Mr. STARK. I didn't know that either. How much more do you
think Boeing is going to pay us in the next few years?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, sir, as we start delivering airplanes, the
787, for instance, that is going to result in a reversal of the
inventory accounting differences that are reflected in the last
3 years that resulted in current tax deductions. It is going to
result in book tax deductions, but yet not a corresponding
deduction on the tax return, so that difference is going to be
reflected in increased tax payments.
Depending upon the magnitude of the deliveries, it is
possible that the company could be paying a rate of tax in
excess of the statutory rate of 35 percent. So this is a
function of the differences in tax accounting between the
Internal Revenue Code and what is mandated under Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles.
Mr. STARK. You pay your taxes based on the Internal Revenue
Code, don't you?
Mr. ZRUST. That is correct.
Mr. STARK. Mr. Chairman, I would just like to submit for
the record the Citizens for Tax Justice analysis of 12
corporations that pay an effective tax rate of negative 1.5
percent, and a further report will be coming later, and it
illustrates that Boeing over the last few years has had a
negative 1.8 percent rate. It paid a Federal tax of--a rebate
of $178 million on profits of almost $10 billion, so that it
just gives us the example of what many of these corporations
are able to do and does illustrate why we should make some
changes in the Tax Code.
I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Chairman CAMP. Without objection, the document will be
placed in the record.
[The information follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today. I want to share with
you an excerpt from a recent article in the New York Times
entitled ``The Logic of Cutting Corporate Taxes'' by Laura
D'Andrea Tyson. She is a professor at Haas School of Business
at the University of California, Berkeley, also a former chair
of the Council of Economic Advisors under President Clinton.
She said this: ``Shouldn't the government raise the
corporate tax rate to require corporations to contribute their
fair share to deficit reduction and to enhance the
progressivity of the tax system? The answer is no.''
And she goes on to say, in today's world of mobile capital,
increasing the corporate tax rate would be a bad way to
generate revenues for deficit reduction, a bad way to increase
the progressivity of the Tax Code and a bad way to help
American workers and their families.
For many years, I think the conventional wisdom has been
that the corporate income tax is principally borne by owners of
capital in the form of lower returns. Now with more mobile
capital, workers are bearing more of the burden in the form of
lower wages and productivity as investments move around the
world in search of better tax treatment and higher returns.
In this environment a high corporate tax rate, not only
undermines the growth and competitiveness of American
companies, but it also increasingly is ineffective as a tool to
achieve more progressive outcomes in the taxation of capital
and labor.
There appears to be an emerging consensus that the
corporate tax burdens workers in the form of lower wages, and
higher retail prices are a reflection of this as well. So I
just wanted for you all to comment, if you would, and elaborate
on how a high corporate tax rate is reflected in terms of
prices, wages and productivity.
Mr. Galvin.
Mr. GALVIN. Certainly the issue, in my opinion, is not just
a high corporate tax rate but the noncompetitiveness, which I
have said before, and the consequences are an additional loss
of jobs. Fifty years ago, the U.S. economy was so large, we
could do whatever we wanted. Now we are much more competitive
with emerging countries in Asia, and that forces us to be
competitive with the rest of the world. And I would hope that
while initially our study, at this hearing, is over the
corporate tax rate longer term, intermediate term, whatever, in
several years, I think the committee might consider looking at
overall U.S. tax reform and the issues that were raised about
the VAT and others to be competitive with the rest of the
world, and the impact we would have if we choose a tax system
that is isolated from the rest of the world as we currently
have it. So I agree with the comments, and we need to study
more economically the issues on a value added tax, not for the
short-term, but intermediate term.
Ms. JENKINS. Ms. Brown.
Ms. BROWN. In our universe, it is interesting because in
terms of productivity, employment growth, we have been
continually providing wage increases, becoming more productive,
adding a tremendous amount of head count. I just checked my
statistics. We added 450 new jobs in Michigan since just July.
So, in our universe, that is a big number.
But I think about, to your point, how does higher income
tax affect the big basket of what we are thinking about long-
term? The strategic landscape for us has changed. There has
been massive consolidation in our industry. And the players who
are the most active in buying up companies, many with U.S.
footprints, and consolidating out the higher-paying jobs,
consolidating out the headquarters, are foreign players in many
instances who are taking advantage of that better after-tax
return that they are able to utilize because of our, again,
relatively higher corporate tax rate.
So we haven't seen necessarily on a day-to-day basis higher
taxes pushing through price changes of our product. We have
been able to manage that entire process through our own
productivity, but we look at the bigger-term, long-term
strategic landscape of what is going to impact our long-term
growth and what we can share with our shareholders and add new
jobs, and that is where it really becomes problematic for us
long term.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Berg is recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I, first of all, want to thank the panelists for being here
today. This is an extremely important matter. I look back at my
home State of North Dakota, and we have reformed the Tax Code.
We lowered the property tax. We lowered the income tax. We
lowered the corporate income tax. And North Dakota business
understood that. What we have heard from you today is not
rocket science. It is pretty simple, pretty straightforward.
Our business knew when we did that that we were not going to
change the rules. We were going to set the Tax Code, and they
can make investments that they are expecting a 10-year return
on or a 15-year return. And when times got tough, we weren't
going to just change the Tax Code and take away their return.
In fact, it is that stability, quite frankly, that has made
North Dakota one of the top job creators in the Nation. We have
a 3.5 percent unemployment rate. This is what happens when you
encourage business and have stability. You know, there is no
question that what we have heard today and we have heard from
the past several months is how our Tax Code, the uncertainty of
it, has a cloud over business, you don't know what the rules
are. I have been stunned by all the changes in the Tax Code,
the size of the Tax Code and the difficulty in anticipating
commonsense business decisions for your company, what that
really means after you filter it through a very complicated Tax
Code.
So, from my perspective, also being at the end of the
questioning here, what I would like to do is kind of get back
to what brought us here in the beginning. And maybe if we could
real simply just go through the panelists, and again, at a high
level, I want to ask two questions. The first question is what
does it mean to your company and your job creation if we
simplify the Tax Code and have a competitive Tax Code? And so
again, Mr. Corum, if you could start.
Mr. CORUM. I might pass that down the aisle since I am not
really representing a company.
Mr. GALVIN. It would certainly help us, because at the
current time, certain jobs that we have historically had in the
U.S., where we could afford a 5 percent or less overall product
differential against our competitors in Asia, with the way the
Tax Code is working and the way different incentives are given
in Asia, reform might reduce the impact of a loss of further
jobs. We have been, as I said, a very large exporter, not as
large as Boeing, but we export more than we import. And the
noncompetitiveness hurts us on doing that because we need to be
competitive with our competitors. It is very simple. In the tax
line, we are not competitive.
Ms. BROWN. A very simple example. Right now, we are going
through a process of evaluating investment and manufacturing
footprint. And certainty of tax rate, long-term certainty, take
out one-offs and anomalies, but that long-term certainty as we
go through this process right now, if I know, and I am very
pleased to be sitting here on this panel and knowing that you
are all talking about this and taking it very seriously,
because if we know that that rate will be lower in the U.S.
longer term, the decision of are we going to put it in the U.S.
or are we going to put that manufacturing footprint ex-U.S.
becomes much easier. And we know that the comparable rates will
be closer; it makes a decision easier because we like to keep
that manufacturing close to where our customers are. Very
simple.
Mr. BERG. A great example.
Mr. ZRUST. On the airplane side of the business, our
manufacturing is in the U.S. Our competition is outside the
U.S., and for the most part, our customers are outside the U.S.
And so what we need to do is come up with a way if we lower the
rate and free up capital that allows us to invest in
innovation, in a new product line to better compete with the
emerging competition that we are facing from other competitors
with significantly lower tax rates.
Mr. MISPLON. Well, certainly we believe that simplifying
the Tax Code and reducing the income tax rate, that reduction
in the tax rate will be passed down to the consumer, which will
equate to increased sales. It will allow us to hire more
employees and allow us to purchase more inventory to keep the
economy going.
Mr. BERG. Thank you.
Mr. STUTMAN. Well, certainly, as to Grant Thornton being a
service provider, I am sure the question isn't aimed at us
directly but at our client base.
Mr. BERG. Absolutely.
Mr. STUTMAN. We would recognize that, again, of the
thousands of clients we have, many of them would appreciate
simplicity, uniformity.
But at the same time, you mentioned the fact that in North
Dakota there is now a consistency and uniformity about the
decisions you are making and how they play out. And it is the
moving parts here as to how you get there, because people have
already made those decisions based upon the complexity, and
then how do you wind them through the process as you move
forward towards getting that consistency and uniformity in the
Internal Revenue Code.
Mr. BERG. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel is recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank the panel for their patience. Basically when it gets
to the later questions, everything that has to be answered has
already been answered. Everyone is seeing from the same page,
and it sounds like the American thing to do, paying this
equity, lower taxes, eliminate unfair preferences, competition,
job creation, give the corporations a break, and they will do
the right thing by America and their stockholders.
There is something wrong with this picture. If we are all
in agreement where is the Chamber of Commerce in all of this? I
put out a bill, and they thought it would be great. I talked
with the Secretary of Treasury, and he said, there is any
number, there are billions of wasteful provisions in the bill.
There are waivers, exemptions, credits that shouldn't be there.
So we should have a more equal playing field. Something is
wrong with this picture.
And there are liberals and conservatives, Republicans,
Democrats agreeing with you; we should do it, and we should do
it fast.
I kind of believe everyone in business doesn't agree with
you. I think that those people that we describe as having
unfair preferential tax treatment are the guys behind the tree.
Do you remember Senator Long, don't tax me, don't tax me, tax
the guy behind the tree? Somebody has got to pay to make this
revenue neutral, right? Right. Somebody who is getting unfair
tax breaks is going to lose them, right? Right. Are they
speaking out? Do we know who they are? Do they come to meetings
like this and say, hey, I like it the way it is? I don't want
any changes, I love R&D, rapid depreciation, all of those
gimmicks will be a gimmick for you, but it is okay for me. Now,
where do we go from here? We all are reading from the same
page. We are your public servants; reform, reform, reform,
competition, jobs creation.
Mr. RANGEL. What is the problem? Mr. Corum, what is our
problem? I mean, why don't we do these things? Why are people
afraid to say--is there an elephant--strike that--is there a
big animal in the room that we don't want to talk about? Come
on, who is the lead--come on. I know, once you get your books
straight, you want to pay more taxes, you want to do the fair
things, and it just looks bad for you. Who is it that we have
to drag to this table? Something is wrong with this picture.
Boeing?
No. Okay, gang.
If the answer is not here, Mr. Chairman, there is something
wrong with this equation.
The last time I ventured on this very thin ice, the people
that were talking about reform started saying that Rangel is
increasing taxes. I said, how could that be? Said, well, we
don't pay taxes now, and he is talking about reform; that is
increasing taxes. Who would want to increase taxes at a time
that we are in today? Wow. You have heard that one before,
right?
So this thing is not on the level. And I just don't know
why I hear such deafening silence since--I don't remember the
last time everybody has been on the same page. So here I am, a
liberal, progressive, left-wing, saying, ``Let's lower the
corporate rates. What is going to stop us from doing this
together?'' And no one is going to help me out? You are going
to sit there and say, ``I have said what I had to say''?
What do you want us to do? Any volunteers that have any
recommendations or suggestions about what we do? How come the
chairman says he has solidarity with the committee, that we
ought to do these fair, equitable things to create jobs, and
now he is being asked--we are asking you, what is the next
move? Can anyone of you bring us the support of the United
States Chamber of Commerce? Any one of you? Have you discussed
it with them?
Mr. Galvin, you are biting at the bit.
Mr. GALVIN. Well, I would generally be first on the list.
What I have said before is that I think the Chamber--and I am a
member of the U.S. Chamber, as you saw in my biography--But you
need overall corporate tax reform, because the last time you
had massive tax reform I believe was in 1986. And other
countries have now substantially reduced their taxes.
A simple thing that I think most corporations would say,
simplify the tax system, lower the rate, make it revenue-
neutral.
Mr. RANGEL. Why aren't we doing this? How long have you
been with this Chamber? Because I don't ever remember getting
any notices from them, ``When are you guys going to reform the
system so we can be competitive again?''
Mr. GALVIN. Well, I would think the Chamber would answer,
``Lower the rate.'' And I will see about getting you something.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you for your great contribution.
Chairman CAMP. Thanks.
Mrs. BLACK. is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I want to thank the panel for being here to testify.
And I apologize for being out briefly, but I had another
committee where we were talking about Fannie, Freddie, and FHA,
so another important subject.
I want to go to the picking winners and losers, because I
have heard this as I have traveled throughout my district in
the last 4 or 5 months, in talking to various businesses, all
the way from very small businesses to the larger businesses--
and, of course, there is a different tax structure; some are
corporate, and some are using the passthrough--but winners and
losers in the different business activities or sectors.
So there are numerous provisions in the Tax Code that have
an effect of preferential treatment to a particular business
behavior or to a particular sector of the economy. Do you agree
that the objective of tax reform should be to address these
kinds of disparities in the tax law? Is that one of the areas
we should focus on, these disparities?
And any of the panel members can certainly pick up and
speak to that.
Ms. BROWN. I would say, certainly. And I am assuming, and
from what I have read, that this is exactly what the committee
is planning to talk about, is look at the interlocking parts of
tax reform and how it would affect the overall economy and job
creation. And, today, obviously, we are talking about corporate
rates, but how that all fits together.
And, you know, my role, as CFO of a corporation--we are
formed as a corporation. We also depend very heavily on a
complex ecosystem of smaller businesses, be they the local shop
that makes sandwiches for the folks in our corporate
headquarters or if it is folks who supply raw materials and
plastic bottles to put our product into. It is a very complex
web of different companies that have different structures.
And simplifying the rates, simplifying the code, it may
mean that some of the smaller businesses choose to form
themselves as a corporation, a small corporation but a
corporation nonetheless. But as long as you are encouraging
each of the different players in our supply chain to be able to
compete with their other competition locally, or if they in
their universe have foreign players, it would make a lot of
sense to us, looking at it all together.
Mr. ZRUST. I think if we are going to look at comprehensive
tax reform, we need to put everything on the table and review
it. And I think our system is perceived to be based on
fairness, or at least that is what should be--there should be
equity in the system. And in doing so--you know, if we talk
about changing the status quo now and there is winners and
losers, but that is just based upon where the tax system sits
right now, and it doesn't necessarily mean the tax system is
perceived as equitable and fair right now. I mean, it is in the
eyes of the beholder.
And so I think what we need to do, in terms of
comprehensive tax reform, is put everything on the table and go
back and review and determine what creates a fair, simple, and
equitable system.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you.
Mr. Galvin.
Mr. GALVIN. Yes. I would also think, as you look at
corporate tax reform, you certainly have to address the
transition rules as you look at passthrough entities. Because,
certainly, I surmise that one of the significant reasons of the
growth of passthrough entities is you get a tax advantage, vis-
a-vis paying the complex corporate tax rate and then either a
dividend tax or a capital gains tax rate to your shareholders.
So if the passthrough entities are hurt with a higher
personal rate, to allow them appropriate transition rules to go
to a corporate structure, especially the larger ones--because a
lot of passthrough entities are not necessarily small entities.
Mrs. BLACK. Right.
Mr. GALVIN [continuing]. Have them go to a C structure, and
then have the double taxation that currently exists, so they
are competitive with the rest of the businesses that they
compete with.
But you have to address those things, as well, and not just
automatically switch off passthrough entities because of the
tax advantages they get.
Mr. STUTMAN. Yeah, I would add on that, you know, as I
mentioned in my testimony, there are a significant number of
moving parts. And the winners and losers ultimately are
determined by effective tax rate, not statutory tax rates.
But we have the issue of passthroughs versus corporates. We
have the tax expenditures. We have other issues on the table
that, you know, the panel has addressed that all need to be
measured, all need to be factored in. And, you know, I
understand that is the responsibility of the committee, to take
this information and work through what would be a reasonable
approach to how business could be impacted, to create jobs, and
to move the economy forward.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. SCHOCK. is recognized.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
this hearing. It has been fantastic.
First, I want to address the outrage expressed by many in
this committee about, apparently, some businesses in this
country paying zero effective tax and what I perceive to be a
little disingenuous demagoguery on their part.
You know, it is one thing to say you don't like the rules;
it is another thing to write the rules and then criticize
people for following the rules.
I went through my neighborhood McDonald's a couple months
ago. It was a brand-new building. Now, the hamburger didn't
taste any better. The fries were pretty much the same. And I
happened to meet the proprietor of the restaurant--true story.
And I asked him, I said, why would you tear down what I thought
was a perfectly good building, close your business, and rebuild
this building from scratch? And he looked at me and he said,
well, thanks to you and the Obama administration, I can write
off the entire cost of this building this year. And he said, as
a result, I won't pay any taxes this year.
Now, I know that my local franchisee of McDonald's is not
the only business doing this. In fact, the Obama administration
was quite proud of pushing for this initiative last fall--
actually, in August. I have a copy of the press release from
the White House where it says, ``The President is proud to push
for targeted tax cuts and has been a long proponent of
expanding the accelerated depreciation and the bonus
depreciation.''
So I think it is important to point out the fact that this
is something that was passed under a Democratic House,
Democratic Senate, and signed into law by a Democratic
President. I would also say that I supported it, given our
economic times, to further encourage investment. However, we
should not demagogue those companies, then, who practice
exactly the type of investment and business practices that, in
fact,] we were incentivizing and asking for.
To that end, I also have a copy of the latest Citizens for
Tax Justice news release that just came out, criticizing 12
corporations for paying, effectively, a negative tax rate. One
of them, of course, is one of my home State companies, Boeing.
And I just thought I would give Mr. Zrust the opportunity
to respond to this criticism and perhaps maybe address the
issue I raised about bonus depreciation and perhaps other tax
methodologies that have played into a very low effective rate
today and maybe next year, and what effect that will have, if
any, by taking 100 percent of the depreciation this year on
further years' tax liabilities.
Obviously, if you don't depreciate something over 5 years
or 7 years or 30 years, you get that depreciation this year,
but now your effective tax rate could be higher later on.
So I guess my question to Mr. Zrust would be, what will be
Boeing's effective tax rate, not for 2008 and 2010, but perhaps
from 2008 to 2018, over a 10-year period, as a result of you
implementing these type of tax methodologies?
Mr. ZRUST. Well, first of all, as I mentioned in my
statement, our effective tax rate--and, again, I talk in an
accounting sense--is 31 to 33 percent.
Now, given that--over the last few years, that is true, we
have paid a relatively low amount of tax. Now, that is cash
taxes, as opposed to effective rate. And the reason for that is
principally three things.
One is the investment in our new products, so we have two
large development programs, the 787 and the 747-8. And there
have been well-documented issues associated with those
programs. And the inventory accounting method that we are on
allows us to deduct certain items for tax purposes that are not
currently deductible for book purposes.
However, as we start delivering those airplanes, it flips.
So, in other words, in the future, we will have lower book
income but higher taxable income. So we are going to pay tax,
and this is a timing difference.
Mr. SCHOCK. So, basically, the short answer is your
effective tax rate will go up? It will be higher in later
years?
Mr. ZRUST. Our cash payments will go up higher than you
would expect in future years as this difference reverses.
Mr. SCHOCK. Okay. My time is almost up, so I apologize.
Real quickly, given all of that, my understanding is
everyone at this table still would put everything on the table
in exchange for a lower effective tax rate. Is that the case?
And if you could all quickly respond. And, if not, what is not
on the table, in your perspective?
Mr. GALVIN. Yes. Everything is on the table.
Mr. SCHOCK. So even with all these loopholes and gimmes
and, you know, all the things we have heard about here today,
you are willing to put it all on the table to lower the
effective rate?
Mr. GALVIN. Drop everything, lower the rate, make it
corporate revenue neutral.
Ms. BROWN. Agreed. Drop everything, lower the rate, lower
the tax burden net overall.
Mr. ZRUST. We are in agreement, as well.
Mr. MISPLON. Agreed.
Mr. STUTMAN. Everything needs to be considered. I am not
suggesting that when you consider everything you get to an
ultimate conclusion that you would trade off everything, for
our client base, relative to a lower rate.
Mr. SCHOCK. All right. Thank you all.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Schock.
And, again, I want to thank all of the witnesses for
participating in this hearing on corporate tax issues in light
of comprehensive tax reform. This will conclude the fifth----
Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP [continuing]. Full committee hearing on tax
reform; six Ways and Means Committee hearings on this issue.
And Mr. Levin.
Mr. LEVIN. For the record, because the effective tax rate
that we obtained from your filings is different than you
indicated today, I am not saying you are wrong; there may be an
explanation, I would ask each of you, for the record, to
indicate how you calculated your effective tax rates. We will
send you the question. I want to be sure that it is precise.
Chairman CAMP. If the witnesses would accommodate the
committee in responding to any written requests that they may
receive, we would certainly appreciate that. Obviously not
conveying any proprietary information in any answer----
Mr. LEVIN. No.
Chairman CAMP [continuing]. But that might help clarify an
issue.
Thank you very much.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:19 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]


