- TAX REFORM AND TAX-FAVORED RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAX REFORM AND
TAX-FAVORED RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 17, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-24

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
79-935                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer Safavian, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published
in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the official
version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare both
printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of
converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of April 17, 2012, announcing the hearing...............     2

WITNESSES

Jack VanDerhei, Ph.D., Research Director, Employee Benefit
Research Institute.............................................     7
Judy A. Miller, Chief of Actuarial Issues and Director of
Retirement Policy, American Society of Pension Professionals
and Actuaries..................................................    47
William F. Sweetnam, Principal, Groom Law Group..................    72
David C. John, Senior Research Fellow in Retirement Security and
Financial Institutions, The Heritage Foundation................    81
Randy H. Hardock, Partner, Davis & Harman LLP, testifying on
behalf of the American Benefits Council........................   102

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

ACLI, statement..................................................   145
CFE, statement...................................................   151
cfed, statement..................................................   154
Custodia, statement..............................................   158
ESOP, statement..................................................   162
ICI, statement...................................................   170
Kevin Wiggins, statement.........................................   181
NAGDCA, statement................................................   183
Putnam Funds, statement..........................................   191
Savings Coalition, statement.....................................   201
Scorse, statement................................................   209
Susan Crase, statement...........................................   211

TAX REFORM AND
TAX-FAVORED RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Dave Camp
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Tuesday, April 17, 2012
FC-24

Chairman Camp Announces a Hearing on

Tax Reform and Tax-Favored Retirement Accounts

Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on
possible reforms to certain tax-favored retirement savings plans that
might be considered as part of comprehensive tax reform. This tax
reform hearing--scheduled to occur on tax filing day--will examine one
source of complexity for individuals and employers by reviewing
employer-sponsored defined contribution plans as well as Individual
Retirement Accounts (``IRAs''). The hearing will take place on Tuesday,
April 17, 2012, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 10:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witness only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

Financial planners and advisors have long identified the major
components of retirement security as Social Security, employer-
sponsored plans, and personal savings. Financed by payroll taxes paid
by covered workers and their employers, Social Security provides
monthly cash benefits to retired or disabled workers and their family
members and to the family members of deceased workers. Social Security
is outside the scope of this hearing.

Outside of Social Security, many employers offer employees the
option of participating in employer-sponsored retirement and pension
plans, which generally receive favorable Federal income tax treatment.
Employer-sponsored plans provide for either a defined benefit (which
generally provides retired employees with an annuity) or a defined
contribution (``DC''). Defined benefit pension plans represent an
important source of retirement security, but raise policy questions
that are outside the scope of this hearing. DC plans receive
contributions from either employees or employers or both. Employees
usually own their own accounts, and control the investment of account
assets, thus bearing the risks and rewards of asset performance. In
general, contributions to DC plans are deductible to the employer,
excluded from the employee's income, grow tax-free, and are taxed upon
distribution. DC plans also generally may offer Roth-style accounts;
contributions to such accounts are made on an after-tax basis but
earnings and distributions are tax-free.

Individuals also may be eligible to save through IRAs, which are
similarly tax-advantaged, although with much lower contribution limits.
Traditional IRAs are taxed similarly to 401(k) accounts. Contributions
are deductible from income, earnings are not taxed currently, and
distributions are taxed. Individuals participating in employer-
sponsored plans cannot contribute to a traditional IRA if they exceed
certain income levels. Contributions to Roth IRAs, on the other hand,
are made on an aftertax basis, but earnings and distributions are
excluded from income. Contributions to non-deductible IRAs are included
in income, grow tax-free and are taxed at distribution less the amount
of previously taxed contributions.

There are several types of DC plans, the most common of which are:
401(k) plans for private employers, 403(b) plans for non-profits and
public schools, and 457(b) plans for State and local governments. In
addition to the types of IRAs discussed above, some employers may offer
IRAs through the workplace, including payroll deduction IRAs, SIMPLE
IRAs and SEP IRAs. The proliferation of tax-favored retirement accounts
has occurred as specific needs have led Congress to create new types of
plans with specific rules. Some commentators, however, have questioned
whether the large number of plans with different rules and eligibility
criteria leads to confusion, reducing the effectiveness of the
incentives in increasing retirement savings. In addition, many
commentators have offered ideas for increasing participation in
retirement plans and better targeting the incentives. These ideas range
from simplification and consolidation of existing plans and accounts to
changing the default rules governing whether an employee participates
to additional incentives such as the Savers Credit.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``Retirement
security is one of the most important long-term policy priorities we
face as a Nation. While many argue that the existing menu of tax-
favored retirement plans provides choice and flexibility for families
and employers alike, others have questioned whether the ad hoc
development of retirement savings incentives has led to undue
complexity and inefficiency that reduce the effectiveness of these
incentives. The general principles of tax reform apply to retirement
security as well: American families trying to save should have options
that are simple, fair, and economically efficient.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will consider the current menu of options for
retirement savings--both with respect to employer-based defined
contribution plans and with respect to IRAs. The hearing will explore
whether, as part of comprehensive tax reform, various reform options
could achieve the three goals of simplification, efficiency, and
increasing retirement and financial security for American families.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Tuesday, May 1,
2012. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy,
the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all
House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov.

Chairman CAMP. Good morning. We meet today to continue our
dialogue about what I hope will result in a bipartisan path
forward to reform our Federal income tax system. In recent
weeks much of the discussion about tax reform has centered on
the corporate side, especially after Japan lowered its
corporate rate on April 1st, leaving America with the dubious
distinction of having the highest corporate tax rate in the
industrialized world. It is simply unacceptable that American
employers face such an undue burden at a time when we
desperately need them to get the economy growing and get almost
13 million unemployed people back to work. But as tax filing
day reminds us, only comprehensive tax reform ensures that we
address the needs of American families and all job creators,
regardless of how they are structured, and as such we must
consider the individual side of the Tax Code if we are to
transform today's broken Code from one that impedes to one that
improves prospects for job creation.
Last year the IRS processed 142 million tax returns. They
also received 10.5 million extension forms, at least in part
due to the complex, costly, and time-consuming nature of the
Tax Code. With nearly 4,500 changes in the last decade, 579 of
them in 2010 alone, the Code is far too complex, and this
complexity has led to ever-increasing costs of complying with
the Federal Tax Code.
According to the National Taxpayer Advocate, in 2008,
taxpayers spent $163 billion complying with the individual and
corporate income tax rules. American families are not only
spending more money complying with the Tax Code, they are also
spending more time. Navigating through the tangled web of tax
rules has resulted in taxpayers spending over 6 billion hours
annually to comply with the Code. Whether it is the compliance
and administrative burdens, the impact of temporary and
expiring tax provisions, or the effect of convoluted rules on
financial planning decisions, today's Tax Code is not just
hampering employers, but it is hampering the ability of
individuals and families to plan their finances with reasonable
certainty.
Turning to the topic of today's hearing, tax incentives for
retirement saving, it quickly becomes clear why we are taking
the time to lay the foundation for comprehensive tax reform by
gathering input from experts. As many Americans work to meet
the tax filing deadline, today's testimony reinforces the wide
popularity of these savings vehicles. The overwhelming majority
of American workers with access to a workplace retirement plan
are participating in that plan. According to the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 78 percent of full-time workers have access
to a workplace retirement plan, and 84 percent of those workers
participate in the plan, meaning 66 percent of all full-time
workers participate. The plans benefit taxpayers of all income
levels and from all walks of life.
In 2010, over 70 percent of workers earning $30,000 to
$50,000 participated in an employer-sponsored retirement plan
if such a plan was available to them, according to data from
the Employee Benefit Research Institute. Similarly, IRS data
indicates that 38 percent of those participating in defined
contribution plans make less than $50,000 a year, while almost
three-quarters make less than $100,000 annually.
The proliferation of tax-favored retirement accounts has
occurred as specific needs have led Congress to create new
types of plans with different rules. Some, however, have
questioned whether the large number of plans with different
rules and eligibility criteria leads to confusion, reducing
effectiveness of the incentives and increasing retirement
savings.
In addition, many commentators have offered ideas for
increasing participation in retirement plans and better
targeting the incentives. These ideas range from simplification
and consolidation of existing plans and accounts to changing
the default rules governing whether an employee participates,
to additional incentives such as the saver's credit. As the
Committee continues its work toward comprehensive tax reform,
it is important to keep in mind that these savings vehicles
affect average people who depend on these resources for their
retirement, and we must ensure that we do not inadvertently
take steps that result in unintended consequences that could
threaten the retirement security of ordinary families.
As this Committee considers tax reform, I believe there are
three important principles to keep in mind when evaluating tax-
favored retirement vehicles: one, simplification; two,
increased participation, particularly by low- and middle-income
taxpayers; and three, whether the tax benefits are effectively
and properly targeted.
Regarding the first of these principles, in August 2010 the
President's Economic Recovery Advisory Board, also known as the
Volcker Commission, presented options for simplifying savings
and retirement incentives in their report on tax reform
options. These options are worthy of consideration and
discussion. We also have an expert panel of witnesses before us
today that will evaluate how existing tax rules measure up to
these criteria.
I would like to emphasize that today's hearing isn't about
drawing conclusions, but it is about making sure that as
Congress approaches comprehensive tax reform, that we do so
well armed with information. Washington has spent too much time
in previous years acting first and asking later. That has
proven to be the wrong approach. America's families and job
creators deserve better than a trial-and-error approach to
crafting policy. This is our opportunity to gather input and
get the facts, and I look forward to the discussion.
And I will now yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Levin, for
the purpose of an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome. Thank you for
coming.
Today's hearing is this Committee's initial examination of
what tax reform might mean for a very specific set of tax
provisions, those designed to promote retirement savings. Tax-
preferred retirement savings have benefited tens of millions of
American families. The estimates of exactly how many vary, but
most find that 40 to 50 percent of all workers are covered by
an employer-sponsored retirement plan, some 60 to 70 million
people. Employer-sponsored plans, including defined
contribution and defined benefit plans, private and public
sector, hold assets of $9.3 trillion, held that amount as of
the end of last year, and an additional 49 million households
hold $4.7 trillion in IRAs.
The tax-preferred retirement system is voluntary. Employers
are not required to offer retirement plans, but I think we will
hear today that employers basically understand the current
system and that it works for them in terms of allowing them to
offer retirement benefits to their workers. I note that most of
this Committee agrees with that.
Mr. Gerlach and Mr. Neal have introduced a resolution
essentially in support of our current system. It has been
cosponsored by 115 Members, including 26 Members of this
Committee, reflecting, I think, bipartisan agreement that these
provisions are vital to encouraging retirement savings.
That is not to say the current system cannot be improved.
Of course it can be. Today I believe we will hear about several
ways to do that, including proposals to expand enrollment in
401(k)s and IRAs, and to expand the saver's credit. But what
should be clear is that the basic structure of our current
system should be preserved, and that this structure should not
be repealed to pay for tax reform. Tax reform should approach
retirement savings incentives with an eye toward strengthening
our current system and expanding participation, not as an
opportunity to find revenue.
I think one of our witnesses, Mr. Hardock, summed this up
very nicely in his--in your written testimony, and I quote,
``The retirement savings tax expenditures should not be reduced
or tinkered with to pay for other initiatives, whether inside
or outside of tax reform process. Those funds are the primary
retirement nest egg of millions of American families. They
should not be taxed in order to finance more government
spending, deficit reduction or to offset other tax initiatives,
including lower marginal tax rates.''
Finally, I want to just note that while today's hearing is
focused on defined contribution plans, our retirement security
policy in this country has traditionally been a three-legged
stool. Personal savings constitute just one of those legs. The
other two legs, defined pension benefit pensions and Social
Security, are indeed also vital components of ensuring
Americans' retirement security.
So thank you again, and all of us look forward to your
testimony.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Ranking Member Levin.
Next it is my pleasure to welcome the excellent panel of
witnesses seated before us today. Today's witnesses have
extensive experience studying or working with tax-favored
retirement accounts, and their experience will be helpful as we
take a look at how the complexities in this part of the Tax
Code affect individuals and employers.
First I would like to welcome and introduce Dr. Jack
VanDerhei, the research director at the Employee Benefit
Research Institute in Washington, D.C. Dr. VanDerhei has been
with the Employee Benefit Research Institute since 1988 and has
published more than 100 papers on employee benefits.
Second we will hear from Ms. Judy Miller, the chief of
actuarial issues and director of retirement policy at the
American Society of Pension Professionals and Actuaries. Ms.
Miller has specialized in employer-sponsored retirement
programs for nearly 40 years.
Third we will welcome Mr. Bill Sweetnam, a principal at the
Groom Law Group in Washington, D.C. Mr. Sweetnam specialized in
retirement security at Groom and served as benefits tax counsel
at the George W. Bush Treasury Department.
Fourth we will hear from Mr. David John, a senior research
fellow in retirement security and financial institutions at The
Heritage Foundation. Mr. John has published and testified
extensively on the improvement of retirement security plans.
Finally, we welcome Mr. Randy Hardock, a partner at Davis &
Harman LLP in Washington, D.C. Mr. Hardock is an ERISA and
regulatory compliance specialist who maintains a practice
focused on advising employers and institutions on retirement
and savings issues. Mr. Hardock is testifying today on behalf
of the American Benefits Council.
Thank you all again for your time today. The Committee has
received each of your written statements, and they will be made
a part of the formal hearing record. Each of you will be
recognized for 5 minutes for your oral remarks and, Mr.
VanDerhei, we will begin with you, and you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACK VANDERHEI, PH.D., RESEARCH DIRECTOR, EMPLOYEE
BENEFIT RESEARCH INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. VANDERHEI. Thank you. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today on the issues involved in
tax reform and tax-favored retirement accounts. I am Jack
VanDerhei, research director of the Employee Benefit Research
Institute. EBRI is a nonpartisan institute that has been
conducting original research on retirement and health benefits
for the past 34 years. EBRI does not take policy positions and
does not lobby.
My testimony today draws on extensive research conducted by
EBRI over the last 13 years with its Retirement Security
Projection Model as well as annual analysis of the behavior of
tens of millions of individual participants from tens of
thousands of 401(k) plans dating back in some cases as far as
1996.
Measuring retirement income adequacy is an extremely
important and complex topic, and EBRI started to provide this
type of measurement in the late nineties. Figure 1 of my
written testimony shows that when we modeled the baby boomers
and Gen X-ers earlier this year, 43 to 44 percent of the
households were projected to be at risk of not having adequate
retirement income for basic retirement expenses plus uninsured
healthcare costs. Even though this number is quite large, the
good news is that this is 5 to 8 percentage points lower than
what we found in 2003.
It would be my pleasure to explain in more detail later why
American households are better off today than they were 9 years
ago, even after the financial and real estate market crises in
2008 and 2009, but the short answer is the extremely positive
impact from automatic enrollment in 401(k) plans.
It is difficult to imagine any voluntary strategy more
effective at dealing with retirement income adequacy than
increasing the likelihood of eligibility in a qualified
retirement plan. Figure 5 of my written testimony shows the
importance of defined benefit plans for retirement income
adequacy, and figure 6 shows a similar analysis for 401(k)
plans. We see that the number of future years that workers are
eligible for participation in a defined contribution plan makes
a tremendous difference in their at-risk ratings. Gen X-ers,
for example, with no future years of eligibility, are simulated
to run short of money 61 percent of the time, whereas those
with 20 or more years of future eligibility would experience
the situation only 18 percent of the time.
Knowing the percentage of households that will be at risk
for inadequate retirement income is important for public policy
analysis; however, equally important is knowing just how large
the accumulated deficits are likely to be. The aggregate
deficit number is estimated to be $4.3 trillion for all baby
boomers and Gen X-ers.
While trillion-dollar deficits are useful in focusing
attention on this problem, they do little to help policymakers
understand exactly where these deficits are coming from. For
example, figure 3 of my written testimony provides information
on the retirement savings shortfalls for Gen X-ers. The average
deficit decreases substantially with additional years of future
eligibility in a defined contribution plan, and Gen X-ers
fortunate enough to have at least 20 years of future
eligibility find their average deficits reduced more than 70
percent of the average deficits for those with no future years
of eligibility.
EBRI research has shown repeatedly that the additional type
of 401(k) plan under current tax incentives has the potential
to generate a sum that, when combined with Social Security
benefits, would replace a sizable portion of the employee's
preretirement income for those with continuous coverage. Our
research has also shown that the automatic enrollment type of
401(k) plan, when combined with automatic escalation
provisions, appears to have the potential to produce even
larger retirement accumulations for most of those covered by
such plans.
Recently, however, there have been proposals to modify the
existing tax incentives for defined contribution plans by
either capping annual contributions or changing the before-tax
nature of employee and employer contributions in exchange for a
government matching contribution.
Last September the Senate Finance Committee held a hearing
that focused to a large extent on the second type of proposal.
EBRI presented preliminary evidence at that time of the
possible impact of such a proposal on future 401(k)
accumulations. In recent months results from two new surveys
have allowed EBRI to model these effects even more accurately,
and last month we published our new results showing the
projected changes in 401(k) balance at retirement age due to
expected modifications of plan sponsors and participants in
reaction to that proposal. Figure 11 of my written testimony
shows a 22 percent reduction in 401(k) balances at retirement
for young workers in the lowest income quartile, those most at
risk for insufficient retirement income. Results are even more
dramatic for small plans. Figure 12 shows the average reduction
for low-income employees in these plans is 36 and 40 percent.
In conclusion, given that the financial fate of future
generations of retirees appears to be so strongly tied to
whether they are eligible to participate in employer-sponsored
retirement plans, the logic of modifying either completely or
marginally the incentive structure of employees or employers
for defined contribution plans at this time needs to be
thoroughly examined. The potential decrease of retirement
income resulting from either employer modifications to existing
retirement plans or employees reducing future contributions to
these plans needs to be analyzed carefully when considering the
overall impact of such proposals.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. VanDerhei follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.037

Chairman CAMP. Ms. Miller, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JUDY A. MILLER, CHIEF OF ACTUARIAL ISSUES AND
DIRECTOR OF RETIREMENT POLICY, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF PENSION
PROFESSIONALS AND ACTUARIES, ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA

Ms. MILLER. Thank you, Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin,
and Members of the Committee. I am Judy Miller, chief of
actuarial issues and director of retirement policy for the
American Society of Pension Professionals and Actuaries.
ASPPA's more than 8,000 members work with retirement plans of
employers of all types, but our primary focus is plans for
small business.
Two key features distinguish retirement savings tax
incentives from other incentives in the Code: The deferral
nature of the incentive and the nondiscrimination rules that
make employer-sponsored plans very efficient at delivering
benefits across the income spectrum.
First, unlike other tax incentives, incentives for
retirement savings are deferrals, they are not permanent
exclusions. When employer-paid health benefits are excluded
from income or mortgage interest is deducted, those amounts
will never be taxed. With the traditional retirement savings
account, no income taxes are paid on contributions when they
are added to the account, but those same contributions are
included in taxable income when the amounts are paid from the
plan. In other words, every single dollar that is exempt from
tax now will be subject to income tax in the future. Since most
of those retirement years are outside the government's 5- or
10-year budget window, looking at the so-called tax expenditure
for defined contribution retirement plans on a short-term cash
basis greatly overstates the cost of this incentive. In fact,
new estimates by former JCT staff show that a better measure of
the expenditure for defined contribution plans is more than 50
percent less than the JCT cash-basis estimate over a 5-year
period. So as you consider these issues, let us not forget that
this is a deferral. The amount of revenue you might think you
are raising if you cut retirement savings incentives today is
not real revenue gain. It is a bookkeeping fiction.
The second distinguishing feature is the nondiscrimination
rules that make sure incentives for retirement plans don't
discriminate in favor of the highly paid. The result is this
tax incentive is more progressive than the current progressive
Tax Code. Households making less than $100,000 pay 26 percent
of all income taxes, but they get over 60 percent of the tax
benefit of this incentive for defined contribution plans, and
this analysis actually understates the benefits for these
households because it doesn't recognize that a good part of a
small business owner's so-called tax savings is actually
transferred to workers in the form of contributions. Let me
explain.
A small business owner usually considers a plan when the
businesses finally become profitable. The owner has shown how
setting up a retirement plan can save enough money on their
personal income taxes to pay most of the cost of contributions,
like matching contributions that are going to be required for
employees by nondiscrimination rules. It is a beautiful thing
really. Deferred income taxes for the owner become current
contributions for the workers.
Data clearly shows the key to promoting retirement security
is workplace savings. Over 70 percent of workers earning from
$30- to $50,000 do participate in a plan at work, but less than
5 percent go save on an IRA on their own. Bureau of Labor
Statistics data show 78 percent of full-time workers have
access to a workplace retirement plan, with 84 percent
participating.
Almost 80 percent coverage is a success story. More needs
to be done, but the Committee should build on the success of
the system. We support the auto IRA proposal in Mr. Neal's
bill, for example, as a way to expand workplace savings by
building on the current structure.
Recent tax reform proposals include dramatic cuts in
maximum contribution limits, a cap on the value of the current
year's exclusion for households making over a certain dollar
amount, or conversion of the current year's income exclusion to
a credit. All of these proposals would reduce the incentive for
small business owners to sponsor a workplace retirement plan
and would be a big step in the wrong direction.
I have over 20 years experience actually selling plans to
small business owners. With rare exceptions, the current year's
tax savings was a critical factor and often the only factor
supporting their decision to put in a plan. Now, it is not that
small business owners are selfish. Quite the contrary. But in
real life they aren't sitting on lots of cash. Savings
generated from the retirement plan tax incentives provides cash
to help make contributions required by the nondiscrimination
rules. Reducing the incentive literally reduces the cash the
small business owner has to work with. Now, there is not a
doubt in my mind that reduced incentives would mean fewer plans
and less contributions toward workers' retirement.
One of the questions posed for this hearing is whether or
not there are too many types of plans. The simple answer is no.
A proposal to combine all defined contribution plans into a
single type of plan might look like simplification on paper,
but in practice combining 401(k), 403(b), and 457(b)s into a
single plan would disrupt savings for employees of State and
local governments and other nonprofits. And believe me, when
you are talking to an employer about setting up a plan, options
and flexibility are not the enemy, and one size definitely does
not fit all.
Now, that is not to say simplification isn't needed. For
example, we support the Small Business Pension Promotion Act
sponsored by Representatives Gerlach, Kind and others, and
would be pleased to work with the Committee on these and other
simplifications.
In summary, the road to improved retirement security for
working Americans is expanded workplace savings. Reducing
incentives for small business owners to sponsor retirement
plans is the opposite of what needs to be done.
I would be pleased to discuss these issues further with the
Committee or to answer any questions that you may have. Thank
you very much.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.060

Chairman CAMP. Mr. Sweetnam, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM F. SWEETNAM, PRINCIPAL,
GROOM LAW GROUP, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. SWEETNAM. Chairman Camp and Ranking Member Levin, thank
you for the opportunity to testify at this hearing. I am a
principal in the Groom Law Group, a law firm that focuses
exclusively on employee benefits law. Prior to joining Groom, I
was the benefits tax counsel at the Office of Tax Policy at the
Department of Treasury from 2001 to 2005. I will testify today
about the simplification proposals for retirement savings
accounts that we developed at the Office of Tax Policy and that
were included in the Bush administration's budget proposals for
fiscal years 2004 and 2005. Please note that I am speaking
today on my own behalf and not speaking on behalf of the firm
or any firm client in my testimony.
One of the reasons to simplify, the Code currently provides
various incentives for individual retirement savings, for
employer-based retirement savings, and for other savings
objectives, such as the payment of medical expenses or
educational expenses. All these savings vehicles have different
eligibility requirements, and the amount of the tax benefits
could change based on the individual's income status or his or
her participation in other savings programs.
Employer-provided retirement savings vehicles present their
own level of complexity. Under the Internal Revenue Code, there
are a number of retirement savings vehicles that employers can
adopt, including 401(k) plans, 403(b) plans, and 457(b) plans.
Some rules vary depending on the type of plan, and there are
limitations on the type of entity that can adopt certain types
of plans.
Multiple nondiscrimination rules add complexity to the
administration of these plans. While nondiscrimination rules
are a means of making sure that lower-paid employees share in
the benefits provided under these savings plans, some
commentators argue that the level of complexity is excessive in
relation to the benefits that lower-paid employees receive.
The Administration's 2004 budget proposal outlined a
simplified system of retirement savings, with only three types
of tax-favored vehicles: Lifetime savings accounts, LSAs;
retirement savings accounts, RSAs; and employer retirement
savings accounts, ERSAs.
Lifetime savings accounts. Individuals would be able to
contribute $5,000 on an after-tax basis to an LSA. Amounts
contributed would grow on a tax-free basis. There would be no
income limitations on who could contribute to an LSA.
Distributions from these accounts could be made at any time
regardless of the individual's age and could be used for any
reason by the account owner. Those individuals with limited
means to save might be more willing to contribute to an LSA
because they could access the money saved in the LSA in the
event of an emergency, which is different than making
contributions to a retirement-based system.
Our next was retirement savings accounts, RSAs. Individuals
could contribute $5,000 on an after-tax basis to an RSA, with
account earnings growing on a tax-free basis. Like the LSA, no
income limits would apply to contributions to an RSA. Qualified
distributions, i.e., those made after an individual attained
age 58 or in the event of death or disability, would be tax
free. All other distributions would be considered nonqualified
distributions and would be included in income to the extent
that the distribution exceeds basis.
Finally, employer retirement savings accounts, ERSAs, would
be available to all employees regardless of the type of
employee entity. ERSAs generally would follow the existing
rules for 401(k) plans, including the 401(k) contribution
limit, the catch-up contribution limit for employees age 50 and
above, and the availability of Roth contributions. The
nondiscrimination testing rules would be simplified and would
be eliminated if lower-paid employees had high savings rates
under the plan. Although these simplification efforts did not
advance in Congress, our efforts to review and recommend
comprehensive changes to the current retirement savings system
was, I believe, worthwhile.
Any effort to advance tax reform will likely include a
review of retirement savings initiatives. If one goal of tax
reform is to simplify the current system, I would recommend
that the Committee examine the work of the Office of Tax Policy
during the Bush administration.
Thank you for this opportunity to address the Committee. I
will be happy to answer any of your questions.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Sweetnam.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sweetnam follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.067

Chairman CAMP. Mr. John, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID C. JOHN, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW IN
RETIREMENT SECURITY AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, THE HERITAGE
FOUNDATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. JOHN. Thank you. Chairman Camp and Ranking Member
Levin, I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you this
morning on ways to ensure that all Americans have the
opportunity to save for retirement. I am David John, a senior
research fellow at The Heritage Foundation and also the deputy
director of the Retirement Security Project.
This is an issue that transcends ideological and partisan
differences. For those who have access to a payroll deduction
retirement savings account, the current system works fairly
well. However, millions of Americans still lack that ability.
In theory they can save in an IRA, but as Jack and Judy have
shown, only a maximum of about 5 percent actually do so on a
regular basis. Many of these workers who lack the ability to
save through payroll deduction are part-time employees of
smaller businesses, women, members of minority groups, younger
workers, or all four.
Social Security, even if it was fully funded, only provides
about half the retirement income needs of an average-income
worker. Either we can ensure that everyone has the ability to
save to provide for themselves in retirement, or a Congress in
the near future will face demands for additional taxpayer-paid
benefits. Those demands will be very hard to resist.
Ensuring that all Americans have the opportunity to save
will require some hard decisions. The proposal developed by
Mark Iwry, who was then at Brookings, and I for automatic IRAs
would provide a relatively simple, cost-effective way to
increase retirement security for millions of Americans. The
automatic IRA would enable these Americans to save for
retirement by allowing them to regularly contribute amounts
from their own paychecks to an IRA. The plan is simple for both
employers and employees. Employees would be automatically
enrolled into their employer's automatic IRA. Automatic
enrollment is a process that has proven to build participation,
which employees like, and under which employees have complete
control ultimately of their own retirement savings decisions.
To avoid confusion and to keep costs low, all automatic
IRAs would offer three, and only three, investment choices. For
employers, the plan is also very simple. They would be asked to
do the same thing they now do, to withhold income and other
taxes from an employee's paycheck, except that the money would
go into an IRA instead of to the Treasury. Employer
contributions would neither be required nor permitted.
Employers would not be required to comply with ERISA rules or
other types of regulations that apply to 401(k)s or a variety
of other things. These simplifications eliminate almost all the
costs associated with an automatic IRA, but the plan also
includes a tax credit designed to cover any remaining start-up
and administrative costs.
While the automatic IRA is especially valuable for new
savers, it would be equally valuable for older savers who
change jobs from a company that offers a 401(k) plan to a
smaller company that currently has no type of retirement
savings plan. Right now these workers stand to have gaps, which
cripple their ability to build retirement security. However,
under the automatic IRA, they could roll their 401(k)-type
accounts into the automatic IRA and continue savings. That
would also work if they went to a larger company.
This is not a partisan or an ideological proposal. The
concept has been endorsed by a number of varied publications,
such as National Review and the New York Times. It has been
endorsed by significant conservative and liberal officials and
other types of officials.
Earlier this year Representative Richard Neal introduced
H.R. 4049, the Automatic IRA Act of 2012. While The Heritage
Foundation, as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, does not and cannot
endorse any legislation, let me say that the policy contained
in his bill would significantly improve our retirement savings
system.
My written statement also discusses the value of
simplifying the current confusing series of retirement savings
accounts so that ordinary Americans and employers can better
understand them. In addition, my statement discusses two modest
proposals, first to use tax information to encourage taxpayers
to consolidate their retirement accounts if they desire to do
so, and second to include Social Security on an annual 401(k)
or IRA statement so that the account owner has a complete
picture of their expected total retirement income in time to
make a change so that they could actually increase savings and
improve their potential outcome. It also discusses the
desirability of allowing multiple employers to share a
retirement savings platform, and a thought or two about the tax
treatment of retirement savings. I would be happy to discuss
them at any point.
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to testify. I look
forward to your questions.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. John follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.086

Chairman CAMP. Mr. Hardock, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF RANDY H. HARDOCK, PARTNER, DAVIS &
HARMAN LLP, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN
BENEFITS COUNCIL, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. HARDOCK. Thank you for the opportunity to speak with
you today on behalf of the American Benefits Council. I am an
attorney with over 30 years experience specializing in
retirement plans. I served as Benefits Tax Counsel at the
Treasury Department and was the Senate Finance Committee's tax
counsel responsible for retirement issues during consideration
of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
This Committee, the Ways and Means Committee, has been
responsible for every major improvement in the retirement
system. That includes the bipartisan Retirement Security Act
passed in 2001, the legislation that established the successful
framework for defined contribution plans and IRAs that is still
in place today. That 2001 bill was cosponsored by you, Chairman
Camp, by you, Ranking Member Levin. We thank you both for that.
It was cosponsored by every senior Republican still serving on
this Committee and by 10 of the 15 Democrats now serving on
this Committee. It was cosponsored by Speaker Boehner, Minority
Leader Pelosi, Majority Leader Cantor, and Minority Leader
Hoyer. Promoting retirement savings is an area where
Republicans and Democrats have long been able to agree, and we
urge you to continue your support in the context of tax reform.
The current retirement system is working. It is working for
the almost 80 percent of full-time employees with access to
retirement plans at work. It works for the almost 100 million
Americans who have saved through workplace retirement plans or
IRAs. So, the first and most important principle to consider
when you discuss tax reform and the retirement system is do no
harm.
In 2012, 80 percent of households with defined contribution
plans said that tax savings were a big incentive to contribute.
Almost half said they would not contribute at all to any
retirement savings if it weren't for their defined contribution
plan.
Today, coverage and nondiscrimination requirements, the
saver's credit, and various other rules ensure that the
benefits in defined contribution plans are delivered fairly
across all income groups. Current rules also provide balanced
incentives that encourage business owners to voluntarily
maintain retirement plans and encourage employee participation.
Any major restructuring of the system that reduces or tries
to reallocate existing retirement tax incentives is a gamble we
cannot afford to take when dealing with the retirement security
of working and retired Americans. Reducing retirement savings
tax incentives to pay for other initiatives would be
counterproductive. Proposals that appear to increase short-term
Federal tax revenue from changes in the retirement savings
incentives generally get those additional revenues because
individuals are saving less for retirement. Making matters
worse, as Ms. Miller indicated, short-term revenue gain from
changes in the retirement incentives under the current budget
rules is an illusion because when a worker saves less money
today, it will mean smaller distributions and less tax revenue
when the person retires.
Just like the short-term budget scoring conventions, the
tax expenditure scorekeeping also does not paint an accurate
picture. The bulk of today's estimated retirement tax
expenditure comes from savings that are already in retirement
plans and IRAs, not from new contributions. So that big tax
expenditure number cannot be turned into big new tax revenues
without retroactively taxing the existing retirement savings
nest eggs of Americans. That action would rightly be seen as a
breach of trust by those workers who contributed (and those
employers who contributed) on the assumption that this money
would grow tax free and be taxed only at distribution.
Still, the retirement system can and should be improved for
all Americans, and especially those with lower incomes who find
it most difficult to save. Tax reform offers the opportunity to
do just that--by building on the existing system, not by
tearing it apart. Today, employer-sponsored plans make
effective use of payroll deduction, provide fiduciary
oversight, and typically include an employer contribution. More
Americans need access to those workplace retirement savings
plans, and all Americans should be encouraged to save at higher
levels.
One area that deserves particular attention is automatic
enrollment and automatic increase strategies. Those are plan
designs where workers must opt out of plan participation rather
than opt in and where the default contribution levels are
increased each year. These plan designs increase participation
and savings rates significantly, especially for low-income,
younger, and minority workers. More employers are adopting
these designs each year, but greater incentives should be
considered to accelerate that trend.
We also believe much could be done to reduce the costs of
plan administration. For example, regulations on delivery of
required notices should be brought into the 21st century to
better accommodate electronic delivery.
We stand ready to work with the Members of this Committee
to assist this Committee in continuing its long history of
promoting retirement savings. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hardock follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.102

Chairman CAMP. Thank you all for that excellent testimony.
Today is tax filing day, and it is a deadline which
Americans have to spend millions of hours preparing their taxes
because our system is a complex one, and not only is compliance
complicated, but long-term financial planning is complicated as
well because of our Code. And I would like to just explore and
ask each of you how the Tax Code is performing in the area of
retirement security. Employers who want to offer a retirement
plan, as many of you--retirement savings option, as you
mentioned, they have a choice, as many of you said, of many
different proposals out there with different rules. And
certainly individuals trying to save for retirement have one
set of rules; individuals trying to save for health have
another system with another set of rules; and families trying
to save for education also have many options available, each
with its own set of rules.
But my question is, should the system--and why don't I
start with Mr. Hardock and go down the line. But should the
system of existing tax-advantaged retirement savings, should
those be consolidated to make it easier for individuals to
save, if you have an opinion on that?
Mr. HARDOCK. Most Americans that have retirement plans are
quite happy with the plans they have. The fact is that plan
participants and most employers do not choose between a 401(k)
plan or 403(b) plan or 457 plan; they simply have one. Those
choices are not particularly difficult, and when they do come
into play, they are made by employers.
What you get if you try to consolidate is you make everyone
reconsider and everyone amend their plans. That can be very
disruptive, disruptive for the individuals involved and
expensive for the employers that have to do that. I would add
that the members of the American Benefits Council are also very
concerned about any proposals that would consolidate retirement
savings options with savings vehicles for other purposes like
education or health. Most people save for a purpose, and
confusing that retirement savings message could be very
counterproductive.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. John.
Mr. JOHN. I understand what my colleague just said, but the
fact is when we talked to multiple small businesses and the
like, the number of different types of savings plans and,
frankly, their rather confusing numbers and names cause a
fairly great anxiety among small businesses that were
considering starting some sort of a plan, especially the ones
that were fairly early in that process. So something that would
consolidate, something that would simplify, not the least of
which--as I say, it is a simple marketing technique--just
changing the name of the blasted things--I mean, what is a
401(k) when it comes right down to it--would be exceedingly
useful.
There is another aspect to this, though, which is that you
referred to savings for different things, and as you pointed
out, there are a wide variety of different types of advantages
or Tax Code treatments of this. It would actually be much
simpler if you just created all real savings the same way and
exempted it from income without necessarily having to have one
level for a 401(k), one for college savings, one for various
and sundry other savings. Savings that is not consumption is
actually an exceedingly valuable thing and should be
encouraged. So to the point that you look at simplification, it
is not just the matter of the accounts, it is the matter of
savings itself.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Sweetnam.
Mr. SWEETNAM. Thank you.
Well, let me first focus in on the individual retirement
savings vehicles. First off, I think one of the things that we
tried to do in the Administration's proposal was to eliminate
the income limits, because when you have those income limits
you really weren't quite sure whether you were eligible to make
a contribution to an IRA. In fact, if any of you remember prior
to the income limits being put on, banks used to stay open on
tax day until midnight in order to accept people's IRA
contributions. There used to be lines in banks to make IRA
contributions on April 15th. Once we put in the income limits,
those lines went away. So I think that was one of the things
that we tried to do in our proposal.
The second thing that we tried to do, and I think David
alluded to this, was with our RSA and LSA proposal. Our LSA
proposal was a means for people to save for any reason and to
pull money out of those accounts to use for any reason.
I think one of the things that people have to realize is
that people's savings needs change over time. Younger people
may be thinking about savings, but they may not be thinking
about retirement savings. I have a 30-year-old son now, and he
is doing saving, but what is he saving for? He is saving to buy
that house, which I think would be a really good thing. But
when he gets a little bit older, he is going to be saving for
retirement. What we tried to do with our LSA proposal was to
give lower-income people or people who were at the margins of
savings a way to have a tax-favored vehicle in order to have
savings.
On the retirement side, I think one of the things that you
have seen--I have probably been practicing as long as Randy,
and what we have seen over the years is Congress legislating to
make the differences between the various types of retirement
plans less and less and less, and so that what we were trying
to do in our proposal was just take that final step. We had all
of the plans have the same contribution amounts. We said, let
us just take the final step and eliminate the various Code
differences between the two. But Congress has been going that
way over the last few years.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Ms. Miller.
Ms. MILLER. Thank you.
I would like to focus on the employer side of this, and I
think it actually ties into the individual, too, in that when
you are talking to a small employer, it really isn't that
confusing. I mean, if you poll somebody that is not thinking
about a retirement plan and say, here is this, this, this, but
if you are actually talking to an employer saying, do you want
to put in a retirement plan, you are really saying, do you want
to have an IRA-based plan, or do you want to have one that has
a trust that your employees are more likely to leave the money
in? You know, if you put your money into a 401(k) for them,
they can't pull it out right away. If you put it into a SIMPLE
plan, they might run off with it. So you are drawing those
distinctions. Then you are really talking about how much can
you afford and what would you like to do.
This is where I get concerned about the proposals for
individual savings in that right now we have the $5,000 IRA
limit, and then you can go up to $10,000 for a SIMPLE plan, and
then you can go up to $17,000 for the individual deferral in a
qualified retirement plan. So there really are rewards for
stepping up and providing better benefits, and I think that is
why the system really has been working so well.
If you have--and there is a proposal for, I am sorry, a
deferral-only safe harbor of like 8- or $10,000. What happens
is if you have somebody that can put $5,000--a small business
owner can put $5,000 in an IRA, $5,000 in an LSA. Suddenly
there is absolutely no reason in the world in terms of what
they can save on a tax-favored basis for them to put in a
SIMPLE plan. Right now they have the $5,000 IRA. If they want
to put in $10,000, they are going up to a SIMPLE plan. So you
have to be careful that what you do on the individual savings
side doesn't disrupt the structure that really works pretty
well on the individual employer side.
And I think when you look at it from an employer's
perspective in selling them a plan, there are options, there
are things you can do as opposed to the IRA charts at the
beginning of Bill's testimony where it is basically telling you
when you can't do something. With the employer side, it is here
is what you can do, here are your options. So it is very
positive on the employer's side.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. VanDerhei.
Mr. VANDERHEI. Thank you.
While EBRI doesn't take positions on proposals of this
sort, I find a lot to agree with in what Randy and Judy just
said, and I think from a rather abstract viewpoint, if you look
at what is happening with respect to employers, you would
introduce a whole new set of nondiscrimination testing if you
did something like this.
The other thing you have to keep in mind is many employees
are very targeted in what they are saving for, and I think what
you would need to keep in mind is if you make it rather
amorphous as far as an overall savings target, it is going to
be much more difficult for any individual to find out whether
or not they are basically on track for a specific retirement
income.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Levin may inquire.
Mr. LEVIN. Well, thank you very, very much for your
testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I think this is a hearing that has
significance for tax reform for this issue and beyond, because
while there are some differences among you, and while I think
everyone believes that we can improve the system, I think your
testimony issues a warning to those who propose to eliminate
all tax expenditures or those who equate tax expenditures
loosely with tax loopholes. Because this tax expenditure, I
think, is not a loophole. It is a policy. And some have
essentially said, let us start by eliminating them all and go
on from there, and some propose getting down to a certain
point, assuming the elimination of all tax expenditures. And do
any of you favor eliminating this tax expenditure? No.
Mr. HARDOCK. That is a big no from this end of the table.
Mr. SWEETNAM. No.
Ms. MILLER. No.
Mr. LEVIN. And I am not sure that this is quite the way to
put it, but, Mr. Hardock, you said here after talking about the
importance of retirement savings, you say for that reason the
first and most important principle you urge this Committee to
consider in the context of tax reform is to do no harm. I am
not quite sure I would put it that way. But maybe as to this
area I think that is true, and the same is true in other areas
relating to policies embraced in tax expenditures.
So maybe I will leave it at that except to say, Mr.
Sweetnam, I think there is a distinction between what you save
for--I am all in favor of supporting, for example, savings for
education purposes and for buying a house. I think the
proposals to eliminate the present provision for purchasing a
house and homeownership, again eliminating that without
reference to any income level or anything else, is a mistake.
But I do think you all feel that the retirement structure
is more or less working, while we still need to improve it. I
think we need to be careful not to lump everything together and
lose the emphasis on having a strong Social Security system,
which is added to by savings for retirement. I think we need
that combination, and I think the point we want to drive home
(you mentioned that the percentage now saved for retirement has
improved a bit) is that we need to try to build that up not by
eliminating Social Security, but by adding on to it.
So I really think your testimony has importance today for
this issue and all other issues relating to tax reform. We need
to look at it, but with care, and not with such broad strokes
that we would sweep away a system like retirement savings that
is working, basically working. Thank you.
Mr. SWEETNAM. May I respond?
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Well, I will do that on somebody
else's time. I do want to say, though, that I think we are
having a very good discussion today. I do think it is important
to point out that I don't think there is anyone who is
proposing eliminating this area. The closest thing that came to
it was Simpson-Bowles, the President's Commission on Fiscal
Responsibility, which capped this, did not eliminate this, and
there is no proposal to do such a thing itself.
Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Chairman, let me just say, in the chart that
is on page 29 of Simpson-Bowles, it has a number of
alternatives----
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. LEVIN [continuing]. Including eliminating all tax
expenditures.
Chairman CAMP. Yes, and that is one reason why I voted
against the Simpson-Bowles Commission, as did Mr. Ryan.
So Mr. Herger, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. John, I want to thank you for your work you put in on
an automatic IRA proposal. As someone who comes from a small
business background, I know the first question that many small
business owners will have about any kind of mandated automatic
IRA is what is this going to cost me. Would automatic IRAs
create any significant new costs or burdens on employers who
offer the IRAs?
Mr. JOHN. No, it actually would not. The way that it is
structured, it is simple enough that most employers that are
covered with this, roughly 97 percent according to studies by a
variety of firms, actually already use some form of payroll-
processing software or an outside payroll processor, and for
those, having had many discussions with both of those
industries, this would just simply be a new module that would
be added.
Plus the fact there is a tax credit. The tax credit has two
components to it, one part which applies for 2 years which
would cover any capital costs of setting up an auto IRA, and
the other, which would last for 6 and could be extended if
Congress chose to do so during that period of time, would
provide a certain amount to cover the costs of actually putting
employees on and off the system. It is a very simple, easy-to-
understand system, and we found--a major insurance company did
some market research with employers for us, and they found that
the more they discussed it with the employers, the stronger the
employer support for the proposal went up.
Mr. HERGER. Do the rest of you agree with this or have any
additional thoughts?
Ms. MILLER. I definitely would agree with that. Even for
those that don't use a current payroll provider, we have
members who are very interested in providing this. An employer
could do it strictly over the phone. The credits should more
than cover any cost incurred by the employer.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. John, I understand your proposal would utilize private
financial institutions to administer the automatic IRAs. In the
past there has been proposals to create personal retirement
accounts that would be administered by the Social Security
Administration, and some might argue that it would be simpler
for small businesses if this could be tied in to the existing
payroll tax withholding process. Could you comment on the pros
and cons of these different approaches?
Mr. JOHN. Sure. This is a very different--this is
completely separate from the proposal in 2005 and before to set
up personal retirement accounts in Social Security. There is a
private sector funds management industry which works
exceedingly well. We don't see any reason to supplant it by
government entity for that.
We do have the ability if the private sector provider so
chooses to have what is called an R bond, which is a retirement
savings account. It is somewhat similar to the I bond, which
has been a U.S. Treasury savings account for a number of years
now, and that would allow small savers to accumulate roughly
$5,000, but at that point then that would be rolled into the
private sector. We feel that the private sector is going to be
more innovative, it is going to create more jobs, and frankly
it will do a better job of keeping costs lower.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Tiberi.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing today and for your leadership on these issues as
well as overall tax reform. As someone who has been interested
in pension and retirement issues since I have been here, I look
forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman, and others on this
issue.
I think strongly that we need to make sure that Americans
have the tools and the education necessary to feel as though
they can make the right choices with respect to retirement, and
one of our panelists did a study with the Employee Benefits
Research Institute, and in that study, Mr. VanDerhei, only 14
percent of Americans are confident they will be able to afford
a comfortable retirement, and more than half of all workers
reported they have not calculated how much they will need to
live during retirement. And you are nodding your head in
agreement. Those are pretty unbelievable numbers.
I find out there--anecdotally, I have a friend of mine who
is a lawyer who took a 401(k) plan and put it into an IRA, and
then ultimately put his IRA into a real estate investment that
he has a third party, pretty sophisticated and doing really
well according to him, versus others who have not quite an
understanding of how much--it has been talked about before--how
much they can put in because of the contribution limits or what
they can put it in.
My question to all of you, and I will start here on my
right, is whether it is simplification, whether it is reform,
whatever it is--how do we get more Americans to change that 14
percent number so they have a better understanding, and can
make better choices, and can have that--so we can have that 14
percent number be something substantial, like 75 percent of
Americans feel they comfortably can live in retirement and
understand what they need in retirement? How do we get there as
policymakers? Starting here.
Mr. HARDOCK. Well, I like to think of the American people
as falling into three buckets. There are the folks who really
aren't going to save no matter what you do. If you force them
to save, they will borrow more money somewhere else. There are
the folks I call the squirrels, who will save no matter what.
That is my mother. And then there is almost everyone else,
certainly including me, that want to do the right thing, know
they need to save, doesn't know quite how to do it, doesn't
want the government telling them how to do it, but want to do
the right thing. Strategies like auto-enrollment and auto-
escalation send a signal to that vast group of people that
these are the levels you should be achieving to get to
retirement security.
So, earlier Mr. Sweetnam talked about his son who felt that
saving for his first home was more important. Well, my son is
25 years old. He asked me, I want to buy a home, but I have
this 401(k) plan at work, and there is a match. I said, put the
money in the 401(k) plan first. And that goes back to the issue
I mentioned earlier, people save for a purpose--for retirement.
We need to set up structures and incentives that let people
know how much to save, and we will see Mr. VanDerhei's savings
numbers for the Gen X-ers and others start to go up even more.
We need to start them young, get them involved and get them
into the habit of saving, ultimately changing the culture of
saving in this country.
Mr. TIBERI. Thanks.
Mr. John.
Mr. JOHN. I actually have four thoughts on this. They will
repeat, and I imagine you are going to hear much of the same
thing here. Number one is obviously everyone has to have
access. If you don't have access, we can talk all we want to
about doing it on your own, but 95 percent of people don't.
Second is, of course, start young. That is absolutely
crucial with that.
Another thing is the auto structures, auto-enrollment, and
particularly auto-escalation. And one of the things that this
Committee can do as part of its discussion of tax
simplification, tax reform, is to look at the 3 percent default
rate for auto-enrollment. There are a number of studies out
there that show that people will have precisely the same
participation rate if it is 5 percent, 6 percent and the like
to start. People think that they are doing the right thing, and
that 3 percent, since that is the way it starts, that must be
the right amount for them to save, and they find themselves in
a trap later on.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Sweetnam.
Mr. SWEETNAM. One of the things that we were looking at
when we did our retirement simplification proposals is that we
thought that we were trying to harness the industry to do a lot
more advertising with regard to savings, and one of the things
that we looked at was by eliminating the income restrictions
for IRAs, that people--that there would be advertisements to
get people to come in and do this.
You know, we actually saw this happen when Congress enacted
the Roth IRA. I was working on Senator Roth's staff at that
time. And when the Roth IRA was enacted, we saw for all
different types of IRAs additional savings because everybody
was promoting it.
Mr. TIBERI. All right.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
I see we are over the time. Mr. McDermott is recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think this is a very important hearing to have to talk
about, and I agree, Mr. Tiberi and I probably come at the same
concern over having people's security. But I fly back and forth
from Seattle, where United Airlines has its largest base, its
oldest base. Most of the flight attendants are about 55 to 60
years old, and one of them told me a story, and I would like
you guys to respond, and ladies to respond to this.
Her husband worked for a big bank in Seattle, Washington
Mutual, and one day they closed the bank, and he lost his
entire 401(k). Boom, gone. All gone because it was invested in
the bank. Right? Because he was required to invest it in the
bank. Now she flies for United Airlines. They have gone into
bankruptcy twice, and each time they go into bankruptcy, the
first thing the bankruptcy judge does in response to the
company's pleadings is to scrape off the retirement. So this
woman who has flown for United Airlines for 29 years now has a
guarantee of $231 a month from the PBGC on top of her Social
Security.
Now, here are middle-class Americans who did everything
right, and they got clobbered by the system, and I want to hear
that this automatic system that we are going to enroll
everybody in is going to protect those people. This woman said
to me, I and my husband are going to work until we die because
we have nothing but Social Security.
Ms. MILLER. I would like to take a first stab at that,
because the situations you described are just horrible, and
Congress has acted to prevent a company forcing an employee to
put all their money into employer stock.
That is no longer permissible. And that was--you know, the
ability was phased out. And you guys did a great job on that.
So hopefully that one won't happen again.
I think the key on automatic enrollment is really all the
defaults, and one of those defaults is investment. And in PPA,
that was----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Let me stop you, though. You heard Mr.
Tiberi talk about how many people know how to invest or
understand, 14 percent.
Ms. MILLER. Right. Uh-huh.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So how in the world can anybody sit up here
and sensibly believe that we can design a system that says we
are going to give all of you a choice, but only 14 percent of
them understand what in the world they are in?
Ms. MILLER. Most people don't take advantage of that
choice; they will stay where you put them. If you automatically
enroll them, they will stay in your default investment. So I
think the key is having a secure and appropriate default
investment. And again, there were changes made in PPA, and I
think there has been a recent study----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Does that mean then, that the company, the
small business or whatever, has certain places they could put
the money that is safe? They will be restricted as well? Or can
they do whatever they want?
Ms. MILLER. They choose the provider, but the type of
investment that is the default investment is defined. It is
like a target-date fund. Or you could, frankly, that is
something that you could be considering, what should that be?
But there is ample evidence that whatever you say the default
investment can be is where most people are going to end up
putting their money.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So the automatic investment or the automatic
enrollment would put it into something that is judged to be--by
whom? Who would say that this is a safe investment? Because I
would like to know who those people are.
Ms. MILLER. You define the parameters in terms of the
individual companies.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. The Treasury will ultimately put the
blessing, they will bless the company that is going to make
these investments; right?
Ms. MILLER. Right now, it would be the plan sponsor or if
you are in--would be the one that is choosing their investment
advisor, and the investment advisor, if they hire an investment
advisor, would accept fiduciary responsibility--would have
fiduciary responsibility for choosing a company that provides--
--
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Who is on the hook if they made a bad
choice?
Ms. MILLER. The fiduciary that is responsible for that
decision.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So any investment counselor would then be
responsible for making the patient--the patient, I am a
doctor--would be responsible for making the client whole?
Ms. MILLER. Well, in theory. You know, fortunately, there
aren't very many situations--now that employer stock is off the
table--there aren't many situations where you have a company
that the investment has gone down to zero. When you do have
responsible people choosing investment providers, it is not--
there are--horror stories are more and more rare.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And the flight attendants, I should just
tell them tough luck; $231 is what you are going to get?
Ms. MILLER. The defined benefit system is a whole other----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It seems to me they ought to be connected
somehow. Or we should take away the ability of the companies to
take off the pension at bankruptcy.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Time has expired.
Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Chairman Camp, for holding this
very important hearing.
As we look at tax reform and the very equally important
area of retirement security, I have taken away a few things
just from all of this discussion: Number one being that,
obviously, we need to look at how you can promote personal
responsibility and savings. Second, whatever we do, I certainly
appreciate the adage of, first do no harm how. So how do you
avoid major disruptions? And thirdly, can we simplify yet
maintain flexibility.
And so, as I am trying to think through this, I remember
when I was running a small medical practice and dealing with
some of these issues after a full day in the operating room and
focusing on the clinical side of my practice, oftentimes
individuals come in to work for you, and they have worked
somewhere else. They have a retirement account, multiple
retirement accounts. And yet--and they may also have an IRA on
top of that. And there are a variety of rules that govern this.
And I remember having to make phone calls to figure out, how do
you incorporate somebody into your business structure when they
have had these other outside arrangements in the past.
Talk to me about the rules, the complexity that these rules
really present to a business owner trying to work with incoming
employees and is this an area that we can really simplify? Any
of you, please.
Mr. HARDOCK. I will just start by saying that the problem
you describe has been around for a while. The changes made in
2001 on portability of assets allowed individuals to combine,
when they switched jobs, assets from one employer plan to the
next employer's plan--or an IRA to consolidate those assets in
one plan. That was a major improvement and really streamlined
the process and made it possible for a business owner to take
those assets in for new hires.
It is still complicated because you have items that may
have been contributed as pre-tax dollars and others as post-
tax. Those are issues we have to deal with no matter what
because they exist today and you can't take away someone's
pretax treatment or post-tax treatment. But we have made
enormous strides since 2001 in improving those rules.
Ms. MILLER. Yes, I think there has been an awful lot of
progress made. And I also think that if you look at the options
that are available, these days you are more likely to have
somebody that comes into your practice that also had a 401(k)
plan at their other arrangement. And so there is a little more
simplicity because I think sometimes when we talk about
consolidation, then you are talking about a 403(b), 457,
401(k); in the medical practice, maybe there was a 403(b), but
as Randy said, the rules have been simplified to make that an
easier process.
But in most instances, you now will have somebody coming
from a similar type plan to your current arrangement. And I
think that really smoothes it. I do think--in our written
testimony, there are some comments on rules that can be changed
that make it a little easier for small business to not get
themselves in trouble. And I think we should get rid of those
rules that trip people up. Frankly, they are rules that apply
whether it was an ERSA or 401(k). Just plain commonsense stuff.
Mr. JOHN. And if I may add, the real serious problem is the
fact that people forget to combine. I have actually an IRA that
was rolled over from TSP 20-plus years ago, and I keep meaning
to roll it into Heritage's plan, but I have yet to do that.
What we see is we have a significant number of people who lose
their accounts, especially over the years, whether employers go
out of business, the providers change and the like. And there
is some suggestion in my written testimony about a way to use
tax information to enable people to find their lost accounts
and to encourage them to combine them.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
One last question. Are there incremental steps that would
make it easier for employers to offer annuity options as part
of a defined contribution plan?
Mr. SWEETNAM. Well, I think that this is something that the
IRS and the Treasury Department are currently looking at. And I
think that it has been something that the policymakers are
really looking to give people that ability to address, to use
an annuity.
Now I am not speaking for the current Treasury Department
or the IRS, but I think what they have been trying to do is to
eliminate some of the difficulties under the current law to go
and to move into an annuity product. And that is something that
I think policymakers have been looking at over a number of
years.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for holding this hearing, and thank you to all
the panel for participating. I have a question for you, Ms.
Miller. The President's 2013 budget proposal includes a
proposal capping certain individuals' itemized deductions to 28
percent.
Ms. MILLER. Right.
Ms. JENKINS. And the limitation on deductions under the
proposal include the exclusion or above-the-line deduction for
pretax employee contributions to defined contribution plans and
contributions to traditional IRAs. Given that the tax break for
retirement savings is a deferral, not a permanent write-off,
wouldn't limiting deduction on the front end but not when the
amount is distributed result in double taxation? And what are
your thoughts on how the President's proposal would affect
retirement savings rates and also on small business owners'
decision to set up or maintain retirement plans for their
employees?
Ms. MILLER. I appreciate that question.
I was very disappointed to see retirement savings included
in that proposal because you are right, it would be double
taxation if you have someone who--because this is a deferral.
So if you have someone who is at a 31 percent marginal rate and
you are giving them 28 percent cap on that, then they are
paying that 3 percent now. But when they pull it out, there is
no special accounting. I am not saying there should be because
that would be a wreck. But when you pull it out, they are
paying taxes on it again. So it really literally is double
taxation.
And if you are being honest when you are talking to an
employer, why would they want to put themselves in that
position? So I do think it would be harmful and anything that
reduces the tax incentive for a small business owner, to me, I
think will discourage coverage.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Sweetnam, your testimony mentioned that following the
Bush administration's proposal simplifying this area, many
interested parties were concerned about the proposal resulting
in fewer savings opportunities being available to small
businesses, causing them to opt out of offering an employer-
based savings vehicle. You also mentioned that the 2005 budget
proposal addressed some of those concerns. Can you just
elaborate for us on what you heard during your proposal and
what changes you made to the 2005 budget? And if Congress were
to move forward to meaningful reforms, what are some of the
transition rules that you might advise us to keep in mind?
Mr. SWEETNAM. Well, the two big things that were problems,
one, in 2004, we had the LSA and the RSA contribution amount at
$7,500, and we reduced it to $5,000. And what we heard from
some of the policy folks, particularly ASPPA being one, was
that by having that high of a tax-favored savings amount, some
smaller businesspeople might say, well, you know what, I can
put in $7,500 in my LSA, $7,500 in my RSA. I have sheltered
everything; I don't need any further savings through an
employer-provided plan.
The other thing that we did was in our ERSA proposal, we
tried to simplify some of the nondiscrimination rules. And one
of the things that we did was we eliminated all the various
testing methodologies that are currently available, thinking
that that was simplification. Well, as I think Judy has said
before, one person's simplification is another person's
opportunity to make various changes. And so we listened to them
and what we did was we just reduced the general complexity of
the test. We didn't reduce some of the opportunities that small
businesses would have in order to create more flexible types of
plans.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I have had a long-standing issue and I think
pretty strong credentials in this area. Just to recount
quickly, I worked with Bill Thomas before he was Chairman of
this Committee on raising IRS rates. As you recall, that was
not a favorite of Mr. Rostenkowski at the time. And I carried
the RSA proposal for the Clinton administration with Bob Rubin,
recalling that the Clinton proposal in terms of differentiating
itself from the Bush proposal was, the Clinton RSA proposal was
as an addition to Social Security; the Bush RSA proposal was as
a substitute for Social Security.
And I have carried this auto IRA proposal for a long period
of time. Now, I introduced this bill 5 years ago, and at least
three of the panelists I know have already endorsed it, and I
suspect the other two have some sympathy for it. Now this
proposal would raise the national savings rate by nearly $8
billion a year. Endorsed by Brookings and now with hard work
from David John and The Heritage Foundation, we have developed
this proposal. I have kidded David many times; it is not every
day that a Massachusetts Democrat's legislation is endorsed by
The Heritage Foundation. We have done just that.
Let me tell you who else supports this legislation: The
AARP, Latinos for a Secure Retirement, the Black U.S. Chamber
of Commerce, Putnam Prudential, Natixis. And I must say with
some grave disappointment, since Phil English left, I can't get
one Republican to sign on to this legislation.
Mr. Herger I thought was headed in the right direction. He
was headed in the right direction as he began to question Mr.
John. He couldn't bring himself to say it was the Neal
proposal, but came very close to going to the altar without
saying ``I do.''
Now, David, why does Heritage support this proposal?
Mr. JOHN. Heritage supports this for two reasons. And we
have enjoyed working with you over the years. Although, for
some of my colleagues, it has been a little--I tell some of
them I just went to a bar.
I have also enjoyed working with your staff, both Melissa
initially and Kara Getz now.
Conservatives support the auto IRA for two very good
reasons. Number one is that savings changes behavior. It takes
people and it brings them closer to the community. It makes
them more future-oriented and makes a variety of cultural
changes that are very important.
A second one which is equally important, crucial that every
American has the opportunity to save, is the alternative: If we
don't have a retirement savings system that applies to all and
allows people to start at one company and move to another and
continuously save, inevitably, we are going to see the data
that Jack had initially, where people do not have sufficient
retirement savings, and they are going to come to Congress, and
they are going to say: Please, sir, we need more taxpayer
benefits. We don't have the money for that right now.
Mr. NEAL. Also endorsed by The Brookings Institution, that
is important.
Ms. Miller, could you tell me why you have endorsed the IRA
proposal that I have offered?
Ms. MILLER. Yes, we are very supportive because it really
does build on the current employer structure. And we think once
employers--first of all, people need to have an opportunity to
save at work and you just can't do that without having the
employer involved. When you get over that hurdle, then we feel
that once employers are used to doing payroll deductions and
feel comfortable with that, it will be easier to approach them
and say, listen, you have been doing this; can you afford to do
a little more? Maybe a simple plan would work for you or a
401(k). And once they are in the system, they will more
comfortable moving up and providing some employer contributions
as well.
Mr. NEAL. It would require no matching contributions from
the employer.
Ms. MILLER. It would require no matching contributions from
the employer. And just the way--you know, 30 years ago, it was
a different story, but right now with the development of
electronic systems, it would be so easy and so little trouble
for the employer to make this work.
Mr. NEAL. Particularly good for the small employer.
Mr. Hardock, why do you like the proposal?
Mr. HARDOCK. The good thing about the proposal is that it
sends a signal that we need to get more employers into auto-
enrollment and auto-escalation. The proposal is one way to move
in that direction.
As Dr. John indicated, providing incentives to employers to
do that--making it attractive to employers to go in that
direction--is something that I think is well worth exploring.
Providing those incentives, getting more employers to do it,
and giving employees that option of the auto IRA if they don't
have a plan of their own, is valuable. So it expands the reach.
I think there is a question of how quickly you can get
there.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I also want to thank our witnesses today.
As you know, we have 10,000 Baby Boomers retiring every
day, they claim, for the next 30 years, 20 years. But a lot of
them are very uptight, frankly, about planning on retiring with
all of these concepts that they had, and now they are getting
to the point where they can retire, 60, 65; they don't know if
they are going to have enough money, if they are going to get
the return on their assets because they like to put them in
more conservative assets going forward. And then the other
thing is they are not sure, maybe at one point, they thought
they were going to live to 75; now my mother-in-law is 92. They
are all concerned about it.
What can Congress do, do you think, if anything, to help
bring a little bit more security and dignity? What incentives
or what would be one thing that we could do that we are not
doing to make a difference? I can tell you I am slowly getting
to that age, and a lot of our friends who thought they were
fine 10 years ago in terms of retirement are very, very
concerned today. They are working longer; they are not sure.
Any thoughts on that.
I will start with you, Ms. Miller.
Ms. MILLER. Yes, thank you. When we are talking Baby
Boomers with such a short timeframe, I think one thing that you
should do is, when you are looking at tax reform, keep those
catchup contributions in. Because as a Baby Boomer, I can say
that I am a lot more conscious of how much I need to save now
that it is too late. And it would be very good to keep those
options there.
I think looking further down the road, it is really
important to engage younger people. And automatic enrollment
and auto-escalation are critical.
But I also think we need to look more at e-delivery of
things. We are all very supportive of all sorts of disclosures,
but when people get a stack of paper, they don't necessarily
look. And if we could approach people more with something that
is interactive, it could be easier for them to plan, easier for
them to get engaged, and they really would like you to enable
more electronic delivery.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. John, would you comment?
But let me just mention, I was reading in USA Today, they
were talking about where they are at in terms of retirement. I
think it was 60 percent, an enormous number, that was just
relying on Social Security, and they don't have much beyond
that. It is pretty scary to think you worked 40 years of your
life, and there is not something in place. Do you have anything
you want to add to that?
Mr. JOHN. Let me add two things if I may. First, of course,
is to take this as an object lesson. The fact is if you reach
55 or 60, you don't have nearly the flexibility that you used
to have. And we need to make sure through the auto IRA and a
wide variety of other things to make sure that this doesn't
happen to the next generation.
But we have a second crisis that is coming with the Baby
Boomers. The first one is going to be not having enough money,
and the second is not managing it properly so that they run out
of money at the time when they are 80 or 85. We need to very
carefully examine the question of guaranteed lifetime income,
annuity type products, whether they are ones that kick in at
the age of 80, whether they are ones that are purchased at the
time of retirement, to make sure that we don't have the same
individuals who are worried now even more worried when they are
85 and their bank account is empty.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me ask one more quick question just in
terms of Congress helping small business. I am concerned there
are a lot of small employers out there where employees would
like to have some kind of retirement; they don't offer it.
What--you know, that is tax deductible--what incentive can we
help with small businesses in terms of making sure that as many
of them as possible would provide some kind of retirement
package, 401(k) or whatever else that is available out there?
Mr. Hardock, do you have any comments on that?
Mr. HARDOCK. I think many Members of this Committee, both
Republicans and Democrats, have supported incentives, for
example start-up credits for small business to send the signal
that if you set up this kind of plan the government will help
you with that initial administrative expense. I think doing
more on that front would be helpful.
I think Mr. Neal now has a bill in. But others on this
Committee have in the past supported that concept, and it could
easily be expanded on because that is where our problem is.
Small businesses that are not covering their employees partly
because of the costs. Electronic delivery would help there,
too. It is amazing how expensive it is to send out all of this
paper.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Marchant is recognized.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. VanDerhei and Ms. Miller, you both state in your
testimony that despite what some may claim, studies show that
current tax incentives for savings for retirement are quite
progressive. What would be the effect on progressivity if you
lowered the top marginal rate to 25 percent?
Ms. MILLER. That is a very complicated question and depends
in part on what else you have done when you have lowered that
marginal rate to 25 percent. I mean, it is a fact that as the
top rate declines, there is less incentive for tax deferral
because you are saving less money when you contribute. But
there are other competing ways to save. It depends in part on
what is happening with capital gains and dividends. If you have
no tax to be paid on an investment, as David would like to see
generally, then it becomes very difficult to incentivize an
employer to put in a plan unless you specifically have a
targeted tax credit or some other specific benefit to encourage
that employer to put in a plan.
So I think that this is something that is particularly
sensitive to what else is happening. But it is true that as the
rate declines, the incentive, cash that is freed up by putting
it in this plan, also declines. So you have to be careful not
to give it a double hit certainly by also--maybe you need to
increase the contribution limits in order to maintain an
incentive there for employers to put in plans.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you.
Mr. VANDERHEI. I agree with what Judy said and would like
to amplify it a bit. We had done some work last summer looking
more at the Simpson-Bowles type proposal, but a lot of that
could be expanded to this type of proposal. If you are reducing
the marginal tax rates, especially for the small business
owners, you are changing the calculus of what their cost-
benefit analysis is of providing that to the employees. And
Judy has in her written testimony a graph that we worked on
last year that actually shows--I believe we had as much as an
11 percent decrease in the number of small plans, defined as
plans with less than 100 employees, because of the 20-20
limits. If that is something you would be interested in, we
could very easily modify that to look at what the impact of
decreasing marginal tax rate would be apart from the
20-20 limits. I could get back to you on that if you are
interested.
Mr. MARCHANT. I think we would be interested in that in all
our proposals, that that tax rate be capped at 25 percent. And
for Mr. John, what would be the overall effect on retirement
savings of adopting the 20-20 proposal as was proposed by the
Bowles commission?
Mr. JOHN. I am not a micro or macro economist, so I have
not really modeled it. I usually tend to defer to Jack on
issues along that line.
Mr. MARCHANT. Okay. Well, Jack.
Mr. VANDERHEI. The 20-20? Actually, we have a figure in the
written testimony that takes a look at what would happen. I
don't think, surprisingly, the biggest hit would be on the
highest income quartile. We found, for example, that people
currently 36 to 45 if it were applied today would have a 15
percent reduction on average in their retirement balances. What
I think comes as a surprise to many, though, is that the second
biggest hit actually comes on the lowest-income quartile and
that is because of the 20 percent, not the 20,000. And one
thing that many people ignore is that oftentimes, people will
come back into the workforce later on in their age. They may be
a spouse, and they may find that because of catch-up or
whatever, they have the ability to put much more of their
income in. We find that they are the ones who typically end up
triggering the 20 percent as opposed to the high income, who
trigger the 20,000. But even for what we found for 36 to 45,
almost 10 percent for the lowest-income quartile, 10 percent
reduction in average account balances because of 20-20.
Ms. MILLER. I think that is actually understated for the
lower paid, because small business owners, they would have
about zero incentive for putting a plan in, and the safe harbor
contributions they make for rank and file workers would be
gone. And so I think that really understates the negative
impact.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson is recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for holding this hearing. I think it is
extremely important, and it is an area where we ought to have a
lot of common agreement. This is something we can actually do
to help people. A lot of young folks out there who could really
benefit from good work that this Committee could do.
I want to follow up on a couple of questions that were
asked by other Members. Mr. Buchanan asked about what to do to
encourage small business folks to participate.
Ms. Miller, in your written testimony, you mentioned that
employers who don't offer any sort of retirement plan for their
employees cite business concerns. Could you elaborate on what
those business concerns are? And did your research show any
downturn or any of the folks who were offering it, did they
jettison those programs during this recession?
Ms. MILLER. Sure, I don't have any data on that last piece,
although our members certainly anecdotally if a business goes
out of business, obviously, the plan is gone. And certainly as
a small business, when your resources are drained, you will cut
back on contributions if nothing else.
But when employers say they are not putting a plan in for
business reasons, there are a few that are top line reasons.
One is that they don't think the employees care. And if the
employees say, give me cash, then the employer would rather
just give them cash if they have it.
The second is that small businesses are notorious for not
lasting very long. And if you aren't sure you are going to
survive, then you are hesitant to do something that really
says, hey, I have arrived, I can plan long term, too.
And the third is the cost. I think there is--some employers
don't understand how inexpensive it is to actually set up a
plan. But most commonly the issue is that they don't feel they
can afford to make a contribution or to promise to make a
contribution. And that is why really we are supportive of the
auto IRA proposal, because it could get employers in without
out-of-pocket costs themselves. And we think that they will
find that employees do actually appreciate it, and we can get
over a couple of hurdles at the same time.
Mr. THOMPSON. I think Mr. Neal's bill would speak to that
issue.
Ms. MILLER. Absolutely. Yes. Yes.
Mr. THOMPSON. For public record, I told him a minute ago
that I would coauthor the bill. I think it is a good one.
Mr. John, you have done some research on retirement savings
plans in other countries. Was there anything there that really
knocked your socks off?
Mr. JOHN. There were actually a couple both good and bad.
If we look, for instance, at New Zealand, New Zealand has a
form of the auto IRA, but given the fact that they only have 3
million people, it is a much more centralized form. But it
works exceedingly well early on.
The one that is a huge mistake is the United Kingdom. The
United Kingdom went through and back in 1997, then Chancellor
of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, increased the taxes of
retirement plans by about 5 billion pounds a year. The net
result obviously was a collapse. The second thing they did was
the U.K. continuously tinkers. They come up, they set up a
program, they actually have a brilliant program called NEST,
National Employment Savings Trust, that starts to go into
effect this fall, except that the government just announced
within the last week or so that now they are looking at a
completely different approach. And what that does is to breed
confusion and distress.
Mr. THOMPSON. Is there anything that we should take from
the different foreign programs that you evaluated and look at
putting in place here?
Mr. JOHN. The ones that work the best are the ones that
have the broadest coverage and start people young and keep them
saving throughout. Australia has a mandatory system which works
exceedingly well. I am not suggesting that the United States
move to something along that line, but the broader the
coverage, the better it is. And it is possible to do a very
simple system, like the auto IRA, and keep it cheap. Frankly,
we studied overseas systems very extensively in developing it.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you all very much for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Berg is recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, obviously, the goal in this whole thing is, how
do you make it simple and easy to pick the right plan for each
individual? And you know, obviously someone's understanding of
financial markets and what is best for them and trying to make
a lifelong decision rather than a short-term decision, so I was
intrigued by the automatic IRAs.
And in part of your testimony, Mr. John, you talked about
simplifying things but also having an automatic IRA. So kind of
my question to you, does the simplification come first, or do
you do the automatic IRAs and then simplification after that?
Mr. JOHN. I anticipate that, given the direction of things,
that the auto IRA comes first. The auto IRA is crucial, because
if people don't save, if they do not get started early on, it
doesn't matter if you simplify or not.
Mr. BERG. Thank you.
I just had one kind of out-of-the-box question. And it
seems like so many people are going through a lot of different
jobs today and sort of the new normal is several different
careers, several different jobs. And a lot of younger people
that I know have been to two or three different employers in a
short period of time. So each time you are trying to analyze
what is the best retirement program? Here is what the employer
is offering. Has there been anything done like out of the box
and looking at a plan that would just be an individual's plan,
and this plan would follow the individual, even though they are
an employee but, again, they would make the decisions on what
is the right package for them for their working career? And as
they went in and out of different careers and different jobs,
those employers might pay into their individual plan rather
than the employer sponsoring a separate plan?
Mr. JOHN. There have been some examinations of that sort of
thing, but the key factor is that most people, especially when
they are starting out, don't have the expertise to make that
kind of choice. And the natural human reaction when you are
faced with a choice that you don't understand is that you do
nothing. So people stop. That is the value of both an employer-
sponsored plan, where you have the payroll deduction and the
auto-enrollment and the auto-escalation. And what we find as
time goes on that a certain proportion of people who started
out in auto-enrollment later learn and take more control over
their activities.
Mr. BERG. Any other comments on more of an individual plan
that follows an individual?
Ms. MILLER. I think it is very hard to motivate an employer
to participate in that kind of an arrangement, because the
employer, once they feel financially secure enough to put in a
plan, they are looking at the tax benefits. They are also
looking at what works for their company. And what sometimes, I
think, gets forgotten in talk about a single, simple plan is
that employers will use--they still use vesting schedules. If
they are putting in a contribution for workers, it might be
fully vested because it is a safe harbor, but if there is
something more than that, they don't like the idea of giving
money to somebody that is coming and going right away. And so
the money won't necessarily all be vested right away. And it
will vest after a few years, or maybe a graduated schedule, it
is 5 years.
So that really doesn't work when you have an individual
account. And so there are things that employer--flexibility
that the employer has under an employer-based arrangement that
would disappear and I think make them less engaged.
Mr. BERG. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Reed is recognized.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To follow up on Mr.
Berg's sentiment, one of the issues I see is the need--we talk
a lot about employers and the government here in Washington
being the ones to choose best what individuals should do with
their futures, especially when it comes to retirement. And we
kind of have this attitude up here sometimes that I try to
fight every day that Washington knows best; just trust us, we
will take care of it. And I want to get to ways to try to
enhance individual accountability and responsibility for
people, allowing them to control their own destiny.
So are there things that we could be doing to encourage
literacy when it comes to financial planning? Any ideas,
thoughts from the panel as to where we could really change the
mindset of individuals as they go into the workplace of
actually being aware that 20, 30 years will come, and we need
to have something in the bank to take care of us? Are there any
proposals that anyone could share with us that they would say
we should be taking a real close look at and advancing?
Ms. MILLER. I have to get back to electronic delivery and
really getting people engaged. There are some amazing things
going on out there in terms of enrolling people and having
their own individual information set up on their iPad or
handing them out when people come in to get enrolled and
letting them work through and see what it is really going to be
like.
And yet there are constraints on how everything has to be
handled right now that minimizes what you can do. And so it
almost ties--you know, this market is incredibly competitive
and creative and can't always get to do everything it could do
because----
Mr. REED. Could you give me some examples of those
constraints? When you say there are constraints, are they
regulatory constraints?
Ms. MILLER. Yes, regulatory constraints. For example, right
now, we have all of this paper that is due out for disclosure
on investments, and it is going to be--we support the
disclosure, but people are going to be getting a stack of
paper, and I don't think they are going to read it.
And if you were able to--if you had their email address, I
mean, we give people at work an email address. You can't
necessarily use that if they aren't--you know, that is not a
routine part of their job and all of this other stuff and even
though they may have used our Web site. So if somebody uses the
Web site, you should be able to drive them to that Web site to
get this information. Once they are there, there are fun things
you can do. There are people working on games to encourage
people to save. We need to really be able to get them involved.
But right now, you have to send them that stack of paper
unless they went through certain steps. And it is just really a
major expense, and it really discourages creativity and truly
engaging people, especially younger people that are so much
into electronics. If we can't deliver this information on their
iPhone, they are not reading it. And right now, we can't.
Mr. REED. Mr. John, I see you nodding over there.
Mr. JOHN. I agree with everything that Judy has said, as I
usually do.
But there are other areas--for instance, the U.K. has
something called the Platform Account, which combines the
retirement savings account with a variety of other types of
savings and investment vehicles. And one of the things that
they have found that works exceptionally well over there is
that because the employer knows how old this employee is and in
what stage of life they are, they can shoot them little target
videos. So if the individual has just got a child, they can
shoot them a video talking in 2 minutes about, here is what you
can do to start saving for your child's future. Or if you just
married, here is what you can do to start saving for a house.
And we found in studies that these work exceptionally well, and
they work even better if the person who is being recorded is
someone that is someone like a coworker or someone who has some
sort of a connection to that individual.
Mr. REED. How about in the educational, like our high
schools, elementary school? Any thoughts on that type of forum?
Mr. JOHN. Yes, my older daughter, who is 25, went through
one of the finest high schools in the United States up in
Montgomery County. And she took a variety of courses in
photography, cooking with amazing results, and I think she
didn't have to take a single financial literacy course.
Mr. REED. That is a great point.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis is recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I want to apologize to members of the panel.
I had to run out and speak to a group of eighth grade students.
So they kept me for a while.
I heard your testimony, and I want to thank you all for
being here. And thank you for your service.
Ms. Miller, it is good to see you again. Thank you also for
all that you do.
Ms. Miller, many of the people who criticize or question
our tax incentives for retirement savings argue that they are
for the wealthy. They say that these laws favor high-income
people. In your experience and research, do you find this to be
true? Do you have any ideas as to how we can further increase
participation among lower- and middle-income workers? How can
we make it easier for people to save for retirement?
Ms. MILLER. That is a very good question. I think if you
look at the retirement savings incentives, first of all there
is a cap on compensation that can be considered. It is at
$250,000. So when we hear a lot of talk about let's cut
incentives for people who make over $250,000, I cannot help but
think, we already cap it. We can't include compensation over
$250,000.
That applies also when you are testing for
nondiscrimination. So somebody might make a million dollars,
but when you are comparing their percentage of pay in this plan
to the lower-income person's percentage of pay, you use the
$250,000. So we already have something that is built in to
limit that.
The nondiscrimination rules generally will say that if the
business owner wants to put in the maximum of $50,000, those
workers are going to be getting a contribution; 3 percent, 5
percent, you know, depending on the arrangement. They are going
to be getting the employer money. And it really is additional
money.
There have been some people who will say, oh, they would
have been getting that as pay anyway, but there was a really
good recent look at this by Eric Toder and somebody else, I
forget, showing that for lower-income groups, if there is a
401(k) plan, it is new money. It is largely new money. They
have like 89 percent, but for small business, it is more like
100. It really is additional money.
So I think these nondiscrimination rules do that. It is a
matter of getting access to more people, and that is why we are
strongly supportive of something like the auto IRA program,
that would make these arrangements available to more workers
and just grow what we have here.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Sweetnam, you mentioned that in another time
in another period, that the banks would stay open. And I
remember rushing down to the bank when I was much younger, had
all my hair, with my wife before the banks closed to get a
$2,000 IRA. What happened to that spirit? What happened? Should
we bring it back?
Mr. SWEETNAM. That was one of the things that we proposed
doing in the Bush administration simplification proposals.
What happened was that we put income limits on who could
make contributions to IRAs. So when you and I were seeing the
lines going in and the banks staying open, it meant that
everyone could make a $2,000 IRA contribution. Now, everyone
cannot make a $2,000 or--can't make a deductible IRA
contribution. It depends on what their adjusted modified
adjusted gross income is and whether they are an active
participant in an employer plan.
You will see in my testimony, I have two pages worth of
charts that talk about who can and can't make contributions.
Before, you didn't have that, and everyone could go in, and the
banks could say, come on in, and we will set up your IRA. That
is the difference. That is the difference now.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, could I yield the balance of my time to the
gentleman from Oregon?
Chairman CAMP. There is only 30 seconds left, but you will
get your own time in a few minutes.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Then I will wait.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Paulsen is recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We have had a lot of
good discussion. I appreciate the testimony in the hearing. One
thing that we haven't talked about is ESOPs, Employer Stock
Ownership programs that enable workers to accumulate
substantial amounts of retirement savings, as compared to some
of these other defined-contribution retirement plans. And there
are studies that even show that the value of the retirement
accounts of an employee that works for, say, an S ESOP, as an
example, for that firm, would average $100,000 in 2008, and you
compare that to only about a $45,000 average of an employee
with an average 401(k) account. So I think these statistics
definitely show that ESOPs have been tremendously successful
when it comes to helping workers save for retirement.
Mr. Sweetnam, if I can just ask you, should Congress make
sure that we protect ESOPs in the context of successful
retirement savings vehicles as we tackle tax reform and also
attempt to simplify the defined-contribution retirement system
as well?
Mr. SWEETNAM. When we looked at the retirement
simplification when I was part of the Treasury Department, we
thought that the ESOPs worked perfectly fine, and we didn't try
to modify them at all. I have dealt with ESOPs and S ESOPs over
my career, and they have provided very good benefits for
people. So I think that one of the things you are hearing from
everyone here is that we shouldn't be cutting back on
retirement benefits and ESOPs and S corporation ESOPs are an
important benefit, and I think that everybody is fine with
continuing on.
Mr. PAULSEN. Ms. Miller, you are nodding your head a little
bit, too. But should ESOPs or S ESOPs be used, that structure
serve a little bit as a model for tax reform or just having
that encompass?
Ms. MILLER. I think that it is important to maintain them.
I am not sure that I could say they are a model because when
you are dealing with an employer and what they should be doing,
when it fits a situation, it is a wonderful thing, but it
doesn't always fit a situation. I think it sits alongside other
retirement programs.
Mr. PAULSEN. Let me ask a question for some of the other
panelists, too. There has been a lot of mention of some of the
current--or some mention, I should say, of some of the current
law, the nondiscrimination rules that apply to 401(k) plans
that make sure that lower-income workers also can benefit from
these plans. Can you talk a little bit about how these rules
work from the perspective of how a tax incentive could help the
owner of a small business afford the contributions that would
be required for those type of rules? Anyone?
Ms. MILLER. I can speak to that. I think, most commonly, if
you are dealing with a small business who has--probably their
accountant has said, go see so-and-so about putting in this
retirement plan, and they have gotten to the point where they
are finally making some money, and they are coming to the end
of the year, and they are going, wow, I have this $30,000
sitting there. I am going to take it out as a bonus, and I am
going to pay all sorts of income tax on that money.
You can show them if they put in a qualified retirement
plan and make a contribution for themselves and save on that
for income tax purposes, they can use some or close to all of
that tax savings to make the required contributions for other
people. And that way, then you say to them, okay, you can take
this bonus home and you can write out a check to Uncle Sam for
28 or 31 percent of it or 36. Or you can put in this plan and
give that money--you find out the receptionist's name when you
go in, of course, you can give that money to your employees.
And most times, they are very eager to have retirement savings
themselves and help their employees save as well. So that tax
incentive, though, is a key part of it. You have to show them
how it can be better used than to just take it home.
Mr. PAULSEN. Anyone else?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Blumenauer is recognized.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I apologize, I have been in the Budget Committee defending
the interests of the Ways and Means Committee.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you for that service.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. It is a pleasure.
And I am sorry that I was not able to be more of a part of
this. I had a chance to review some of the material. It strikes
me as something that would be--our time is well spent. With all
of the vagaries that are surrounding tax changes, some of the
budget pressures, retirement security seems to me to loom very
large.
And I appreciate advice and admonition from the panel
members about looking at the big picture, about things that
encourage employers to provide a range of choices. I know at
times, it may be bewildering, which is why I have supported the
automatic IRA enrollment. It is why I am a lead cosponsor on
the ESOP; where it is appropriate, it is very powerful.
But I was struck by something Mr. John said about the
experience in Great Britain. Be careful about tinkering--about
taking an already confused and confusing system and, with all
the best of intentions, changing it again.
It seems to me that with your help and advice, and Mr.
Chairman and the Committee, zeroing in on things that truly are
refinements, not sea change, I am willing to explore all sorts
of modifications in the Tax Code, including in some cases,
raising taxes on myself and others. But I think that the
investments that have been made in the Tax Code to incent
retirement savings, insurance, these are things that a lot of
people are relying on. These are things that it takes a while
for the consumer to be educated. And there are opportunities
for a whole host of unintended consequences if we are not
careful.
So I just wanted to express my strong support for the
Committee working on this for the advice and counsel about
refinement at a time when Americans have hit choppy water
economically; where millions of people have lost what they
thought was the value of their home, maybe it was artificially
inflated, but they borrowed against it, and they were counting
on it; where retirement savings and college education accounts
have been diminished.
I think the advice that we are getting here about
refinement, not tinkering, moving forward is well taken. And I
hope it is something that we can work on together to strengthen
these retirement opportunities, send clear signals,
automatically enroll, incent innovative approaches but have
continuity and follow through. It seems very, very important to
me.
And I appreciate the courtesy. I am sorry I wasn't with you
more, but I think your contribution is very important, and this
hearing I think is very important.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much. And to another Ways and
Means Member who also serves on Budget Committee, Dr. Price.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I, too, apologize
for not being here for the entire hearing.
I want to thank you for your testimony on what is, I think,
an incredibly important issue. And I want to hone in, and it
may have already been discussed, but ask Mr. VanDerhei and Ms.
Miller, if you would, my sense, the small business folks at
home, people that I talk to tell me that there are impediments
and obstructions into both the employer and the employee being
able to contribute to what might be a more open, flexible, and
I think you called it creative plan. Ms. Miller, if you had to
identify the greatest impediment that the government puts in
place to either the employer or the employee for setting up a
flexible, responsive retirement plan, what would that be? Mr.
VanDerhei.
Mr. VANDERHEI. Well, I will focus on the responsive part of
that. One of the major improvements we have had in the
retirement system in this country, certainly since 2006, is the
increased adoption of automatic enrollment and automatic
escalation of contributions. For a variety of reasons, a number
of employers have adopted a safe harbor approach, this
automatic escalation, which unfortunately currently has a
maximum cap of 10 percent.
I think if you talk to most financial planners, they would
say that in addition to what the employer is probably matching,
perhaps 3 percent, you need, especially for employees who are
starting this process late in their careers, something more
than just a 10 percent contribution per year, and I think if
there were ways to not only, first of all, have employers
increase the default contribution rate, as David had already
mentioned, from perhaps 3 percent to 6 percent or more, but to
allow those employees who want to automatically allow their
contributions to escalate over time, to go beyond the 10
percent.
Mr. PRICE. You would increase the cap?
Mr. VANDERHEI. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. Increase the cap.
Mr. HARDOCK. Mr. Price, on that same issue there is some
data in our testimony that shows that when you do that, it is
like telling your kid a C is a good enough grade, you will get
a C. If you tell him an A is the grade you want, you are going
to get closer to an A. And then the data we have seen shows
that if you set that bar higher, even the people who don't do
the automatic escalation do more because they see the bar, and
they say, oh, that is what I am supposed to do.
Mr. PRICE. Ms. Miller.
Ms. MILLER. Yeah. I think one important point to make here
is that auto-enrollment isn't as popular with smaller employers
as it is with larger ones, and the reason is that it is too
easy--practitioners don't recommend it to them because it is
too easy to trip up, and then you get hit with penalties on it.
And I think we need to take a look at some issues that
would make it easier for small employers to do this kind of
thing without incurring additional expense. And, you know, an
example is if you are automatically enrolling, then when
someone completes their year of service, you sign them up. With
a small business, sometimes you forget that, that date passes,
and you didn't do it, and you get to the end of the year, and
whoever is doing your retirement plan work says, oh, so-and-so
should have been enrolled. Well, if they happen to only have
missed a few months, that is okay, you can get them signed up,
but if they were out for close to a year, the small business
owner, to do this automatic--this safe harbor correction not
only has to put in whatever match they would have made, but
they have to put in the automatic enrollment contribution, too,
so the employee got their salary, but they also get the
employer money. And it just is so much hassle that they just
don't want to bother, and that makes no sense. If they have to
make the match, yes, but not to have to put the contribution
in.
Also, small business deals with top-heavy rules where if
over 60 percent of benefits are for key people, then there is a
minimum contribution of 3 percent of pay, which is fine, but if
the owner wants to be nice and let everybody contribute to the
plan, even if they haven't had a year of service in, suddenly
they have to make the contribution for everybody, which, as I
mentioned, if they are going to be short term, they really
don't want to. So they really are constrained by some of these
things that are particularly difficult for small business and
really would be pretty easy to clean up.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you.
My sense is that there has to be a right balance between
this competitive and creative market that we want out there and
regulation.
Ms. Miller, would you say that that balance has been struck
right now, or are we out of balance?
Ms. MILLER. There is room for improvement, let me--
definitely room for improvement.
Mr. PRICE. Great.
I thank you. I would appreciate each of the panelists, if
you desire, to follow up on that score, identifying those areas
where the regulatory environment is actually less helpful to
employers and employees.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Dr. Price.
Again, I want to thank our panelists for excellent
testimony today. Some good information was transmitted to us as
many good points were made. And with that, this hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.168

Statement of Susan Crase

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T9935A.169


