S. HRG. 112–523

TAX REFORM AND THE TAX TREATMENT
OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS

JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
AND THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION

DECEMBER 6, 2011

SERIAL 112–14

(
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00001

Fmt 6011

Sfmt 6011

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

TAX REFORM AND THE TAX TREATMENT OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00002

Fmt 6019

Sfmt 6019

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

S. HRG. 112–523

TAX REFORM AND THE TAX TREATMENT
OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS

JOINT HEARING
BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
UNITED STATES SENATE
AND THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION

DECEMBER 6, 2011

SERIAL 112–14

(
Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 2011

75–771—PDF

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800
Fax: (202) 512–2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402–0001

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00003

Fmt 5011

Sfmt 5011

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
MAX BAUCUS, Montana, Chairman
JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER IV, West Virginia ORRIN G. HATCH, Utah
KENT CONRAD, North Dakota
CHUCK GRASSLEY, Iowa
JEFF BINGAMAN, New Mexico
OLYMPIA J. SNOWE, Maine
JOHN F. KERRY, Massachusetts
JON KYL, Arizona
RON WYDEN, Oregon
MIKE CRAPO, Idaho
CHARLES E. SCHUMER, New York
PAT ROBERTS, Kansas
DEBBIE STABENOW, Michigan
MICHAEL B. ENZI, Wyoming
MARIA CANTWELL, Washington
JOHN CORNYN, Texas
BILL NELSON, Florida
TOM COBURN, Oklahoma
ROBERT MENENDEZ, New Jersey
JOHN THUNE, South Dakota
THOMAS R. CARPER, Delaware
RICHARD BURR, North Carolina
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
RUSSELL SULLIVAN, Staff Director
CHRIS CAMPBELL, Republican Staff Director

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman
WALLY HERGER, California
SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas
CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas
FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin
JIM McDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California
JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio
RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky
XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington
LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana
MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois
JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia
RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida
BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois
JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York
JON TRAUB, Staff Director
JANICE MAYS, Democratic Staff Director

(II)

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00004

Fmt 0486

Sfmt 0486

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

CONTENTS
OPENING STATEMENTS
Page

Baucus, Hon. Max, a U.S. Senator from Montana, chairman, Committee
on Finance ............................................................................................................
Camp, Hon. Dave, a U.S. Representative from Michigan, chairman, Committee on Ways and Means .................................................................................
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G., a U.S. Senator from Utah .................................................
Levin, Hon. Sander M., a U.S. Representative from Michigan ...........................

1
2
3
4

WITNESSES
Barthold, Thomas, Chief of Staff, Joint Committee on Taxation, Washington,
DC ..........................................................................................................................
Raskolnikov, Alex, Charles Evans Gerber professor of law and co-chair,
Charles E. Gerber Transactional Studies Program, Columbia Law School,
New York, NY ......................................................................................................
Kramer, Andrea S., partner, McDermott, Will, and Emery, LLP, Chicago,
IL ...........................................................................................................................
Miller, David S., partner, Cadwalader, Wickersham, and Taft LLP, New
York, NY ...............................................................................................................

5
7
8
10

ALPHABETICAL LISTING AND APPENDIX MATERIAL
Barthold, Thomas:
Testimony ..........................................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Response to a question from Senator Nelson .................................................
Baucus, Hon. Max:
Opening statement ...........................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
‘‘Financial Derivatives: Disparate Tax Treatment and Information Gaps
Create Uncertainty and Potential Abuse,’’ Government Accountability
Office report (GAO–11–750), September 2011 ............................................
‘‘Options for Tax Reform in the Financial Transactions Tax Provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code,’’ American Bar Association Section of
Taxation, December 2, 2011 .........................................................................
Camp, Hon. Dave:
Opening statement ...........................................................................................
Hatch, Hon. Orrin G.:
Opening statement ...........................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Kramer, Andrea S.:
Testimony ..........................................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Responses to questions from committee members .........................................
Levin, Hon. Carl:
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Levin, Hon. Sander M.:
Opening statement ...........................................................................................
Miller, David S.:
Testimony ..........................................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
‘‘A Progressive System of Mark-to-Market Taxation,’’ David S. Miller,
Tax Notes, November 21, 2005 ....................................................................
(III)

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00005

Fmt 5904

Sfmt 5904

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

5
35
142
1
148
150
213
2
3
276
8
278
287
303
4
10
306
314

IV
Page

Miller, David S.—Continued
‘‘A Progressive System of Mark-to-Market Taxation,’’ David S. Miller,
Tax Notes, October 13, 2008 ........................................................................
‘‘New Tax Issues Arising from Derivatives Regulatory Reform,’’ Erika
W. Nijenhuis, Tax Notes, June 14, 2010 .....................................................
‘‘New Tax Issues Arising From the Dodd-Frank Act and Related Changes
to Market Practice for Derivatives,’’ Erika W. Nijenhuis, Columbia
Journal of Tax Law, Vol. 2, No. 1, 2011 ......................................................
Responses to questions from committee members .........................................
Raskolnikov, Alex:
Testimony ..........................................................................................................
Prepared statement ..........................................................................................
Responses to questions from committee members .........................................

348
355
392
491
7
506
520

COMMUNICATIONS
Center for Fiscal Equity ..........................................................................................
Managed Funds Association ...................................................................................

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00006

Fmt 5904

Sfmt 5904

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

529
531

TAX REFORM AND THE TAX TREATMENT
OF FINANCIAL PRODUCTS
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2011

U.S. SENATE,
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE,
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS,
Washington, DC.
The hearing was convened, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room HVC–210, Capitol Visitor Center, Senator Max Baucus
(chairman of the Senate Finance Committee), presiding.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MAX BAUCUS, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM MONTANA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

Chairman BAUCUS. The hearing will come to order.
Warren Buffett once wrote to his shareholders, ‘‘No financial instrument is evil per se. It is just that some variations have far
more potential for mischief than others.’’
This potential for mischief is one of the reasons we are holding
this joint hearing. Many financial instruments do serve essential
business purposes. They allow individuals and companies to hedge
against risks and minimize exposure to losses, especially in these
turbulent economic times. For example, Darin Arganbright, a small
grain farmer in my home State of Montana, uses futures contracts
to reduce the impact of the market’s ups and downs. These contracts help him lock in prices for his crops in advance. But too
many resources are spent developing new and complex financial instruments simply to avoid taxes. Over the past decade, the use of
one type of financial product, derivatives, has grown considerably.
The notional or theoretical value of derivatives held by U.S. commercial banks has grown by more than 6 times in the past decade
and now totals about $230 trillion. Globally, the notional value of
over-the-counter derivatives is estimated to total more than $700
trillion. It equals more than 3 times the value of all global financial
assets.
This growth can make it harder to determine the value of a business holding these financial instruments. Some believe this lack of
transparency is one of the problems that gave rise to the financial
crisis. Financial advisors have created a complex web of new products that mix debt, equity, and derivatives. The only purpose of
some of these is to avoid taxes, or at least defer taxes, and, of
course, a deferral of taxes is tantamount to an interest-free loan
that some wealthier people can take advantage of, but most other
folks cannot.
(1)

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00007

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

2
Those who benefit from these new financial products are often
large companies and high net worth individuals who can afford to
hire expensive lawyers and advisors to structure their investments
and lower their tax liabilities. These complicated transactions to
avoid taxes result in wasted investment, and they are not fair to
taxpayers who cannot afford those high-priced lawyers and accountants.
So let us clarify and simplify the tax treatment of these products.
Let us ensure that they are taxed rationally and fairly and work
to make the tax code reflect the goals of transparency, consistency,
and protection of the American taxpayer. And, as Mr. Buffet alluded to, let us limit the potential for mischief.
I want to thank Chairman Camp for our continued work together
as we tackle the broader issues of tax reform. This is one of a couple of joint hearings we have held, the Finance and Ways and
Means Committees, and I expect there will be others. I think it is
an opportunity for us to work together, hearing the same information from the same witnesses, and hearing each others’ questions,
which tends to help us work better together.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Baucus appears in the appendix.]
Chairman BAUCUS. I would like to recognize the chairman of the
House Ways and Means Committee, my compadre here, Chairman
David Camp.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVE CAMP, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM MICHIGAN, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON
WAYS AND MEANS

Representative CAMP. Thank you, Chairman Baucus, and thanks
to all of you for joining us this morning at this hearing of the
House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Finance Committee. As Senator Baucus said, having served on Ways and Means
for a number of years, I will say that having one, let alone two
joint hearings, on the subject of tax reform has not been the norm,
but this does reflect the deep interest that Chairman Baucus and
I have on the subject of tax reform.
So we are here today to explore the taxation of financial products
and the report on that topic that was prepared by the staff of the
Joint Committee on Taxation which was requested by Chairman
Baucus and myself earlier this year.
The JCT report provides two critically needed tools. First, the report is helpful in demystifying much of the murkiness that surrounds financial products. Today’s marketplace features a wide
array of products that can result in different tax or financial accounting treatment of economically similar products, including
debt, equity—and mixtures of the two—and financial derivatives,
such as options, futures, and forward contracts and swaps.
Second, the report also highlights the complexity of tax rules in
this area. In part, this reflects the inherent variety of products, but
the complexity has been further exacerbated by the tendency of
Congress to enact tax legislation affecting a particular financial
product without evaluating whether or not the approaches would
provide more uniformity or simplicity to the existing taxation of future financial products.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00008

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

3
A greater understanding of how the tax treatment of these products’ influences or use affects the complexity of the tax code is
badly needed, and I look forward to the insight that our witnesses
will offer on this issue.
Over the years, there have been few proposals to reform the taxation of financial products on a comprehensive basis. In addition to
the Joint Committee report, I am encouraged by some of the information recently shared by the tax section of the American Bar Association in this area. The ABA report is one perspective, and I
hope others will add their voices to the discussion. Gaining a better
understanding of these products is imperative if we are to enact
tax reform that combines the needed flexibility in financial markets
with certainty and predictability in the tax code.
I look forward to Mr. Barthold’s testimony on the JCT report and
to the testimony of our other witnesses who are adding their expertise to today’s discussions. I want to thank you all for being here,
and I want to thank also Chairman Baucus, my good friend, for
holding this hearing, and I look forward to the testimony. Thank
you.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Chairman Camp.
I would now like to recognize the ranking member of the Senate
Finance Committee from Utah, Orrin Hatch.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ORRIN G. HATCH,
A U.S. SENATOR FROM UTAH

Senator HATCH. Thank you to both chairmen. I want to thank
both Senator Baucus and Congressman Camp for this hearing, and
thank you, Mr. Barthold and the staff of the Joint Committee on
Taxation, for producing this important report on the tax treatment
of financial products.
Twenty-five years ago, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 was signed
into law by President Ronald Reagan. At the time of the 1986 Act,
which was the last major tax reform we have had in the United
States, the tax treatment of financial instruments and derivatives
was relatively new and highly undeveloped as an area of our Nation’s tax law. In fact, derivatives were unknown to most of the
American public, although early evidence of these types of instruments can be traced all the way back to ancient Greece.
As I have said before, when Congress undertakes comprehensive
tax reform, and it must, that reform should be based on the same
three principles that led to the enactment of the Tax Reform Act
of 1986: fairness, simplicity, and economic growth. I am very much
looking forward to what our witnesses have to say today, particularly as these three principles relate to the tax treatment of financial instruments and derivatives.
Allow me to share a few of my initial thoughts. Financial instruments generally refer to stocks, bonds, hybrid instruments, and derivatives. Derivatives include options, forward contracts, future
contracts, and swaps. They are called derivatives because their
value is derived from some other asset, some other liability, or
some other measure.
The use of derivatives has skyrocketed in the last 20 to 25 years.
According to the Bank for International Settlements, in June 2011
the total notional amount of outstanding over-the-counter deriva-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00009

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

4
tives was $707 trillion. Of this amount, $554 trillion was due to interest rate contracts and $65 trillion to foreign exchange contracts.
These figures are, to me, mind-boggling. To give some perspective,
the size of the U.S. economy is about $15 trillion.
In the last several years, there has been a lot of discussion of
credit default swaps, which are a type of derivative. These swaps
became front page news during the recent financial crisis involving
Lehman Brothers and American International Group, AIG. According to the Bank for International Settlements, the volume of credit
default swaps peaked at $58 trillion in 2007 and declined to about
$30 trillion at the end of 2010.
Surprisingly, given the size and number of credit default swaps
for a number of years, it was not clear how these swaps were treated for tax purposes. It was just 3 months ago that the U.S. Treasury Department issued proposed regulations addressing the tax
treatment of credit default swaps.
Generally, the tax treatment of financial products involves three
major issues: timing, character, and source. The timing issue relates to when an item of income or expense is taken into account
for tax purposes; the character issue relates to whether the income
is ordinary income or capital gain; and the source issue relates to
whether the income is U.S. source or foreign source. Although
these three issues involve principles that are fundamental to the
U.S. itself, or to the U.S. income tax system in general, they are
particularly applicable to the taxation of financial products.
Again, I would like to thank our witnesses for attending this
hearing, and I look forward to their comments on this timely and
complex issue.
Again, Chairman Baucus and Chairman Camp, thank you for
holding this important hearing on tax reform.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Senator, very much.
[The prepared statement of Senator Hatch appears in the appendix.]
Chairman BAUCUS. I would now like to recognize the ranking
member of the House Ways and Means Committee, a member from
Michigan. He has been a very valuable member of the committee
and Congress, and has spent a lot of time making things happen:
Congressman Levin.
OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SANDER M. LEVIN,
A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM MICHIGAN

Representative LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Chairman, Senator Hatch, and to all of you. I think we all join in thanking Tom and his staff for all of their usual hard and effective work,
and in thanking our three witnesses.
Clearly there has been an explosion in terms of financial instruments. This explosion has been part of the downturn in the economy. I do not think we understood fully what was happening. We
essentially had an increasing number of instruments that had similar economic features but were taxed in very different ways, and
sometimes were not taxed at all. Also, very importantly, there was
very little transparency. So it is clear that today’s economic landscape is vastly different than it was in 1986, and I think we very
much need to delve into this as we undertake tax reform.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00010

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

5
But I would like to bring a sense of urgency and reality today
while we are considering this report. I do not think anybody, except
those who wrote it, has had a chance to fully master it. It is 90some pages, and sometimes people say this is the kind of work that
is good for bedtime reading. It is important work, but we have not
had a chance to master it.
But what we clearly have to master is action in the next couple
of weeks, because we have unresolved issues that are in the domain of our two committees: the Finance Committee and the Ways
and Means Committee. As we sit here today, these issues are unresolved. The payroll tax cut remains very much uncertain; 150
million-plus taxpayers have their taxes at stake. We have over 6
million people in this country who may be out of their unemployment insurance next year if we do not act. That would be, except
for the Great Depression, historic in this country.
We have SGR also within our jurisdiction that remains to be resolved, and here it is just a few weeks before Christmas. And while
it is important for us to hold this hearing today, I think it is clear
that we cannot leave Washington for the holidays until these issues
are resolved.
So, I want to thank Tom and your staff and our three witnesses
for coming, but to also strike a note of absolute urgency on the
issues that are within the domain of our two committees, that are
within the domain of Congress, and that are, I think, today, in the
domain of the people of our country. I hope in these next weeks we
will see some effective action in response to these needs.
Thank you very much.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Congressman Levin.
If there are any other members who wish to insert statements
in the record, they are certainly welcome. Also, if there is no objection, I would like to include the recent GAO study recently referred
to on the taxation of financial products, and the recently released
ABA report on the taxation of financial products, as part of the official record.
[The documents appear in the appendix on p. 150.]
Chairman BAUCUS. I would like to introduce our witnesses. The
first is Thomas Barthold, Chief of Staff for the Joint Committee on
Taxation. Welcome again, Tom. Second, Mr. Alex Raskolnikov, tax
law professor and co-chair of the Charles E. Gerber Transactional
Studies Program at Columbia Law School. Welcome, Professor.
Next, Ms. Andrea Kramer, partner at the law firm of McDermott,
Will, and Emery. And finally, Mr. David Miller, partner at the law
firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham, and Taft.
Thanks for coming. Your prepared statements will be automatically included in the record. I would urge you to summarize in
about 5 minutes. As I said to you privately, just say what is on
your mind. Let her rip.
Tom, you are first.
STATEMENT OF THOMAS BARTHOLD, CHIEF OF STAFF,
JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. BARTHOLD. Thank you, Chairman Baucus, Chairman Camp,
Mr. Levin, Senator Hatch, and members of the committees. It is
our pleasure to have worked on this report, JCX–56–11, on the tax-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00011

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

6
ation of financial products and instruments, which was requested
by the chairmen earlier in the year. The staff ’s efforts in this report were to describe what the law is and what incentives the law
might create, and I want to highlight just a few points in the few
minutes allotted.
First of all, it is important to remember that financial instruments are the means of financial intermediation by which the resources of savers are transferred to investors who may need those
funds to acquire capital assets or working capital for their business
enterprise. This intermediation involves the transfer not only of the
capital from one party to the other, but also of rights of ownership,
risks, and potential returns.
Now, our report discusses in detail the tax law applicable to the
basic financial instruments of stocks, bonds, options, forwards and
futures, and swaps, known under the Treasury regulations as notional principle contracts. It is important to recognize that these instruments represent specific ways of allocating the rights of ownership, the risks, and the potential returns. And in fact, as we demonstrate, there can be an infinite number of ways to allocate these
attributes by designing different financial instruments, and there
can also be multiple different ways to combine financial instruments and arrangements to attain the same allocation of rights,
risks, and returns. But the bottom line result is that, while the underlying economics of two different financial situations may be
identical, the tax treatment under present law may not be equal.
Let me just present very briefly a simplified, very stylized example. Assume with me that market interest rates are 6 percent. My
colleague seated behind me here, Patrick, takes $100 and purchases a zero coupon bond that, with 6-percent interest rates, will
pay him $112 2 years from now. My other colleague over here,
David, he takes $100—we do not get paid that much—and purchases a share of stock in XYZ corporation. But, at the same time,
David sells a call option on XYZ with a strike price of $112 and
settlement date 2 years from now. With a premium received, he
purchases a put option on XYZ, also with a strike price of $112 and
settlement date 2 years from now.
Now, because of the offsetting put and call, as you can see, working through David’s financial structure, David receives, just as did
Patrick, 2 years from now, he will have assured himself of the receipt of $112.
The tax rules provide, though, a different tax result for David
and Patrick. Patrick’s $12 of income is characterized as ordinary
income, taxable at ordinary income tax rates up to a maximum of
35 percent under present law, and the income must be reported
and taxed annually under the original issue discount rules of the
Internal Revenue Code.
David, on the other hand, will have held his share of XYZ stock
for 2 years, and his $12 of income will generally be characterized
as long-term capital gain, taxable at a maximum rate of 15 percent
under present law. David also will have deferred the time at which
he pays any tax for a full 2 years.
As our report details, the taxation of any financial instrument
can be determined, as was noted by Senator Hatch, by understanding the character of the income: is it deemed ordinary or cap-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00012

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

7
ital; the timing of receipt of the income: is it received in the current
year, upon realization at some future date, or in limited cases, is
it marked to market at each year’s end; and then the source of the
income: is it income from a U.S. source or is it income from a foreign source?
My example of Patrick and David shows how constructing financial instruments can reach the same economic result, but in that
particular example, changes the timing and character and, consequently, the taxation of what is fundamentally an identical economic outcome.
The report also provides a number of other examples of similar
issues and uncertainties arising under the present law rules related to character, timing, and source of the income, uncertainties
and issues that lay before the committees in their consideration of
possible reform in this area.
I thank you for your time. We thank you for the opportunity to
present this material to the committees, and, as always, we are
available to answer any questions that you may have.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barthold appears in the appendix.]
Chairman BAUCUS. Next, Mr. Raskolnikov.
STATEMENT OF ALEX RASKOLNIKOV, CHARLES EVANS GERBER PROFESSOR OF LAW AND CO-CHAIR, CHARLES E. GERBER TRANSACTIONAL STUDIES PROGRAM, COLUMBIA LAW
SCHOOL, NEW YORK, NY

Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Thank you. Chairman Camp, Chairman Baucus, Ranking Members Levin and Hatch, distinguished members of
the committees, thank you for inviting me to testify at this historic
joint hearing.
Let me begin by emphasizing that there is a lot to like about financial products also known as derivatives. They help businesses
to manage risk, they facilitate financial intermediation, and they
offer investors a breathtaking menu of products. But it is also true
that derivatives have been used to game every aspect of our tax
system. There are derivatives that defer income, generate inappropriate deductions, convert high-tax into low-tax income, and change
the source of income, allowing it to escape the U.S. tax altogether.
There is a lot of money at stake. The incentives facing taxpayers
and financial engineers are extremely powerful. And the results are
in: the taxation of financial instruments is in dire need of reform.
So what can be done? It will not surprise you to hear that there
is good news and bad news. The bad news is that fixing the taxation of derivatives with incremental reforms is like patching up
small leaks on a ship hit by a torpedo. The leaks may be stopped,
but the ship will keep on sinking. In slightly more technical terms,
no benchmark of an effective and efficient tax regime can be
achieved without a substantial revision of the existing rules. This
means that symmetry, a system in which both sides of every transaction are taxed under the same timing rule and rate; consistency,
a system in which economically similar transactions are taxed the
same way, regardless of the labels attached to them by taxpayers;
and balance, a system in which gains and losses from each deriva-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00013

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

8
tive are treated alike, are all unattainable without a fundamental
reform of financial product taxation.
But there is good news as well. If we take a deep breath and look
closely at the reform alternatives, we will realize that there are
three, just three possible conceptual approaches. Each is wellknown, each can be adjusted in a variety of ways, and each is already reflected in the existing law, even if to a limited extent.
So the first alternative is mark to market. This regime already
applies to securities and commodities dealers and certain other taxpayers and financial products. The second alternative is anticipatory taxation. I understand that it sounds obscure, but it is already reflected in taxation of contingent debt and certain swaps.
And the third alternative is retroactive taxation. That regime is already used to tax holdings in offshore investment funds’ and hedge
funds’ derivatives.
So the options are known. They certainly can be implemented.
Each obviously has its own advantages and drawbacks. What is
needed is a will to act, a choice based on balancing relevant cost
and benefits, and some work on details.
Needless to say, financial products is only one area of a fundamental reform your committees have considered, are considering,
or may consider in the near future. It is important to realize that
these other reforms will have differing implications for the urgency
of fixing the taxation of derivatives.
Any reform that eliminates the distinction between different
types of income, eliminates taxpayers’ ability to choose one tax
treatment or another, or eliminates capital income from the tax
base altogether, would reduce the pressure to reform the taxation
of derivatives. Any reform that increases that disparity in taxation
of different types of income would have the opposite effect.
So, reforms that take the pressure off include eliminating the difference between taxation of ordinary income and capital gains,
eliminating the difference between taxation of debt and equity,
switching to mark to market for publicly traded assets, and switching to some form of a consumption tax. On the other hand, a substantial reduction of corporate tax rates and a switch to a territorial tax system are likely to increase the urgency of reforming the
taxation of financial products.
Yet, whatever other reforms take place today or tomorrow, an effort to rethink taxation of derivatives cannot come too soon. The
problems with financial products’ taxation are very serious, and
they will not go away on their own. In fact, these problems are certain to persist and worsen if Congress fails to act.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Professor, very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Raskolnikov appears in the appendix.]
Chairman BAUCUS. Ms. Kramer, you are next.
STATEMENT OF ANDREA S. KRAMER, PARTNER,
McDERMOTT, WILL, AND EMERY, LLP, CHICAGO, IL

Ms. KRAMER. Chairman Camp, Chairman Baucus, Ranking
Members Levin and Hatch, and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear this morning. I am

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00014

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

9
here at the request of the committees on my own behalf, and the
views I express are entirely my own.
In the time I have, what I would like to do is flag what I believe
is the real issue with respect to the taxation of derivatives, and
that is that the basic hedging rules are too restrictive in that they
inhibit legitimate commercial and financial activities.
Each of the code sections that we have that addresses derivatives
concerns anti-abuse provisions. Once you have an entire system
that has a framework that is based on anti-abuse, you need exceptions to assure that appropriate transactions can continue. So, in
the derivatives tax area, what we basically have is, we have sets
of matched pairs of rules. We have the ‘‘thou shalt not do this’’
rules, and then the ‘‘in these specific circumstances, you can do the
following’’ rules. And it is these specific circumstances rules that I
want to focus on this morning—and those are the exceptions to the
anti-abuse rules, and the exceptions that I want to discuss concern
hedging.
The substance of the exceptions is found in the definitions of
hedging, and, in all cases, the definition is too limited. It needs to
be expanded to give our businesses the flexibility to manage their
risks without running afoul of disruptive and punitive anti-abuse
rules. And the way that this can be accomplished is by expanding
the definitions of hedging, and that would actually make the taxation of derivatives simpler and fairer, and it would do so without
opening any loopholes. And, as I can explain, I believe that this expansion can actually eliminate a variety of abuses.
Now, in making this claim, I do not mean to minimize the technical difficulties in expanding the hedging definitions, and careful
attention needs to be paid to the types of taxpayers, the types of
products, and the differential tax rates, and I acknowledge that
those are very important issues that we have to deal with. But I
believe that these are really technical difficulties that should not
stop us from moving forward with the need to expand the hedging
definitions.
Let me give you a simple example. A taxpayer has a receivable
denominated in a foreign currency. The taxpayer has the risk that
the value of the U.S. dollar goes down relative to that currency before receiving payments. To protect itself, the taxpayer can buy a
futures contract, could buy an option or enter into a swap, and all
of these derivative transactions are hedging or risk-management
transactions.
Now, in the context of derivative taxation, hedging functions in
an important way, and two of the basic anti-abuse rules that apply
to derivatives are straddle rules and section 1256 treatment, both
from 1981. And together, the straddle rules and section 1256 treatment are principally designed to prevent taxpayers from creating
artificial losses in one year, pushing the gains into the next.
Now, if a taxpayer entered into derivatives that qualified as
hedges, those transactions would be exempt from the straddle and
the 1256 rules, but they would be subject to a separate set of
matching rules, which is entirely sensible. And, if the taxpayer actually used derivatives to manage a business or investment risk, it
would make no sense for those transactions to be taxed on any-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00015

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

10
thing other than a clear reflection of income standard. Tax accounting requires clear reflection of income for hedges.
The problem is, how do we define hedging? And, in the 40 seconds I have left, what I can say is that the Treasury regulations
that were adopted to follow the statutory provision do not carry out
the purposes of the hedging rules, and that the regulations need
to be expanded. At the same time, I would also say that the code
needs to be expanded to include other types of transactions than
just ordinary income, ordinary assets, ordinary obligations, and
borrowings. I also mention in my written statement a couple of
other hedging sections that I obviously cannot mention today.
But what I would like to end with is to say that I am not objecting to the basic approach taken in the code and the Treasury regulations in creating exemptions and then anti-abuse rules for hedging. What I am objecting to is the fact that we could fix the problem and also fix abuses by expanding the definitions of hedging.
So my suggestion is really very simple. We identify the types
of risks that we want to have managed and call them riskmanagement transactions, classify them as hedges, and we could
be done with it. The transactions would be subject to clear reflection of income for hedges generally and integration for qualified
foreign currency hedges and debt security hedges, which I have not
had a chance to mention.
With that, I would like to thank everybody, and I am happy to
answer questions.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you very much, Ms. Kramer. We appreciate that.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kramer appears in the appendix.
Chairman BAUCUS. Mr. Miller, you are our final witness.
STATEMENT OF DAVID S. MILLER, PARTNER,
CADWALADER, WICKERSHAM, AND TAFT LLP, NEW YORK, NY

Mr. MILLER. Chairman Camp, Chairman Baucus, Ranking Members Levin and Hatch, and members of the committee, thank you
for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today. I am here to
talk about the Federal income tax treatment of financial instruments, but I am going to start with Claudius Ptolemy.
Claudius Ptolemy was the 2nd-century astronomer who created
a model of the heavens that predicted the positions of the sun, the
moon, and planets that was used for over 1,400 years. There was
just one problem with his universe—the Earth was in the middle.
To explain and predict heliocentric planetary patterns in his Earthbased model, Ptolemy had the planets travel in a series of ellipses
or epicycles around the Earth. His model was extraordinarily complex and, in the end, did not work very well.
Our Federal system for taxing financial instruments is truly
Ptolemaic. As Ptolemy’s system was geocentric, our Federal tax
system is based on the equally archaic system of realization, the
concept that income is not earned and therefore not taxed until the
taxpayer actually sells property for cash or exchanges it for materially different property. Our modern capital markets understand
that true economic income is measured by the increase in the value
of assets regardless of when they are sold, and so taxpayers can

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00016

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

11
borrow against and spend the unrealized appreciation in their publicly traded property without tax.
Like Ptolemy and his ellipses, Congress and the IRS have tried
to correct for our fundamentally flawed system of taxation. The
wash sale rules, the straddle rules, the original issue discount
rules, the conversion transaction rules, and the constructive ownership and sale rules are the ellipses of our tax system. So we are
left with a system as complicated as Ptolemy’s; over a dozen cubbyholes for various financial instruments, each with their own set of
rules, many of them inconsistent.
Because our system of taxation has no basis in the reality of economics, sophisticated taxpayers are free to choose a tax treatment
that minimizes their taxes. And choose they do. I offer three examples.
First, some taxpayers take the position that their credit default
swaps are options for tax purposes so that the premiums can be deferred. Others take the position that the very same credit default
swaps are notional principal contracts, so that they can claim current, ordinary losses.
Second, wealthy individuals with appreciated stock can enter
into variable prepaid forward contracts that hedge their risk on the
stock and provide them with current cash without tax.
And finally, over $200 billion in structured notes have been
issued in the past 10 years in public transactions registered with
the SEC. Many of these notes are structured as prepaid forward
contracts which offer their investors deferral and long-term capital
gains rates. The ability of taxpayers to choose their tax treatment
arises because there is no single guiding principle governing the
taxation of financial instruments.
But there is an alternative that matches economic income precisely. It is simple to apply and all but foolproof. It is called mark
to market. Under a mark-to-market system, the taxpayer simply
compares the value of the instrument at the end of the year with
its tax basis and pays tax on the difference regardless of the type
of financial instrument and regardless of whether the instrument
is sold.
I have proposed a system that would require large companies
and the one-tenth of 1 percent of the wealthiest and highestearning individual taxpayers to mark to market all of their publicly
traded property and their derivatives of publicly traded property
that are not used to hedge business assets and liabilities. This system would at once abandon our Ptolemaic tax system and finally
match tax with economics. But it is radical because it would apply
to stocks and securities as well as to derivatives.
But incremental change is also possible. Mark-to-market treatment could be applied selectively to derivatives. In an appendix to
my testimony, I have outlined how a mark-to-market system of taxation for derivatives might work.
It took 1,300 years for Nicolaus Copernicus to challenge Ptolemy’s Earth-centered model with a competing but infinitely simpler
view that happened to correspond to reality. It is the Earth, the
moon, and the planets that revolve around the sun.
Our own tax system was conceived at the beginning of the last
century when economic income could only be measured by cash,

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00017

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

12
and the effect of a tax deferred was little understood. Our markets
are now liquid, our taxpayers sophisticated. To bring our system
for taxing financial instruments into the 21st century, tax must
match the reality of economic income. Only a mark-to-market system of taxation does that.
Thank you. I welcome your questions.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Mr. Miller.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller appears in the appendix.]
Chairman BAUCUS. For this hearing, we will alternate back and
forth.
You talk about Ptolemy. I thought for a minute you might be referring—there are a couple of articles in today’s paper about the
discovery of this huge black hole. I thought it was going to suck
up all the rational thinking on this subject. It was fascinating. The
size of the black hole—our solar system is one-tenth the size of this
black hole that was discovered.
Sandy Levin will get to ask the first question. Is that correct?
No. Dave, you ask the first question.
Representative CAMP. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barthold, your report notes that the notional amount of outstanding derivatives traded in the U.S. has grown dramatically
since 1998 and at a rate of over 16 percent. Credit derivatives in
particular have grown since that time at an annual rate of 42 percent. What do you think are the reasons for this growth and the
implications obviously for tax policy associated with that?
Mr. BARTHOLD. I think the reasons are, people are seeking different ways to divide risks across different potential investors, to
hedge risks. It makes the cost of capital cheaper. I would say that
is the primary means of growth. There are more financial transactions that go across borders so that we see more flows in and out
of the country seeking returns.
As far as the taxation, we outlined in the report a number of
issues. Since it is possible to replicate similar economic outcomes
with different characteristics of timing, character, and source of income, we do not always provide equal taxation. So the challenge is
to try and have a neutral tax system layered on top of financial innovation.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Raskolnikov, in your written testimony, you state that a narrowly based tax reform that just lowered
corporate rates but did not lower rates for individuals—and some
have advocated going that route—would have the result of increased base erosion because of the use of tax planning and other
financial instruments. Can you explain your reasoning behind that?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So the reasoning is that, if we drop the corporate tax rate substantially below the top individual rate, there is going to be a
greater payoff for devising financial instruments, among other
things, that will shift income to the low-taxed corporations while
shifting related deductions to high-taxed individuals. If the rates
are similar, there is just less of an incentive to do this.
So that is not an argument against reduction of the corporate tax
rate. It is a point that, if we were to do this, there is going to be
more pressure to fix derivatives, because there is going to be much

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00018

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

13
greater incentive to invent products that will accomplish this, and
therefore there will be a revenue drain.
Representative CAMP. Do any of the other witnesses disagree
with that comment?
Mr. MILLER. I agree with that comment.
Representative CAMP. Ms. Kramer?
Ms. KRAMER. I agree as well.
Representative CAMP. Thank you. I think one of the witnesses
mentioned that, in the past, Congress has taken a real piecemeal
approach to changing tax rules related to financial products, and
usually looking at a specific financial product with a specific
change in the rules. What are some of the problems with that approach, and what are some of the ways we can deal with that? I
guess I would just quickly ask Mr. Miller.
Mr. MILLER. Sure. Let’s take one quick example. So, quite a
number of years ago, taxpayers were able to enter into short
against-the-box transactions and avoid the tax on their appreciated
securities, hedge all of the risk of loss and opportunity for gain,
and achieve cash. The way that Congress addressed that particular
transaction was to enact the constructive sale rules which effectively say that, if a taxpayer eliminates substantially all of their
risk for loss and substantially all of the benefits of the particular
appreciated position, then and only then is the taxpayer treated as
if they had sold the underlying security. But because Congress limited the definition of a constructive sale to only those derivatives
that eliminate substantially all of the risk, it left an opportunity
for taxpayers to eliminate something less than substantially all of
their risk, but still a great percentage receive cash and avoid tax.
So that is how the piecemeal method of our tax system applies in
a real-life example.
Representative CAMP. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Chairman Camp.
A sort of a theme a couple of the witnesses had was mark to
market, and, Ms. Kramer, I do not know how much you would
agree with that, so I am going to ask you. I have several questions
around marking to market. One, it is a major step, as you mentioned, Mr. Miller. It depends on what securities you apply it to.
A second question I have is the ease in determining what the market rate is—and some of these products are pretty complicated, so
what is the market value? Third is frequency; it is how often to
mark to market. End of the year? More frequently?
And then beyond that is, Ms. Kramer, whether you agree or disagree with those two other witnesses who tend to think that that
is a good reform here, that it gets at, in a sweeping way, some of
the potential abuses.
So let me, all of you, first Professor Raskolnikov, if you could answer the first three questions, I will go right down the line there
and have each of you address marking to market.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, I think mark
to market is a very plausible alternative. The ease of determining
fair market value is to an extent in the eye of the beholder, but
it is important to remember that, you know, there is very little
hard data, but sort of anecdotally from my experience—and other

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00019

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

14
panelists can comment—with the vast majority of derivatives, one
of the counterparties is either an exchange, so they are already
publicly traded and subject to a mark-to-market regime, many of
them, or a financial institution that either marks—that probably
marks to market that very derivative for its own tax purposes. Of
course, with Dodd-Frank regulations coming through, there are
going to be more exchange-cleared or -traded financial instruments,
so that will make marking to market easier.
There are some concerns on the other side. They will need to be
addressed. But in general, I think it is plausible. Frequency is annually. That is how our tax system was built. You need to calculate
your income and losses on an annual basis, and that is how the existing mark-to-market regime works.
And just to comment on sort of—it is also important to remember
that mark to market excepts hedging transactions. Hedging transactions should be subject to a separate regime, and they can be discussed, but there are separate rules, good or bad, sufficiently or insufficiently broad today, and there will need to be hedging rules as
well in the mark to market.
Chairman BAUCUS. So you are referring more to speculative
trades?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Yes. Anything other than hedging or managing risk. There will be a challenge in defining what does it mean
to manage risk, but yes.
Chairman BAUCUS. We restrict ourselves to 3 minutes here, so
we have run out of time. I will ask my next question of you, Ms.
Kramer, next round.
I turn now to you.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Levin is recognized.
Representative LEVIN. Thank you. You know, I think the problem
is there may be no Copernicus when it comes to taxation. Whether
we like it or not, we are all somewhat Ptolemaic.
Chairman BAUCUS. The sun is the center of the solar system.
Representative LEVIN. I know, but what is the center of our tax
system? We have trouble agreeing on that even with 2 weeks left
and the inability to move on a few concrete tax and tax-related
issues. I think, in a sense, this hearing is very topical, because I
would think for the average person listening, they might conclude
that this explosion in these financial instruments is very much related to the recession that we have and the depths of it.
Do you think that is true? We have talked about how different
it is from 1986, the huge increase in the use of these instruments
and the failure to understand them. Do you think this was an important cause of where we are today? Do any of you want to venture an answer to that?
Tom, I guess I should not ask you that. Do you want to answer
it anyway?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Mr. Levin, a number of observers have made the
point that you have, that a failure of the housing market may have
contributed to increased risk that some people did not realize that
they were undertaking at the time. So I think it can reasonably be
said that some financial market problems certainly contributed to
our current economic slow growth and recession of 2 years ago.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00020

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

15
Representative LEVIN. Do any of you disagree with that? Do any
of you feel strongly about that? Mr. Miller, you talked about the
need to move from Ptolemy to Copernicus. That would seem to indicate something was very wrong, no?
Mr. MILLER. I was referring specifically to our tax system and
the fact that our tax system does not measure economic income,
which I think should be the center of our tax universe. I do not disagree with Tom’s statement, but it is a little out of my area of expertise.
Representative LEVIN. The same for you?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Yes.
Representative LEVIN. Mr. Raskolnikov, if we plug some of the
loopholes that you referred to, would we obtain sufficient added
revenue perhaps to cover the issues that we now face? Do you
think so?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. I think that by plugging some of the loopholes, you will obtain some revenue temporarily, but financial engineers are extremely adept at focusing on the remaining loopholes
or finding new ones. That is why incremental reform is good as far
as it gets, but eventually it is not going to succeed. It has not succeeded. You have been plugging loopholes, but some of those plugs
did not work. But even those that did work, people found new loopholes.
Representative LEVIN. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Congressman.
I would like now to recognize Senator Hatch.
Senator HATCH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to commend
each of you for being able to understand these areas. They are very
difficult for people in Congress and elsewhere.
This is a question first for Mr. Raskolnikov, and then for the entire panel. Professor, you make the point that basic financial instruments are unquestionably linked, at least, I think you make
that point. For example, a share of stock plus two options may be
used to produce an economic return that is the equivalent of interest on a bond. Yet we tax these instruments differently based on
what cubbyhole they fit into, and not on their economic effect.
Can you elaborate for us on how this can distort investment and
lead to tax avoidance?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Well, it can distort investment and lead to tax
avoidance because taxpayers have choices of making investments
in different forms, and needless to say, they are likely to choose the
form that results in the lowest tax liability. But in the real world,
alternatives are similar to each other, but not exactly the same.
And when there are two alternatives—let’s say there are only two.
There are usually more than two, but when there are two alternatives and, as a business, I would prefer alternative one, putting
taxes aside, but alternative two, that I actually do not like quite
as much, has a great tax result, overall I am going to end up taking alternative two. That is the distortion, and also it is a lot of
wasteful tax planning going on in creating alternative two to offer
to businesses and taxpayers.
Senator HATCH. My time is running out, so I would just like to
ask one more question that is different. I am sorry I did not have
time to ask each of you. And this is a question for the entire panel.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00021

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

16
The United States has a worldwide tax system with deferral of
earnings earned by foreign subsidiaries and a foreign tax credit for
income taxes paid to foreign countries. Now, if the United States
were to adopt a territorial tax system in the form of a dividend exemption, how would that impact the use of financial products?
Maybe we could start with you, Mr. Raskolnikov, and go to others.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. I will be very quick. It is the same problem
in a way or a similar problem as dropping the corporate tax rate.
It does not mean that it is not worth considering very seriously.
But instead of deferral, success in moving income offshore is now
permanent forgiveness, if you will. So there is a great incentive to
do this. Some of the problems that already exist today remain and
possibly some new appear. So just the stakes are higher, so the
pressure is greater.
Mr. MILLER. I agree with that statement absolutely. That is, if
the active income earned offshore is not taxable at all, then there
is a tremendous pressure to move income offshore, whether economically, or, if it is possible to use derivatives to do that, then to
do it that way.
Senator HATCH. Ms. Kramer?
Ms. KRAMER. I think that one of the key issues is that all of the
pieces kind of fit together and move maybe. And so what we have
is, if we can advantage one type of income or one type of investment, then, as my panelists have said, the consequences are that
it is going to then force decisions to be made to do business in a
way that is going to be most advantageous.
Senator HATCH. Mr. Barthold?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Thank you, Senator Hatch. I think it is important to remember that a number of the issues that are raised do
not involve cross-border transactions. While a number of them can,
a number do not. My simple, super-stylized example was an alldomestic transaction. A number of responses that the Congress has
made over time have really been in response to financial innovations that can be exploited solely in the domestic market. For example, 30 years ago, the OID rules for original issue discount
bonds, whether we had a territorial system as our corporate system
or not, that would not really have mattered to that financial innovation.
Senator HATCH. Thank you all. I appreciate it very much.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Herger is recognized.
Representative HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The JCT report describes how derivatives allow investors to magnify their position with leverage, because derivatives generally do not require
an up-front commitment of capital. Is this a distinction that should
matter for tax purposes? Mr. Raskolnikov first.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. So it is a question of leverage, and leverage
magnifies risk. Leverage can be certainly achieved with derivatives; it can also be achieved without derivatives. So now you are
thinking about the regulation of risk-taking, and that is a somewhat separate question than taxation of different types of income.
So, if you are particularly concerned about risk-taking and you
think there is too much in the economy, you would be concerned
about derivatives, but also about some non-derivatives as well.
Representative HERGER. Ms. Kramer?

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00022

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

17
Ms. KRAMER. The concept of leverage is not unique to derivative
products, and there are some products that are going to have more
of an opportunity for leverage than others. In the context of the
new financial services regulations and Dodd-Frank, we are going to
be seeing less leverage based on at least the proposed rules that
I have been seeing that have been proposed so far.
Representative HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Miller?
Mr. MILLER. Yes. I can borrow $100 and buy IBM stock, and I
am completely leveraged. I could also enter into an equity swap on
100 shares of IBM stock, and economically those are the same
transactions. My risk profile is exactly the same. One might make
the argument that those two transactions should be taxed the same
way for tax purposes, even though they are both completely leveraged.
Representative HERGER. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BAUCUS. Senator Wyden.
Senator WYDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to come back
to the question of these transactions, Mr. Barthold, in the context
of tax reform. As you know, there is great interest in the Congress
in looking at a territorial tax system, in effect, where you would
have a company only paying taxes in the country where they
earned the income. And Mr. Raskolnikov raised concerns about
this, talking about how this could make the problems associated
with derivatives worse. And there was a very good article written
by your predecessor, Ed Kleinbard, ‘‘The Lessons of Stateless Income.’’ Are you familiar with that, or have you heard about that
article?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Yes, I have had a chance to look at it some.
Senator WYDEN. Here is what concerns me—I think it is a very
important issue for the purposes of tax reform. What Professor
Kleinbard essentially says is, if you go to a territorial system and
you try to prevent abuses, the question of generating income in one
place and booking it somewhere else and the gaming associated
with expenses, you create so many additional problems for yourself
that it makes it more attractive to go the alternative route—which
is essentially what I have advocated—where you essentially drive
the rates down for our businesses. That way you do not have the
incentive to do all this gaming, and you do not have the incentive
to take businesses offshore the way you would have with a territorial system. So the key, of course, is, competitive rates solve so
many of the problems.
Now you touched on with Senator Hatch the question of dealing
with derivatives and hedging and the like on the domestic front,
but I see so much of the economy—and certainly, if the Congress
goes the territorial route—going global. So, if you could, touch on
the challenges—I do not want to turn you into a legislator here—
but touch on the challenges that Congress would have to deal with
with derivatives and hedging and the instruments we are looking
at today if you go with the territorial system.
Mr. BARTHOLD. Well, thank you, Senator Wyden. Obviously, you
raise a really complicated and broad question. A number of the
points that Ed Kleinbard identified are really about the location of
income in any system, whether it is worldwide or territorial. So a
number of the challenges that you see before you today in terms

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00023

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

18
of thinking through the taxation of derivatives can be somewhat
independent of the underlying system of business taxation. So I
think the broad point that is laid out in our report and that the
chairmen’s opening statements have made is, can we fashion a system that has complete neutrality, or at least more neutral treatment across more instruments, or will the Congress always be in
the situation of chasing after the most recent or 5-year-old financial innovation because we did not like the outcome?
I think that is the challenge for the members in the context of
broad tax reform, whichever way you intend to go in terms of the
business taxation system that you may create.
Senator WYDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you, Senator.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Representative JOHNSON. Thank you. Ms. Kramer, in your testimony, you believe there is not really a tax loophole problem with
respect to derivatives, but rather that the basic rules are far too
restrictive and, as a result, are inhibiting legitimate commercial
and financial activities. Let me ask at the outset, do you believe
these rules are having a negative impact on job creation?
Ms. KRAMER. Yes, I do. I would clarify that there are derivatives
that are used for abusive transactions, but that many of the types
of abuses that we are talking about could actually be addressed in
the context of a broader hedging and risk-management exception.
And I do know from personal experience that there are inhibitions
put on activities that businesses do because they are concerned
about the tax treatment of their transactions. And those are nonabusive risk-management and hedging transactions.
Representative JOHNSON. Well, from my understanding, you recommend creating an IRS list of acceptable hedges. Would we not
however be better off with a hedging definition that could withstand the test of time; in other words, a definition that could more
or less keep up with the innovations in hedging? Would you comment?
Ms. KRAMER. I would agree with you that having a list of acceptable hedges is not really the appropriate way to go. We would need
to be defining the types of transactions that we would want to
qualify as hedges or risk-management transactions. And it turns
out that many of those transactions could actually—if we expanded
the definitions of hedging beyond ordinary assets, ordinary obligations, and borrowings—what we could do is, we could actually
sweep in a lot of the structured product transactions that currently
require new and creative rules to stop them, because they could be
swept into the hedging rules and would be subject to the clear reflection of income or the integration rules that apply to hedging
transactions.
And so, it could actually do two things: it could both encourage
business and investment activities, but it could also stop some of
the abuses where one derivative is taxed in a particular way, and
it is paired up with another product taxed in a different way.
Representative JOHNSON. Thank you, ma’am. I yield back.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you. Next, Senator Cardin.
Senator CARDIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and let me thank
our witnesses for their testimony here.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00024

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

19
Let me ask a fundamental question, and that is, can we really
do anything about this within the existing tax code? Sure, we can
make some short-term corrections. We could do mark to market for
a certain segment and catch those who are currently abusing the
intent of the code. But, as we have seen over the last 5 years, with
the new products that are on the market, and with the type of tax
planning that goes forward, it is hard to predict what type of financial instruments are going to be out there 5 years from now. And
whether we put exceptions in, as some of you have suggested, in
dealing with legitimate hedge investments, where the definition of
that becomes subject to abuse, or we use income limits, which can
be subject to abuse, or we do other things with exemptions, as Congress tends to do as it develops the political realities of what we
do around this place, the question is whether we can, over any period of time, handle the abuses that are currently in the financial
products that you are talking about within our current tax code,
which I think brings about the fundamental question of, how soon
we can get to fundamental tax reform in this country.
I have been proposing that we use less income taxes and use
more consumption taxes, and do it in a way that is more progressive than our current tax code, which has been suggested. My question to you is, is there a way to permanently fix this, or do you believe that, even if we look at some of the suggestions that you are
making on a current basis, we should really be looking at fundamental change in our tax code? Because what is happening with
the taxation of financial products is, I think, symptomatic of the
fundamental problem of our current income tax code that we tried
to simplify in 1986. It lasted maybe 1 year before we started changing it. Any comments?
Mr. MILLER. I can comment. As you know, I think mark to market is the only system that accurately measures economic income.
I think the broader the number and types of financial instruments
that are subject to mark to market, the more accurate our tax system is. I have somewhat arbitrarily limited my broad comprehensive proposal to the one-tenth of 1 percent of wealthiest individuals
and corporations, and that is somewhat arbitrary, but I think that
those are really the only class of individuals who enter into these
type of derivatives that we are talking about. And I think that the
bang for the buck is highest at those levels.
Senator CARDIN. Let me interrupt for a moment. I agree with
what you are saying. The problem is, in 1986 we thought we were
doing fundamental tax reform, and it did not last very long. If we
go mark to market for a limited group, how long do you think it
will remain in Congress before we start changing it?
Ms. KRAMER. Can I jump in on that one? One of the things is
that, if it were a year last time, maybe you might get 18 months,
so I think that is really what the issue is. Because, wherever there
is an opportunity, then there is going to be planning. And so my
concern with scrapping the existing system, where at least we
know how it works and where the pieces are—that is, if we were
to go to something like a mark-to-market system, it would need to
be, what is in, what is out? I mean, that is the first question. What
would be covered? How would it be valued? Who would do the valuation? I know that Mr. Miller has a lot of opinions about that, and

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00025

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

20
we could talk about the differences there. But the reality is that,
whatever changes are made, there will be new opportunities, and
those opportunities will be filled. If not, 18 months would be the
outer limits in my judgment.
Senator CARDIN. Thank you. I thank the witnesses.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Rangel is recognized.
Representative RANGEL. Thank you. This is an exciting exchange,
and I just hope that it is not just academic. It seems to me that
the creation of these exotic instruments basically is an incentive for
people who want to avoid taxes; is that right?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. To a certain extent. To an extent for businesses to manage risk and——
Representative RANGEL. While it is great talking to professors,
when I was chairman and as long as I have been on this committee, the policymakers fiscally in the corporate structure, you can
talk with them, and they say generally, I do not mind a fair system
as long as it is fair to my particular industry. But when the lobbyists come down, they do not care what is fair or not. They are paid
to make changes that the people who pay them want. And so the
whole idea of good government—I think outside of the tax-writing
committees that want so badly to believe this is on the level, to a
large extent it is, where is the leadership in the country to determine what risk members of Congress are prepared to take? So
somebody would be hurt when you bring in reform. And I do not
know whether, because you teach it, you get such a great satisfaction out of, ‘‘Gee, if I had my way,’’ but you do not have your way.
And we cannot agree as Democrats and Republicans to give tax
fairness to middle America. People are making commitments to, ‘‘I
do not care what happens, I am not going to change anything; if
it is a loophole and it creates revenue, count me out.’’
Where do all of the studies you have and all of the students
whom you are sending out—what could you suggest before we start
making the difficult decisions? What do we have to do as a Congress to even contemplate making the dramatic reforms that are so
necessary for economic growth to our great Nation?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. So, in connection with financial products, I
would say the broader the reform, the fewer possibilities there are
to create loopholes. So that is the guiding principle: fewer opportunities are there for lobbyists who come and have separate exceptions for this, that, or the other thing. If the incremental line drawing continues, that is just an invitation to continue as has been
done so far.
Representative RANGEL. But the decision has to be made by how
the voters respect us in doing the thing that is in the Nation’s best
interest. And I know this is outside of your portfolio, but, if people
do not like each other and do not talk with each other, and there
is going to be risk involved, political risk, and one of your students
was to ask you, how do we get started in this—you are sending
them out in the real world; do you tell them that this is just an
academic thing? Yes, ma’am.
Ms. KRAMER. Well, I actually teach as well, at Northwestern Law
School, the taxation of derivatives.
Representative RANGEL. The fact that most of you teach was the
basis of my assumption.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00026

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

21
Ms. KRAMER. But in response to that though, what I would have
to say is that perhaps the reason that my reform proposal seems
so modest compared to my panelists is because I am a realist, and
I think that the likelihood that we could actually get the types of
dramatic changes made in a way that would work across the board
are impossible. And so, looking at the system that we have and trying to figure out how we can avoid abuse and encourage the economic development that we need, it seems to me that by putting
more transactions into the hedging and risk-management bucket,
I view that as being a major improvement in the system. But as
to totally scrapping it and starting over, I cannot imagine that that
is a likely possibility.
Representative RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope, Professor Kramer, that you might send to me the answer you would
give to a student who asked my question. Thank you.
Ms. KRAMER. Afterwards.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you very much. Senator Nelson, you
are next.
Senator NELSON. The complexity and the appearance of special
interest treatment in the tax code is what has the American people
understandably upset. I want to zero in on one particular provision
where the Dodd-Frank Act amended section 1256. It was that the
holder of a derivative must pay capital gains tax on any appreciation on their derivatives on that contract at the end of the year,
regardless of whether the holder had sold it off. And to defer to Mr.
Miller, that is the mark-to-market tax treatment. But there was a
section 1256 in both the House and Senate versions of Dodd-Frank
that had no change. In the conference committee, at the last moment, a change was added that exempted traders from section
1256, and Dodd-Frank thus ensured that these traders can continue to defer taxes on their derivative holdings.
Now, Mr. Barthold, I wanted to ask you, does this Dodd-Frank
provision, does it continue to defer taxes on the income generated,
as it apparently does, by the derivative holdings? Who are the likely beneficiaries of that provision? And would it be more appropriate
for credit default swaps and other exchange-traded derivatives to
be subject to the annual taxation on their gain?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Senator Nelson, thank you for the question.
Maybe just to clarify for all the members, under section 1256, regulated futures contracts, which are basically the scope of section
1256, are marked to market annually at the close of the year. So
that identifies their timing in terms of one of the aspects of thinking of financial instruments. They are also given a special character in that they are accorded 60-percent long-term capital gain
treatment and 40-percent short-term capital gain treatment.
You asked about the change; in particular you are focusing on
the change in the conference agreement on the Dodd-Frank bill.
What you had going into that conference—and I assume that this
is what the conferees had discussed—is the scope of regulated futures contracts subject to 1256 under present law is somewhat unclear. There is some argument about the breadth of what would be
regulated futures contracts. So the question in the Dodd-Frank bill
was, was 1256 going to continue to apply only to what you might
call traditional futures contracts or was it going to be any contract,

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00027

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

22
including swaps? The Internal Revenue Service has always taken
what my colleagues and I think of as a rather narrow view of 1256
contracts. So one interpretation absent the changes in conference
is that you could have had an expansion of 1256.
Now, since a lot of these contracts are reconciled within a 12month period, in the normal course, a number of contracts would
be short-term gain to individuals. So any change changing the
breadth of what is covered under 1256 potentially benefits some
people; it could also harm some people. You could benefit if you are
automatically given the 60/40 treatment on your contract, which
you would not have gotten otherwise under present law. So what
the conference agreement did is, it was really intended to clarify
the scope of 1256 to say that it did not include swap contracts.
Now, the second part of your question is, should it include swap
contracts, and that is not really a question for me. We could talk
further.
Senator NELSON. Well, what you are saying is, there are winners
and losers. Who are the winners?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Well, I will tell you—as we reported for the purpose of the CBO analysis of the Dodd-Frank legislation—that we
estimated, in fact, that there would be a modest increase in revenues from the change that was made in conference. That is a consequence of adding clarity that individuals could not take the position that this was, in fact, a 1256 contract on which they could take
60-percent long-term capital gains, the preferential rate under
present law. So, for the purpose of scoring that legislation, we said
that the result of this change made in conference was to increase
by a little over $100 million across the budget period, the revenues
incoming as a result of the legislation.
I cannot—I will have to look further and follow up with you on
potential types of taxpayers who would have benefitted or lost in
terms of individuals, different types of business entities, and I will
follow up—my staff and I will follow up with you on that.
Senator NELSON. Mr. Chairman, could that follow-up be inserted
as part of the record?
Chairman BAUCUS. Absolutely.
Senator NELSON. Thank you.
Chairman BAUCUS. You bet.
Representative CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Davis is recognized.
Representative DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for both
chairs for holding this hearing. I would disagree with the gentleman who spoke earlier and made the comment that someone has
to get hurt when there are reforms. I think that base is a false
premise and actually asks the wrong question.
From my experience in business operation process reforms, I
would probably go in a little different direction. The premise I
learned to operate under in metrics and measurements was that,
if you want to maximize effectiveness, transparency, accountability,
in effect, measure the right things, you have to strive to minimize
complexity, hopefully not with the fate that Copernicus suffered for
sharing the truth.
In a more immediate context, what I see in much of this discussion over financial regulatory aspects and taxation is, if we have
broken processes at the core and we paper them over by adding

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00028

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

23
more rules leading to more overhead cost for compliance, less agility for the institutions, and difficulty in performing to standard,
that in fact can lead to an increase in subjectivity in enforcement
or even contradictory rules depending on what side of the process
we are dealing with.
With that said, Ms. Kramer remarked that Sarbanes-Oxley was
66 pages long and mandated 16 rulemakings and 6 studies. In contrast, Dodd-Frank, which I do not believe has been helpful to solving the root cause of the problem, is 849 pages long, or over 2,000
pages counting the pages from the committee print, and mandates
more than 240 rulemakings and nearly 70 studies. Many of the
deadlines are tight and many have been exceeded already and
missed. Here is a question for any of the witnesses: do you think
the enormity of the regulatory projects in Dodd-Frank, keeping in
mind the premise I had laid out that, to maximize effectiveness,
you minimize complexity, do you think that these very quick deadlines could result in mistakes that would have implications for the
tax treatment of these instruments? I throw that open to any of the
witnesses.
Ms. KRAMER. Well, it is my view that it is better to go slowly and
get it right than to come up with rules that do not work. And so
although the——
Representative DAVIS. That would be a novel concept in Washington.
Ms. KRAMER. But that is really what my view is, which is that
the Congress really gave the regulators an impossible task of trying to accomplish in 360 days what the equity markets took 70
years to figure out. And so I think that it is better that the rules
are done carefully and slowly than to just get them out and they
are wrong.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. I just want to mention, as related to financial
products taxation, your view would suggest that we are much better off with broader reform because we can explain three basic approaches here in 10 minutes or 20 minutes. If you ask us to explain
current rules, you know, it would take, I don’t know, months. And
so, any kind of fundamental reform that treats derivatives as a
group, even if it is much more transparent, much clearer, still a
few underlying issues will remain: derivative versus non-derivative,
and derivative versus derivative used as a hedge. But there is a
few compared to, you know, 500.
Representative DAVIS. Thank you. Mr. Barthold?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Mr. Davis, my colleagues and I always prefer a
more deliberate approach to try to get all the technical details right
so that the members have an opportunity to think through the
ramifications, the policy changes. I believe that is what Chairman
Camp and Chairman Baucus have been trying to do throughout
these years: take a very deliberative look at the Internal Revenue
Code.
Mr. MILLER. I will decline to speak on Dodd-Frank.
Representative DAVIS. Probably a wise choice. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BAUCUS. I thank everybody. I do not see any more
Senators, so I will ask another question.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00029

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

24
I told you, Ms. Kramer, I would give you an opportunity to talk
about mark to market. Is there anything else you want to say
about mark to market? Do you agree with the concept, or do you
just think it is too complicated and, therefore, cannot be implemented?
Ms. KRAMER. There are situations where we do have the markto-market rules in place now. And what my concerns are with
going to a broad mark to market—and I already mentioned some
of them. What is in? What is out? How do you value it? How do
we address the issues with respect to the pieces that are in mark
to market versus the pieces that are not? Because to throw everything into a mark-to-market system then would raise questions
about illiquid assets and how do we value these. And I think that
the problem that we have is that, from an administrative and policy standpoint, I personally believe that it would be very, very difficult to impose a mark-to-market system that would actually accomplish the reforms that we are talking about.
Chairman BAUCUS. Professor, how do you deal with that?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. The problem is that, while everything Ms.
Kramer said is correct, she is identifying a line-drawing problem:
what is in, what is out, what is subject to mark to market, and
what is not. It is a problem; it always exists whenever there is a
line. The difference is that today we have like 50 of those lines. We
need to decide what is the difference between a forward and a swap
and an option and a swaption, and we can keep going on and on.
No, seriously, there is such a thing as a swaption. So, caps and
floors; it is endless.
Chairman BAUCUS. There is a swaption?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Swaption—it is an option and a swap.
Ms. KRAMER. You do not really want to know.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. You do not really want to know. So mark to
market, there will be a line-drawing problem, two actually big linedrawing problems: what is subject to mark to market and what is
not, and what is a derivative that is a hedge that is totally separate and what is not. But now we have 22 or 222.
Chairman BAUCUS. How would you deal with variable prepaid
forward contracts?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Well, in the mark-to-market regime, it is very
simple: you look at the fair market values. Again, with the vast
majority of counterparties, at least one counterparty on a variable
prepaid forward contract is a financial institution that is already
on mark to market for its tax purposes and has to determine those
fair market values. They just need to tell the investor or the company, whoever is on the other side, what they are including.
Chairman BAUCUS. Ms. Kramer, do you think it is too difficult
to implement, or do you also disagree with the principle?
Ms. KRAMER. I also disagree with the principle.
Chairman BAUCUS. Why is that? Why is that not right? Just cut
to the chase: what is the market value?
Ms. KRAMER. Well, if we are only talking about publicly traded
instruments, then it is easier to find market value; you know what
it is. But in the context of expanding mark to market to other types
of products or instruments, then I have to say that there will be
broad differences as to value and differences of opinion, even some-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00030

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

25
thing that has a long date to it, a long maturity date. That has
really been a very, very big issue in trying to figure out valuation.
So I really see it as a critical problem with the whole thing.
Chairman BAUCUS. My time has expired. Chairman Camp?
Representative CAMP. Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Representative REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
the witnesses for their testimony.
Professor Raskolnikov, you testified that the IRS has authority
to share information with analysts about the use of financial instruments, but it does not do so. Why do you think they do not
share that information?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. It is hard to say. Actually it is hard to say,
because the standard answer is taxpayer privacy and taxpayer protection, and, of course, this is a paramount concern. It is in the law
and absolutely essential to preserve that protection, but IRS now
has enormous amounts of data in electronic form. And stripping
taxpayer identifying information is not that hard. So this is the
greatest opportunity to urge you to give them a little nudge, because it will be incredibly useful, and they are talented, dedicated
economists who will be delighted, at no cost to the public, to do this
research and give us a much better idea about what is going on.
Representative REICHERT. Is there just a small group of the population of taxpayers that is affected by this concern regarding privacy?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. No, I think it is not a small group. But the
privacy can be preserved, that is the more important——
Representative REICHERT. Some transactions, I understand, are
so unique that some taxpayers might be identified just by looking
at what kind of transaction it might be.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Maybe. And so the IRS will need to look more
carefully. A lot of transactions, variable prepaid forwards, are done
by hundreds if not probably thousands of taxpayers. And so what
do we know about the magnitude of revenue losses? What do we
know about what these people would have done if they could not
do this variable prepaid forward——
Representative REICHERT. I am an old retired cop; that is my
background. I want to know everything. I think the more information we have, the better off we are making decisions about tax reform. You just touched on a couple of things there. What do you
think Congress could gain from acquiring the information that the
IRS has regarding the use of these tools?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. The most simple answer is, you will have a
much better idea of revenue estimates.
Representative REICHERT. Okay. Thank you. To move on to another question—I have 40 seconds here. We normally think of complex financial products as being the domain of the sophisticated
and wealthy, but there seems to be a trend toward developing a
tax-advantaged financial product for smaller, more retail investors.
Are you seeing that? I understand the so-called exchange-traded
notes are an example of such a product. Does anyone wish to comment on that? Mr. Miller?
Mr. MILLER. I think the trend has been toward expanding the investor base for those products. There are, as I mentioned, $200 bil-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00031

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

26
lion in publicly registered SEC exchange-traded notes or structured
notes. So that has been the trend.
Representative REICHERT. Anyone else?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. I agree.
Representative REICHERT. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Lewis is recognized.
Representative LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman,
the last time both of our committees were together in this room,
we were approaching the debt ceiling and did not talk about it.
This time we find our committees together, and again we are not
talking about the most pressing issues of the day. There is a growing gap between the haves and the have-nots. All across the globe,
economic inequality is increasing. And right here at home in the
United States, over the past 30 years, we have seen a tremendous
increase in wealth for the richest among us, those who have the
most.
Make no mistake, there is nothing wrong with making money,
but something is wrong when the middle class and the working
poor are left out and left behind, they are forgotten. The last 30
years have not been kind to them: stagnating wages, loss of their
jobs, their homes, and their retirement savings. Unemployment insurance is a critical lifeline for too many of the people, not just in
my district or my State, but throughout our country.
Many who call my office are unemployed for the first time in
their careers. Some have 10, 20, 30 years of work experience. They
are educated and never thought this would happen to them. Others
are just entering the workforce and are the first to be cut when
times are tough and difficult. These are our fathers, our mothers,
our daughters, our sons, our brothers, our sisters, aunts and uncles
and cousins, who lost their jobs through no fault of their own.
Congress needs to be compassionate; we must listen to the people. This is the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression,
and it calls for extraordinary action, here and now. I strongly believe that we must pass a clean extension of unemployment benefits, and we must pass it now. It is the right thing to do; it is the
moral thing to do, Mr. Chairman. I wonder whether any member
of the panel has any response to my statement? Professor, you are
a teacher, you are an educator. You educate a lot of young people,
train a lot of students.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. When I teach them, we certainly talk about
the growth of income inequality in this country, but as far as financial products are concerned, there is nothing I can tell about any
direct connection between one or another.
Representative LEWIS. Any other members of the panel?
Ms. KRAMER. Well, what I would like to add to that is, given the
situation that you have painted, the reality, my concern is that trying to turn the existing system upside down could cause some problems, and that working with a broader—I feel like I am saying the
same thing again, but working with broader hedging and riskmanagement exemptions for businesses, I think, could only benefit
the employees as well.
Representative LEWIS. But some people suggest maybe we have
to turn things upside down to turn it right side up. Mr. Miller?

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00032

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

27
Mr. MILLER. I harken back to Congressman Rangel. I agree with
him that cooperation and conversation are good things, and I am
an optimist. I would not be here unless I did not think you can improve things.
Representative LEWIS. Mr. Barthold? I am hopeful and optimistic——
Mr. BARTHOLD. It is not appropriate for me to comment. These
are member decisions, as you pointed out.
Representative LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
Mr. Chairman.
Representative CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Paulsen is recognized.
Representative PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me ask
this question of all the witnesses. Because the financial instruments that are used have parties on both sides of the equation, oftentimes the treatment of the issue of an instrument must be mirrored by the holder as well. And so, in theory, that symmetry that
is going to be there is going to tend to minimize the consequences
even to the IRS because, even if the issuer receives a tax advantage to the holder, supposedly in practice, on the other side there
may be an advantage or disadvantage if it goes both ways. Advantage versus disadvantage—any comments on that in terms of if, in
practice, that actually exists with those financial products and how
that——
Mr. MILLER. In practice it does not exist. Let me give you a few
examples. First we talked before about prepaid forwards that allow
investors to defer their income and gain. On the other side of every
one of those transactions is a financial institution that is on mark
to market. Those financial institutions are completely indifferent.
So there is no symmetry; they are simply paying tax on their profits, whereas the taxpayer is able to defer.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Just to give you one more example of how this
works. So there are financial instruments called convertible bonds,
and you can add a little bit of an uncertainty to this convertible
bond, and it will become a contingent convertible bond. So convertible bonds give low-interest deductions to issuers, and therefore
low-interest inclusions to holders. Contingent convertible bonds
that are really similar economically—not identical, but very similar—give high-interest deductions to the issuers and high-interest
inclusions to the holders. So you would say, isn’t that fixed; there
is a friction? Well, the answer is no, because there are clientele effects, and corporations and markets direct convertible bonds and
contingent convertible bonds to the right investors.
So, where issuers take high deductions, the holders are all taxexempt—pension funds, for example, or foreigners—so they are not
including income. When the issuer does not need high deductions,
then there are taxable holders of those bonds. So financial markets
are extremely good at doing this kind of thing so there is no friction, and therefore there are revenue losses.
Representative PAULSEN. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Marchant is recognized.
Representative MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When we
think about complex financial instruments, we usually think that
these are instruments that are primarily used by the rich or the
sophisticated or those who can afford the advice. But in the last 2

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00033

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

28
years, one of the most explosive new products on the market has
been the exchange-traded funds, which have pretty much put at
the fingertips of very small investors and very unsophisticated investors, some very sophisticated tax planning, tax vehicles. Could
the panel comment today on how we might take those new instruments into consideration when we look at the reform of the tax
code?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Well, exchange-traded funds are less of a derivative. I think what you might be referring to are exchangetraded notes, that have proliferated dramatically in the past few
years. They are derivatives, and they are fairly complicated. They
allow one both to defer income and convert some of the short-term
capital gain and ordinary income into long-term capital gain. In
fact, you know, there is definitely a derivatives-to-the-masses
movement, and you should be concerned about this because, in
terms of revenue, once middle-class investors are allowed this opportunity to convert and defer income on an instrument that, at
least before the financial crisis, looked very similar to an investment in a mutual fund, they will start investing into the lower-tax
alternative, and the revenue will be lost.
And going back to the prior discussion, then it turns out that
these exchange-traded notes are not exactly like mutual funds.
When you invest in mutual funds, you actually have assets, but
exchange-traded notes are unsecured claims, and when the
exchange-traded notes are issued by Lehman Brothers, you know,
the holders of those notes are not feeling so good right now.
So that is how tax systems sort of move people to do things they
would not have done otherwise. So, in addition to revenue losses,
there are other social costs—because Lehman ETN investors would
have been better off if they had held Vanguard shares, so all of this
is serious.
Representative MARCHANT. Mr. Miller?
Mr. MILLER. I agree with what the professor said. I tend to
think, although these products are issued to lower-income investors
as well—and I am referring to the ETNs—I tend to think, and yet
I do not have the data, but I tend to think they are overwhelmingly
purchased by the wealthy. I think generally the comments made
are accurate that, for a low-income investor, in most cases, they
would be better advised to invest in a more traditional mutual
fund.
Representative MARCHANT. Ms. Kramer?
Ms. KRAMER. I really do not have anything to add on the
exchange-traded notes other than what has been said.
Representative MARCHANT. Okay. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Crowley is recognized.
Representative CROWLEY. I thank the chairmen, both Camp and
Baucus, for this hearing today. And I find it interesting. Overall,
the potential taxation of these instruments is complicated, to say
the least. And, while the topic at hand is one that has the Princeton economics department atwitter, I think we need to really focus
back on what is really important to the average American citizen
today.
Mr. Barthold, in 3 weeks, on December 31st, the payroll tax holiday created by Congress last year will expire; is that correct?

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00034

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

29
Mr. BARTHOLD. Yes, sir.
Representative CROWLEY. The payroll tax holiday was passed
into law by the former Democratic majority in the House and Senate and was meant to provide an immediate cut in the payroll tax,
which is paid by all workers and employers at a rate of 6.2 percent
each on the first $106,800 of wages earned in the given year. This
payroll tax cut meant tax savings of $1,100 this year in a worker’s
paycheck for a family earning $55,000, probably an average income
in the area that I represent. But on January 1st, 2012, if the
Republican-led House continues its path of doing nothing for the
middle class, nothing for job creation, people with an annual income of $55,000 will see their income taxes raised by $1,100. Talk
about an unhappy New Year.
It has been 3 months since President Obama not only proposed
extending this payroll tax relief, but expanding it to make it more
generous for workers, as well as to provide payroll tax relief for
employers, those actually trying to create jobs in this economy. Yet
despite the leadership of the President and calls for action from the
American people, this Congress continues to operate at a standstill.
This Congress has provided no vision, no plan for how to move the
Nation forward and get our economy back on track.
Now, with only 25 days until the end of the year, we are on a
collision course to let income taxes increase on Americans by over
$1,100 due to the continued refusal of the House to even consider
legislation to extend the payroll tax cut.
My colleagues, the American people need more than knee-jerk
legislation; they need more than last-minute squabbling about
whether or not middle-class families and small businesses deserve
tax relief. Let us give relief to small businesses and working people
today, and let us start spending time on creating a bigger vision
for how to ensure America’s best days are still ahead. With that,
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Representative CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Berg is recognized.
Representative BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This question
is really for the whole panel, and one of the areas I am most interested in is derivatives. My question is, is there an example of some
other country that has really figured out the best way to tax derivatives? Is there an example that is out there that is being tested
that we can look to and say, hey, there is a model we can follow?
Mr. BARTHOLD. Mr. Berg, I am not aware of another western
country that has gone completely to mark to market or, as was suggested, retroactive taxation or anticipatory taxation with a broad
treatment across every possible financial instrument.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. I am not aware either, but I want to emphasize that, with a few exceptions of major financial centers—London,
Hong Kong, Tokyo, and a few others—there are really not that
many countries that face the pressure as much as we do and where
the volume of financial innovation is anywhere comparable to that
volume in the United States.
Chairman BAUCUS. Why is that?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. That is because the U.S., New York, is a
major financial center of the world, and there is an incredible number of highly trained and very talented people focused on this, as

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00035

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

30
is true of London and a few others. So there is just capacity to develop this.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you. I apologize, Mr. Berg.
Representative BERG. No, no, not at all; any time, Mr. Chairman.
I yield.
Chairman BAUCUS. It was a question in my mind too. I was
going to ask—there is a movement among many countries to move
to a LIFO system of accounting. Is there any movement overseas
on how to tax these new exotics? You have already answered the
question: apart from the other major financial centers, this is really
not as much of an issue as it is in this country. I apologize. Go
ahead.
Representative BERG. Just a quick—I suppose I get another
minute now, though.
Chairman BAUCUS. Take a couple.
Representative BERG. No, no, no. One quick follow-up. The
follow-up is, if we go to mark to market on derivatives, are there
unintended consequences that might happen? I am just wondering
if people, because they are really not getting cash, if they pay a tax
on that, would that force them to liquidate things to generate cash?
Does anyone see that as an unintended consequence?
Mr. MILLER. I will take that. One thing that is the natural consequence of imposing mark to market on some products rather
than others is that you tend to move people into those other products, and, once again, people start looking for ways out of the
mark-to-market system. So, for example, if you mark to market derivatives and you do not mark to market physicals, people could
use physicals to create partnerships that create synthetic derivatives. So you have to think about the behavioral responses to a partial mark-to-market system. So one is, you have to police around
those margins.
Second, your point is well-taken that if you are imposing markto-market taxation, that is, taxing people before they have the
cash, you have to ask, are they sufficiently liquid? If you are only
doing publicly traded derivatives, then you have a mark, and usually sophisticated taxpayers can negotiate for the requisite liquidity. The idea is, if you establish the clear rule and it applies prospectively, then taxpayers who are worried about the liquidity will
not enter into the derivatives.
Representative BERG. Thank you. I yield back.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Reed is recognized.
Representative REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was just interested—there has been some discussion, some debate about a little, unrelated issue, it may be related, on imposing taxes on the actual transaction—the financial transaction tax. I have taken a position on it—I do not want to share that position with you—but I am
interested in having the conversation. If the panel could offer some
insight as to the pros and cons of imposing a financial transaction
tax, I would be appreciative of that. Anyone, other than Mr.
Barthold? Go with the professor; he is always on the spot.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. We are almost all professors. But I think—I
do not have a strong view. I, you know, did not prepare for this
hearing to answer this question, but I think it certainly should be
considered. I know that you have discussed it at the previous joint

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00036

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

31
hearing. It is sort of like throwing sand in the wheels; you sort of
hope to slow down things that you cannot quite control. If you really are buying time, maybe—but it would be great also to figure out
the ways to control things that you are trying to control. But this
is not a particularly educated view, so maybe I should not have
said as much as I have said.
Representative REED. No, I appreciate that. The other two
please, just your comments. We are going to put you on the spot.
Ladies first.
Ms. KRAMER. The sand in the gears is really the concern with the
transaction tax, because what happens is, it discourages the transactions. And so the question is, is that really the objective or the
way that we want to solve whatever issue it is that we are dealing
with? And, in the context of the derivatives that we have been talking about, the concept of a transaction tax probably does not make
sense unless we are only looking at exchange-traded products,
where we would be able to capture that tax readily.
Mr. MILLER. I have been focused on a tax system that matches
economic income so that it does not affect taxpayers’ behavior. Obviously, a transaction tax is a very different type of tax, in part,
because it is designed to affect taxpayers’ behavior. I think that is
a sort of different inquiry. I think you have to worry a lot about
exactly how it is constructed. The EU has proposed a financial
transaction tax that has the consequence of imposing multiple
taxes on single transactions, so you have to worry about exactly
how it is implemented, and you have to tread very carefully.
Representative REED. With that, I will yield back. Thank you.
Representative CAMP. Mr. Neal is recognized.
Representative NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Professor, I
thought you did a good job in explaining the difference between
exchange-traded notes and mutual funds: the difficulty is the issue
of risk. For the bank that offers that opportunity, the problem is,
as you cited with Lehman Brothers, where would individual investors go to collect? I guess the question I would have for you is, how
do you explain in the market that element of risk when there is
no congressional backup to fill the tax gap? I offered legislation on
this in 2006.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. Of course, I supported that legislation.
Representative NEAL. That might have been singular. But the
question I raised at the time is still prevalent in the sense it has
been discovered here.
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. So the reason it is still prevalent is because
of Too Big to Fail. So, on the one hand, the financial crisis, and
Lehman in particular, revealed very starkly that exchange-traded
notes are different from mutual fund shares, and investors should
think very hard before they decide that an unsecured claim on a
bank or a financial institution is as good as actual assets in a mutual fund.
On the other hand, today a lot of the exchange-traded notes are
issued by huge financial institutions. My impression is that, you
know, even before the bailouts, but especially after the bailouts, nobody believes that any major financial institution will be allowed
to fail. And not only that, during the bailout, if the memory serves
right, not only the major financial institutions in the United States

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00037

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

32
were bailed out, basically nobody lost money; no creditors lost
money. And so, if that is true, then there is really nothing to worry
about for ETN holders, and so then the problems that you were
trying to address 3 years ago very much exist today.
Representative NEAL. So it is heads they win and tails they win?
Mr. RASKOLNIKOV. In the case of a bailout? Yes, meaning that
ETN investors defer taxes, they convert high-tax income into lowtax income, and then, when the financial institution is in trouble,
taxpayers come and bail them out.
Representative NEAL. Mr. Chairman, I think we have done a
good job in the committee this year holding hearings. They have
been very helpful in terms of a variety of opinions as we talk about
this. But I also think that the country would be well-served if we
were to insist that the presidential candidates next year took up
this issue earnestly and moved away from some of the issues that
frequently cloud the debate.
And I call that to your attention because I think we could be very
helpful on that basis, and the truth is, unless those two candidates
crystallize these issues, the American people will continue to feel
very sour about the tax code. Much of the debate is frequently driven by the front page of major publications, including the Estée
Lauder story in The New York Times. The witnesses are very helpful to this discussion, but what they do is they provide us with a
lot of ammunition and a lot of information.
The difficulty is, I suspect, until the Presidential candidates say
we are going to aggressively hear what everybody has to say on
this and we are going to offer some far-reaching proposals—because the issue that I have just talked about here with exchangetraded notes, they are moving again. They are moving again. And
they came to sort of a calamitous halt after Lehman Brothers, but
they are becoming attractive again. And as the professor suggested,
of course, they are going to be attractive if the investor comes to
believe that the government is going to step in afterwards and
make everybody whole. Thank you.
Chairman BAUCUS. Thank you. That is a very constructive idea,
and I appreciate that.
Representative CAMP. Thank you. I might have just one more
question.
First of all, I agree. I appreciate the testimony today. But different participants in this market are treated differently, whether
you are an investor, a trader, or a dealer, as you all have pointed
out. Does that help lead to the differential treatment, tax treatment of financial products, and is it worth looking at how to treat
these different participants in a more uniform way?
If you would like to comment, anyone who would like to comment
on that.
Mr. MILLER. I think one point, and this was alluded to before,
is we have dealers who are subject to mark to market, we have investors who are not. Therefore, dealers can permit investors to
defer with no adverse tax consequences to the dealer. If we expanded that treatment of mark to market across the spectrum to
investors, then we would not have the situation where one party
is deferring their tax and the other is indifferent.

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00038

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

33
Representative CAMP. And should those who are hedging be
treated differently than those who are speculating?
Mr. MILLER. I think they should be. So, in each of my proposals,
I have carved out or excepted taxpayers that hedge their ordinary
income and liabilities, like the farmers and the business owners. So
I think that it is appropriate to carve out taxpayers who hedge in
the ordinary course of their business their ordinary income and assets.
Representative CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Schock is recognized.
Representative SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As an Illinois member and home to the CME and the Board of
Trade, we have a lot of traders in our State. Ms. Kramer, being
from Illinois yourself, I am interested in your perspective on some
rulemaking that has just been posted.
On September 16th of this year, the Treasury Department issued
proposed regulations entitled ‘‘Swap Exclusions for Section 1256
Contracts.’’ I am sure you are aware that many of the traders in
Illinois are large corporations, but also there is an entrepreneur
element, pass-through entities. And knowing that those small businesses—I have visited them—in our State that employ these traders that benefit from CME and the Board of Trade being in Illinois,
their tax treatment is different. Specifically the 60–40, they benefit
more from that than a C corp.
The rulemaking that the Treasury Department proposed seeks to
do away with that. I am interested, as a tax attorney from Illinois,
whether you are aware of that and, if so, if you have an opinion
on it, and whether those regulations concerning 1256 which expand
further the definition of a swap and narrow the definition of a section 1256 contract, are consistent with what was intended by the
Dodd-Frank Act, or do you believe that they go further than what
was intended in that legislation?
Ms. KRAMER. A great question. As a starting point, the provision
to remove certain swap products from 1256 treatment has been discussed previously, and the concept behind that was that the concern was to get—that there would be more products that would be
moving into 1256 treatment, and the exclusion that was put in
Dodd-Frank is to make it clear that certain products cannot migrate into the 1256 regime. So, based on my view that that is what
the statute was intended to do, then the regulations that have been
proposed are beyond what was contemplated by Congress, and the
regulations go too far.
Representative SCHOCK. Well, I would agree. You know, the stated intent of the Dodd-Frank legislation was to promote transparency and safety in the financial markets, and, in particular, the
goal was to move derivatives on to exchanges which offer the most
transparent and safest form for trading.
Based on what you just said, do you think the treatment of futures and other exchange-traded contracts under section 1256 is
consistent with these objectives or outside the stated objectives for
Dodd-Frank?
Ms. KRAMER. Well, I think that the fact that they are exchangetraded already and they do have the clearing mechanism, means
that the objectives that Dodd-Frank is looking for for the over-the-

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00039

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

34
counter products are met with respect to the current treatment of
futures and exchange-traded options.
Representative SCHOCK. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I know my time has expired, but I do not see anyone else waiting around to ask questions, so, if you would indulge
me for 30 seconds.
I know you talked about—I am curious—moving to mark to market not only for these financial products but also expanding them
to stocks and other assets. I am wondering if—I realize this is focused on financial products, but it is also investments, obviously,
if you talk about including stocks. What about real estate?
Mr. MILLER. No, I would not expand mark to market to real estate, for several reasons. One, valuation is incredibly difficult for
real estate. Real estate is not liquid. It would be a real hardship
for people to have to pay tax on the appreciation of their real estate
without the cash to be able to pay that tax.
Representative SCHOCK. Does that favor then one investment vehicle over another?
Mr. MILLER. Yes. If my comprehensive mark-to-market proposal
were adopted and only publicly traded securities were subject to
mark to market, at the margins, if somebody is considering an investment in real estate as opposed to an investment in publicly
traded property, they might elect real estate and achieve the deferral to avoid the mark-to-market treatment. However, there are real
economic differences between an investment in real estate and an
investment in a publicly traded security. They would lose the liquidity that an investment in publicly traded securities would give.
Representative SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it.
Chairman BAUCUS. I have a question. With all the problems in
Europe today, if you are a very creative tax lawyer, what would
you be counseling your very lucrative client to be looking at? I can
always think about the Euro falling, maybe selling short. I am just
trying to put myself in the mind of some pretty big wealthy investors and thinking about new opportunities. Everything is an opportunity. Even bad news is an opportunity. Do any come to mind, or
is that just too idle to be worth contemplating?
Mr. MILLER. Well, if you could tell me where the market will go,
I can derive the financial instrument that will minimize your taxes.
Chairman BAUCUS. Of course, that is the key question. Even
back in the financial debacle days, different people had different
views whether these Collateralized Debt Obligations were worth
anything or not.
Mr. MILLER. And if you truly do not know, then only a mark-tomarket system will assure that you are not subject to adverse tax
consequences when the market goes against you, because you can
take your loss.
Chairman BAUCUS. Let’s hope that Europe does not tank.
I thank the witnesses very, very much. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the hearing was concluded.]

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00040

Fmt 6633

Sfmt 6633

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

APPENDIX
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00041

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771001.eps

(35)

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00042

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.002

36

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00043

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.003

37

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00044

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.004

38

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00045

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.005

39

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00046

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.006

40

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00047

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.007

41

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00048

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.008

42

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00049

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.009

43

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00050

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.010

44

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00051

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.011

45

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00052

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.012

46

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00053

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.013

47

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00054

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.014

48

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00055

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.015

49

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00056

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.016

50

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00057

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.017

51

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00058

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.018

52

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00059

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.019

53

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00060

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.020

54

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00061

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.021

55

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00062

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.022

56

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00063

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.023

57

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00064

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.024

58

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00065

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.025

59

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00066

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.026

60

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00067

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.027

61

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00068

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.028

62

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00069

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.029

63

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00070

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.030

64

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00071

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.031

65

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00072

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.032

66

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00073

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.033

67

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00074

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.034

68

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00075

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.035

69

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00076

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.036

70

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00077

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.037

71

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00078

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.038

72

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00079

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.039

73

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00080

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.040

74

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00081

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.041

75

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00082

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.042

76

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00083

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.043

77

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00084

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.044

78

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00085

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.045

79

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00086

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.046

80

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00087

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.047

81

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00088

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.048

82

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00089

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.049

83

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00090

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.050

84

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00091

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.051

85

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00092

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.052

86

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00093

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.053

87

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00094

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.054

88

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00095

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.055

89

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00096

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.056

90

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00097

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.057

91

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00098

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.058

92

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00099

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.059

93

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00100

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.060

94

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00101

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.061

95

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00102

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.062

96

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00103

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.063

97

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00104

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.064

98

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00105

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.065

99

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00106

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.066

100

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00107

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.067

101

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00108

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.068

102

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00109

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.069

103

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00110

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.070

104

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00111

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.071

105

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00112

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.072

106

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00113

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.073

107

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00114

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.074

108

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00115

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.075

109

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00116

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.076

110

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00117

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.077

111

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00118

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.078

112

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00119

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.079

113

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00120

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.080

114

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00121

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.081

115

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00122

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.082

116

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00123

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.083

117

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00124

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.084

118

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00125

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.085

119

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00126

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.086

120

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00127

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.087

121

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00128

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.088

122

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00129

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.089

123

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00130

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.090

124

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00131

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.091

125

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00132

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.092

126

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00133

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.093

127

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00134

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.094

128

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00135

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.095

129

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00136

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771096.eps

130

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00137

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.097

131

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00138

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771098.eps

132

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00139

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.099

133

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00140

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771100.eps

134

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00141

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771101.eps

135

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00142

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.102

136

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00143

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.103

137

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00144

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771104.eps

138

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00145

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771105.eps

139

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00146

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.106

140

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00147

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771107.eps

141

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00148

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.108

142

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00149

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.109

143

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00150

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.110

144

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00151

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.111

145

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00152

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.112

146

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00153

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.113

147

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00154

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.114

148

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00155

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.115

149

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00156

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771116.eps

150

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00157

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.117

151

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00158

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.118

152

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00159

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.119

153

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00160

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.120

154

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00161

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.121

155

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00162

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.122

156

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00163

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.123

157

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00164

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.124

158

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00165

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.125

159

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00166

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.126

160

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00167

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.127

161

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00168

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.128

162

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00169

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.129

163

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00170

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.130

164

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00171

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.131

165

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00172

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.132

166

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00173

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.133

167

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00174

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.134

168

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00175

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.135

169

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00176

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.136

170

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00177

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.137

171

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00178

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.138

172

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00179

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.139

173

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00180

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.140

174

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00181

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.141

175

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00182

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771142.eps

176

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00183

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.143

177

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00184

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.144

178

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00185

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.145

179

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00186

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.146

180

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00187

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.147

181

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00188

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.148

182

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00189

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.149

183

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00190

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.150

184

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00191

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.151

185

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00192

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.152

186

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00193

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.153

187

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00194

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.154

188

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00195

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.155

189

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00196

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.156

190

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00197

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.157

191

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00198

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.158

192

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00199

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.159

193

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00200

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.160

194

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00201

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.161

195

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00202

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.162

196

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00203

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.163

197

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00204

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.164

198

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00205

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.165

199

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00206

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.166

200

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00207

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.167

201

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00208

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.168

202

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00209

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.169

203

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00210

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.170

204

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00211

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.171

205

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00212

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.172

206

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00213

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.173

207

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00214

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.174

208

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00215

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.175

209

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00216

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.176

210

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00217

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.177

211

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00218

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.178

212

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00219

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.179

213

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00220

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.180

214

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00221

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.181

215

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00222

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.182

216

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00223

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.183

217

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00224

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.184

218

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00225

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.185

219

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00226

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.186

220

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00227

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.187

221

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00228

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.188

222

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00229

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.189

223

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00230

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.190

224

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00231

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.191

225

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00232

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.192

226

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00233

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.193

227

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00234

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.194

228

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00235

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.195

229

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00236

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.196

230

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00237

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.197

231

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00238

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.198

232

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00239

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.199

233

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00240

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.200

234

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00241

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.201

235

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00242

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.202

236

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00243

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.203

237

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00244

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.204

238

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00245

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.205

239

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00246

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.206

240

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00247

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.207

241

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00248

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.208

242

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00249

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.209

243

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00250

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.210

244

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00251

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.211

245

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00252

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.212

246

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00253

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.213

247

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00254

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.214

248

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00255

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.215

249

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00256

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.216

250

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00257

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.217

251

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00258

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.218

252

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00259

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.219

253

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00260

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.220

254

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00261

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.221

255

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00262

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.222

256

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00263

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.223

257

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00264

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.224

258

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00265

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.225

259

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00266

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.226

260

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00267

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.227

261

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00268

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.228

262

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00269

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.229

263

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00270

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.230

264

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00271

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.231

265

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00272

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.232

266

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00273

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.233

267

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00274

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.234

268

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00275

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.235

269

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00276

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.236

270

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00277

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.237

271

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00278

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.238

272

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00279

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.239

273

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00280

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.240

274

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00281

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.241

275

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00282

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771242.eps

276

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00283

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771243.eps

277

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00284

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.244

278

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00285

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.245

279

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00286

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.246

280

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00287

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.247

281

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00288

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.248

282

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00289

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.249

283

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00290

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.250

284

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00291

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.251

285

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00292

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.252

286

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00293

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.253

287

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00294

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.254

288

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00295

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.255

289

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00296

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.256

290

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00297

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.257

291

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00298

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.258

292

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00299

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.259

293

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00300

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.260

294

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00301

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.261

295

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00302

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.262

296

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00303

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.263

297

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00304

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.264

298

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00305

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.265

299

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00306

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.266

300

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00307

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.267

301

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00308

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.268

302

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00309

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.269

303

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00310

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.270

304

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00311

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.271

305

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00312

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.272

306

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00313

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.273

307

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00314

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.274

308

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00315

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.275

309

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00316

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.276

310

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00317

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.277

311

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00318

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.278

312

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00319

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.279

313

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00320

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.280

314

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00321

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.281

315

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00322

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.282

316

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00323

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.283

317

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00324

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.284

318

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00325

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.285

319

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00326

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.286

320

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00327

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.287

321

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00328

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.288

322

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00329

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.289

323

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00330

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.290

324

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00331

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.291

325

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00332

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.292

326

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00333

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.293

327

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00334

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.294

328

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00335

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.295

329

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00336

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.296

330

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00337

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.297

331

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00338

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.298

332

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00339

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.299

333

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00340

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.300

334

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00341

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.301

335

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00342

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.302

336

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00343

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.303

337

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00344

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.304

338

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00345

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.305

339

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00346

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.306

340

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00347

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.307

341

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00348

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.308

342

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00349

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.309

343

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00350

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.310

344

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00351

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.311

345

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00352

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.312

346

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00353

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.313

347

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00354

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.314

348

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00355

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.315

349

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00356

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.316

350

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00357

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.317

351

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00358

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.318

352

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00359

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.319

353

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00360

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.320

354

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00361

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.321

355

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00362

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.322

356

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00363

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.323

357

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00364

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.324

358

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00365

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.325

359

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00366

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.326

360

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00367

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.327

361

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00368

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.328

362

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00369

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.329

363

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00370

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.330

364

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00371

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.331

365

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00372

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.332

366

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00373

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.333

367

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00374

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.334

368

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00375

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.335

369

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00376

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.336

370

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00377

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.337

371

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00378

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.338

372

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00379

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.339

373

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00380

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.340

374

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00381

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.341

375

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00382

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.342

376

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00383

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.343

377

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00384

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.344

378

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00385

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.345

379

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00386

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.346

380

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00387

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.347

381

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00388

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.348

382

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00389

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.349

383

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00390

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.350

384

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00391

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.351

385

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00392

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.352

386

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00393

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.353

387

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00394

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.354

388

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00395

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.355

389

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00396

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.356

390

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00397

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.357

391

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00398

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.358

392

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00399

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.359

393

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00400

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.360

394

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00401

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.361

395

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00402

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.362

396

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00403

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.363

397

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00404

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.364

398

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00405

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.365

399

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00406

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.366

400

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00407

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.367

401

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00408

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.368

402

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00409

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.369

403

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00410

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.370

404

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00411

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.371

405

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00412

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.372

406

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00413

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.373

407

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00414

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.374

408

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00415

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.375

409

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00416

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.376

410

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00417

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.377

411

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00418

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.378

412

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00419

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.379

413

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00420

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.380

414

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00421

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.381

415

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00422

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.382

416

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00423

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.383

417

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00424

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.384

418

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00425

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.385

419

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00426

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.386

420

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00427

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.387

421

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00428

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.388

422

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00429

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.389

423

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00430

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.390

424

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00431

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.391

425

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00432

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.392

426

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00433

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.393

427

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00434

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.394

428

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00435

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.395

429

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00436

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.396

430

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00437

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.397

431

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00438

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.398

432

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00439

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.399

433

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00440

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.400

434

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00441

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.401

435

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00442

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.402

436

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00443

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.403

437

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00444

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.404

438

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00445

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.405

439

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00446

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.406

440

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00447

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.407

441

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00448

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.408

442

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00449

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.409

443

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00450

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.410

444

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00451

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.411

445

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00452

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.412

446

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00453

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.413

447

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00454

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.414

448

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00455

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.415

449

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00456

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.416

450

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00457

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.417

451

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00458

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.418

452

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00459

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.419

453

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00460

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.420

454

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00461

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.421

455

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00462

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.422

456

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00463

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.423

457

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00464

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.424

458

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00465

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.425

459

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00466

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.426

460

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00467

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.427

461

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00468

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.428

462

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00469

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.429

463

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00470

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.430

464

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00471

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.431

465

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00472

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.432

466

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00473

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.433

467

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00474

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.434

468

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00475

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.435

469

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00476

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.436

470

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00477

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.437

471

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00478

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.438

472

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00479

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.439

473

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00480

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.440

474

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00481

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.441

475

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00482

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.442

476

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00483

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.443

477

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00484

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.444

478

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00485

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.445

479

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00486

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.446

480

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00487

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.447

481

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00488

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.448

482

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00489

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.449

483

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00490

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.450

484

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00491

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.451

485

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00492

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.452

486

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00493

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.453

487

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00494

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.454

488

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00495

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.455

489

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00496

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.456

490

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00497

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.457

491

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00498

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.458

492

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00499

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.459

493

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00500

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.460

494

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00501

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.461

495

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00502

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.462

496

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00503

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.463

497

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00504

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.464

498

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00505

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.465

499

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00506

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.466

500

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00507

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.467

501

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00508

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.468

502

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00509

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.469

503

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00510

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.470

504

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00511

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.471

505

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00512

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.472

506

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00513

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.473

507

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00514

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.474

508

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00515

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.475

509

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00516

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.476

510

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00517

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.477

511

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00518

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.478

512

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00519

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.479

513

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00520

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.480

514

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00521

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.481

515

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00522

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.482

516

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00523

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.483

517

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00524

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.484

518

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00525

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.485

519

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00526

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.486

520

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00527

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.487

521

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00528

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.488

522

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00529

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.489

523

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00530

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.490

524

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00531

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.491

525

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00532

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.492

526

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00533

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.493

527

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00534

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

COMMUNICATIONS

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00535

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771494.eps

(529)

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00536

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.495

530

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00537

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.496

531

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00538

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.497

532

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00539

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.498

533

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00540

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.499

534

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00541

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.500

535

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00542

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 6621

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771.501

536

537

VerDate Nov 24 2008

21:34 Sep 17, 2012

Jkt 000000

PO 00000

Frm 00543

Fmt 6601

Sfmt 5011

R:\DOCS\75771.000

TIMD

75771502.eps

Æ

