- HEARING ON THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL WITH U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY SECRETARY TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING ON THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL

YEAR 2012 BUDGET PROPOSAL WITH U.S.

DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY SECRETARY TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

February 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-6

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-470                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

Chairman CAMP. The committee will come to order for this
hearing on ``The President's Fiscal Year 2012 Budget
Proposal.''
Before I begin this afternoon, I want to recognize an
individual who is not with us today because his courage and
conviction has landed him an invitation to the East Room of the
White House. It goes without saying that it is an immense honor
to serve with our colleague from Atlanta, Mr. John Lewis. His
role in the civil rights movement is well-documented. And after
today, when the President of the United States bestows upon him
the Nation's highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of
Freedom, it will be well-recognized.
On behalf of this Committee and the people I represent in
the Fourth District of Michigan, I want to extend heartfelt
congratulations to John. The success of the civil rights
movement was a victory for the African American community and
for every American. It may be a bit out of character for this
Committee, but I would ask that we break with tradition and all
join in a deserved round of applause for the Honorable John
Lewis.
[Applause.]
Chairman CAMP. With that, welcome, Secretary Geithner. It
is good to see you again and have you before the Committee.
It has been said that the power to tax is the power to
destroy. But last year's election shows the American people are
increasingly concerned about the power of deficits to destroy
jobs, the sound dollar, and ultimately their children's and our
country's future.
Unfortunately, the President's budget features too much of
both. It would result in record-high deficits while pushing the
Federal tax burden over 20 percent of our economy, a level
never sustained in our Nation's history.
And let me be clear, Mr. Secretary, Americans are not taxed
too little. What America has had under this administration is
too little job creation, more borrowing, taxing, and spending,
and certainly not the answer to what ails our economy.
In 2009, we were promised that spending $1 trillion on a
stimulus plan would drive unemployment under 7 percent by now.
Instead, unemployment has remained at or above 9 percent for a
record 21 months.
Stimulus advocates also promised 137 million jobs by now.
We are woefully short of that mark as well. Today, almost 14
million Americans are looking for work but can't find it, and a
record number have given up trying, choosing instead to sit on
the sidelines of our economy. A full 6.2 million are long-term
unemployed, and the average duration of unemployment is a
record 37 weeks. That is almost double the record level before
this recession.
Vice President Biden recently said that the unemployed
should just ``hang in there'' and wait for jobs to return. But,
at the current pace, it could be 2020 or beyond before the U.S.
returns to full employment. And that is a long time to just
``hang in there''.
The fact is, Americans shouldn't have to wait any longer
for some real solutions. And, frankly, this budget is a missed
opportunity. In the words of Erskine Bowles, the Chairman of
the President's own deficit commission, this budget goes
``nowhere near where [you] will have to go to resolve our
fiscal nightmare''.
As I look through this budget proposal, I am left wondering
if there wasn't a printing error, because it looks almost
identical to last year's budget. We again have massive tax
increases, now totaling $1.9 trillion, that will hit small
businesses, middle-class families, American employers with
worldwide operations, and investment income--the very
investments we need to jump-start the economy.
Even the same things are missing from this budget. There
are platitudes about tax reform but tax policy proposals that
move in the opposite direction. And there is nothing on
entitlement reform, and there is little more than lip service
about getting the deficit under control.
During the Simpson-Bowles commission, of which three
members of this Committee were members, we heard testimony
that, once a nation's debt reached 90 percent of its economy,
that country would see economic growth decline by about 1
percent. And in the U.S., that would cost us about a million
jobs. And, Mr. Secretary, we are not at 90 percent; our gross
debt is now 100 percent of our economy. And we can ill-afford
to lose out on the needed job creation simply because
Washington can't get its spending under control.
Despite that and other warnings, what is being presented
today fails to deliver real change. I had hoped for so much
more, and I am left wondering how many more experts need to
ring the alarm bell before this administration begins to hear
it and act accordingly?
I ask unanimous consent to insert into the record a
Washington Post editorial from today's paper entitled,
``President Obama's Budget Kicks the Hard Choices Further Down
the Road.''
[Washington Post article]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.011

Chairman CAMP. Now, I am sure many of my friends in the
minority can't wait to chime in and set the record straight. So
please allow me to admit something: We all share part of the
blame for where we are today. However, that is not the issue.
The issue is whether or not we will all be part of the
solution.
And, Mr. Secretary, you and I have had many good
discussions about where this country needs to go. And today I
am not interested in the boilerplate but am interested in
finding real solutions that reduce the cost and complexity of
our Tax Code, that deal with the unsustainable costs of our
entitlement programs, and that brings our debt back under
control. All of these will help unleash the private sector to
create good-paying jobs.
So, Mr. Secretary, I look forward to hearing from you
today. And also, later in the week, we will hear from your
colleagues from the Department of Health and Human Services, as
well as the Office of Management and Budget, on these topics.
And, with that, I yield to the ranking member, Mr. Levin,
for the purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The President's budget is in sharp contrast to the House
Republicans' CR. It embodies a necessary combination of
investing in economic growth and reducing our deficit. The
Republican 2011 blueprint, which the House will debate this
week, reflects starkly different priorities. It disinvests. It
would take our economy backwards through extreme cuts.
The President's budget charts a responsible path to a
sustainable fiscal situation. Its point of departure is an
economy that has been through a wrenching recession and a
recovery that is still gathering strength.
Since the recovery began, more than 1.3 million private-
sector jobs have been created, more than in all 8 years of the
Bush administration together.
Our efforts were designed to ensure a sustainable economic
recovery, and we must be sensible to that, as we take needed
steps to reduce our deficits.
That is why, as the President's budget lays out $1.1
trillion in deficit reduction over the next decade, it invests
in proven public-private partnerships that support jobs,
innovation, and growth. It makes permanent and enhances the R&D
credit. It extends the Build America Bond program, which
Republicans oppose and which has financed over $180 billion in
vital infrastructure improvements.
It also provides an additional $5 billion for the highly
successful 48(c) tax credit. This tax credit provides a direct
incentive to manufacture advanced energy products like solar
panel and wind turbines here in the U.S. In one example that I
know you, Mr. Chairman, are very familiar with, Hemlock
Semiconductor received $142 million in tax credits to help
maintain its global leadership in producing the polycrystalline
silicon used in the manufacturing of solar panels. This is one
of the vivid examples of a successful public-private
partnership.
The House Republican plan disinvests in jobs and growth and
in our community. It cuts more than $1 billion from the Clean
Water Revolving Fund. It chokes funding for the Energy Advanced
Research Projects Agency, which is conducting cutting-edge
research to foster the products and jobs of tomorrow. It
completely eliminates the COPS program that puts police
officers on our street every day. It takes a hatchet to the
Community Development Block Grant program that is so important
to local economic development in municipalities that are under
severe economic strain right now.
At the same time, the Republicans' rules allow for
unlimited additional tax cuts that are not paid for, at a time
when tax revenues as a percentage of the economy are near an
all-time low. According to the administration's estimates,
permanently extending the tax cuts for upper-income households
alone would increase the deficit by nearly $1 trillion over 10
years.
The President's budget focuses on preserving the tax relief
for working families making less than $250,000. It would
permanently protect the middle class from AMT. And it
permanently extends vital assistance to working families that
we had to fight Republicans to include in the December tax
compromise.
More broadly, the Chairman--you, Mr. Chairman--has
criticized the President's budget as lacking a plan for tax
reform. If we are going to have tax reform, we are going to
need to work together, not against each other, to make the
difficult choices necessary for responsible reform.
Nowhere is it more true than on the debt limit. As the
Secretary--as you, Mr. Secretary--has made clear, the need for
fiscal responsibility and the need to support economic recovery
must complement each other, not undermine one another. And
vitally, we cannot jeopardize the economic recovery by putting
at risk the full faith and credit of the United States. The
majority must not irresponsibly put our economy in severe
jeopardy by using the debt limit as leverage or as a bargaining
chip.
We took necessary steps to prevent a recession caused by a
financial crisis from becoming a depression. We cannot risk a
new financial crisis that would reverse the new momentum of
economic growth.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Welcome, Secretary Geithner. You have 5 minutes. Your full
written statement will be part of the record, but you may begin
your testimony. And welcome to the Committee on Ways and Means.

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER, SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
THE TREASURY, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Secretary GEITHNER. Thank you, Chairman Camp, Ranking
Member Levin, and Members of the Committee. It is a pleasure to
be here before you today to talk about the President's budget.
The President's budget presents a comprehensive strategy to
strengthen economic growth and expand exports, with investments
in education, innovation, and the Nation's infrastructure.
Alongside these investments, the budget presents a
detailed, multiyear plan to cut spending and reduce deficits.
Our deficits are too high. They are unsustainable. And, left
unaddressed, these deficits will hurt economic growth and make
us weaker as a nation. We have to restore fiscal responsibility
and go back to living within our means.
The President's budget cuts the deficit he inherited in
half as a share of the economy by the end of his first term.
These cuts are phased in over time so that we protect the
recovery.
In order to make it possible for us to invest in future
growth and to restore fiscal sustainability, the President
proposes to reduce nonsecurity discretionary spending to its
lowest level as a share of the economy since Dwight Eisenhower
was President.
To achieve this, the budget proposes a 5-year freeze of
annual nonsecurity discretionary spending at its 2010 level.
And this will reduce the deficit by more than $400 billion over
the next 10 years.
The President also proposes to reduce the request for
Defense spending, to freeze civil service salaries, to improve
efficiency in government services through a range of program
eliminations and reductions.
These savings create the necessary room for us to make
targeted investments in support of reforms that will help
strengthen future economic growth. The most important thing we
can do to promote our long-term growth is to improve the
quality of education, to invest in innovation, and to rebuild
America's infrastructure. Without these investments, America
will be weaker and less competitive.
As part of this strategy for growth, the President proposes
reforms to our tax system designed to encourage investment. We
propose to put in place a permanent and expanded tax credit for
research and development in the United States; to eliminate--to
eliminate--capital gains on investment and small businesses; to
encourage advanced manufacturing and clean energy technologies;
to keep taxes on investment income, dividends, and capital
gains low; to reform and extend the Build America Bond program;
and to make college more affordable for middle-class Americans.
These tax incentives are accompanied by reforms that would
reduce incentives to shift income and investment outside the
United States and to close loopholes and tax preferences that
we cannot afford.
Now, in addition, we propose to pursue comprehensive tax
reform that would lower the corporate tax rate. Our present tax
system for businesses combines a very high rate with a very
broad range of expensive tax preferences for specific
industries and activities.
We need a more competitive system that allows the market,
not tax planners and lobbyists, to allocate investment, a
system in which businesses across industries pay a roughly
similar share of earnings, a system that provides more
stability and certainty, that is more simple to comply with.
And we need to do all this without adding to our future
deficits.
We have begun the process of building support for
comprehensive corporate tax reform. Mr. Chairman, I want to
welcome your personal support for comprehensive reform. I
believe we have the opportunity to do this now.
The President's budget also outlines some responsible
reforms on the individual side. We propose, as we have in the
past, to allow the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts for the wealthiest
Americans to expire; to limit certain deductions, tax
expenditures for those same high-income Americans; to restore
the estate tax to the 2009 levels; and to close the carried
interest loophole.
These proposals--and I want to emphasize this--these
proposals will help ensure that the savings we achieve together
through spending restraint are devoted to deficit reduction,
not to sustaining lower tax rates for the most fortunate 2
percent of Americans.
This budget would achieve the dramatic reductions in our
deficit over the next decade that are necessary to stop the
national debt from growing as a share of the economy and to
stabilize our debt burden at a level that will not threaten
future growth.
Now, this is only a first step, a down payment on the long-
term reforms necessary to address our long-run deficits. To
address the long-run deficits that we face over the next
century, not just the next decade, we will have to build on the
progress and the very substantial progress that has been
achieved in the Affordable Care Act to reduce the rate of
growth in health care costs.
And in addition to that, although it is not a contributor
to our short-term or medium-term deficits, we should work
together across party lines to strengthen Social Security for
future generations.
Now, we cannot grow our way out of these deficits. They
will not go away on their own. And they will not be solved by
cutting deeply into programs, into investments that are
critical for future growth and competitiveness. We have to work
together to find consensus on a multiyear plan that cuts
deficits where we can so that we can invest where we need and
that reduces our deficits.
Making a multiyear commitment will allow us to make sure
that the changes are phased in as the economy recovers. And
making a multiyear plan will help give businesses and
individuals adequate time to adjust and prepare for the impact
of those changes on the economy.
The President's proposals represent an important starting
point for discussion. And we recognize that there are many
valuable ideas on both sides of the aisle. And we know, as you
know, that we need both parties and both houses of Congress to
come together to enact solutions that work best for the
country.
In December, we were able to come together to find
bipartisan consensus on a very strong package of tax incentives
to help sustain recovery and restore confidence. We want to
bring that same commitment to the challenge of restoring fiscal
responsibility.
Thank you. I would be happy to take any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Geithner follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.009

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Secretary.
I think we can agree, the economy is not adding jobs at the
rate it needs to. And I think that is particularly why I am
disappointed. You sense disappointment on our side, that the
President's budget brings up some of the same tax hikes on
American small business that Congress, even when both chambers
were controlled by Democrats, already rejected.
About 75 percent of small businesses are structured as
passthroughs--partnerships, or S corps, or sole
proprietorships--and they are responsible for about two-thirds
of all new jobs created. Yet, these are the businesses the
President would subject to massive tax hikes by raising the top
marginal rates.
Given that unemployment has been stuck at or above 9
percent for 21 consecutive months, do you really believe that
we should be raising taxes on small businesses? And will you
commit that any tax reform that we might move forward on would
address the concerns of these employers?
Secretary GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, a very important
question. And you are right, I think, to emphasize that our
overwhelming priority now for the country should be to make
sure we are reinforcing this expansion, get more people back to
work. Because we are still living with the scars of the damage
caused by the crisis. You can see it in high unemployment
rates, in millions of people still at risk of losing homes, the
pressure on small banks, small businesses across the country.
So that objective of strengthening growth should still be our
overwhelming focus and priority.
Now, we propose in the budget a series of very well-
designed, targeted tax incentives for small businesses.
Because, as you said, they are so important to job growth and
to innovation. So, for example, as I said in my opening
statement, we are proposing to eliminate capital gains taxes on
investment in small businesses, to make permanent pretty
generous expensing for investment by small businesses in
capital equipment.
Now, you are right that we are proposing again to allow to
expire on the schedule agreed to by Congress last December
these taxes that affect the top 2 percent of individuals and
small businesses in the country. They only affect 2 to 3
percent of businesses. And the vast bulk of those small
businesses you referred to are structured as partnerships. And
we are talking here about our law firms, investment firms,
businesses who choose to structure themselves as partnerships,
not as corporations.
And the vast bulk of those small businesses you are
referring to earn very, very substantial amounts of revenue
each year. And, again, even in that case, we are proposing to
restore those tax rates to the level that prevailed in the
1990s, where we had the best record of investment, productivity
growth, innovation, job growth than the country has seen in
generations.
We think that is a responsible recommendation. We recognize
it is not popular on your side of the aisle. But I want to
underscore what you said, I think, is that our challenge is it
to figure out a way to restore sustainability and strengthen
economic growth. We have to balance those two objectives. And
we are not going to be growing in the future unless we make
some tough choices to restore fiscal responsibility. And those
are the types of tax changes, tax reforms we think are
consistent with our obligations to strengthen growth.
Chairman CAMP. Well, I am encouraged by some of the
comments that the President and you have made, and also by your
testimony today about the need for the reform of the corporate
Tax Code.
But, given those comments, we then see a budget that goes
in the opposite direction. Instead of proposing reforms that
broaden the base and lower rates, which is what I think most
people would like to see on the business side, and trying to
level the playing field and reduce complexity, this budget is
proposing changes that continue to pick winners and losers.
I guess my question to you is, how do you suggest we
achieve tax reform, particularly on the business side, when the
administration continues to push proposals that will raise
taxes on some companies or some activities in order to offset
spending that is unrelated to those activities? It is going in
the opposite direction of, I think, the very encouraging
comments that have been coming out of the administration and
you, as well.
Secretary GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, you are right that, in
the budget, we do not propose a detailed plan for comprehensive
tax reform. But we do propose a set of changes to the existing
structure that would help, as we see it, improve investment
incentives in the United States.
And I think the way to look at those changes is, they help
make the case for why we need comprehensive reform. And if
there are aspects of those proposals that make you
uncomfortable, you should view it as an incentive for us to do
comprehensive reform.
And we are very serious, as you know--and we have talked
about this a lot--in trying to build consensus now on a set of
fundamental changes to the corporate tax system that would
improve incentives for investment, do so in a way that is
fiscally responsibility. And to do that, we would have to lower
the rate very substantially and eliminate or substantially
reduce the broad range of tax preferences, incentives, that now
create a lot of unfairness and distortions in the Tax Code.
But, again, what we did in the budget is say, we would like
to work with Congress on comprehensive reform, but if we are
forced to work within the current system, here are some changes
that would help improve investment incentives in the short
term. But, again, view those as an incentive, as a way to make
the broader case for a comprehensive reform.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Levin may inquire.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I am glad you asked the Secretary about the
position of the administration not to extend the high-income
tax cut.
And I think, Mr. Secretary, you have helped to shatter the
myth that this is basically an increase in taxes on small
business. You have explained that, right? And as I remember the
analysis, about 75 percent of the high income that would be
affected would be income over $1 million a year. Is that
correct?
Secretary GEITHNER. That is roughly correct, yes.
Mr. LEVIN. That is the estimate.
Secretary GEITHNER. That is the estimate. That is one
estimate, yeah.
Mr. LEVIN. And you indicated what percentage of businesses
would be affected?
Secretary GEITHNER. Only 2 to 3 percent of all businesses
in the country. And, again, the vast bulk of those businesses
make well over a million dollars in earnings a year. And, of
course, many, many of those who make that much money are
fundamentally what we would call law firms or investment firms
or other types of companies that are structured that way to
help lower their tax burden.
Mr. LEVIN. All right. Let me now ask you about investment,
because there is such a sharp contrast between the President's
budget and the CR. I think you have described it--for the
President, it is invest and cut the deficit. For the CR, it is
essentially non-invest or disinvest and cut the deficit, except
increase it by how much, the high-income tax cut over 10 years?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, to extend the high-income tax
cuts for 10 years would cost substantially over $700 billion,
maybe close to a trillion dollars.
Mr. LEVIN. All right, now, Mr. Chairman, it is interesting.
I think we need to have this discussion. You used the term
``winners and losers.'' And that is often talked about in terms
of investment. And I didn't mean to pick on you. I picked on
Hemlock because I was there.
Chairman CAMP. The chair does not feel picked on.
Mr. LEVIN. Good.
I was there. It is a vivid example of public-private
partnership. And I was told right there that, if it hadn't been
for 48(c), the expansion would not have occurred.
So, Mr. Secretary, just quickly sum up why this budget
cutting the deficit combines it with investment.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, you know, again, we live in a
very competitive world. We have to make sure that we are
focused every day on how to make the country stronger and more
competitive. And if we are going to be able to meet a
substantial share of the growing demand for goods and services
around the world, we want more of that to be met by investment
in the United States.
And what the President's budget does is propose a range of
reforms and incentives that make it more likely that that next
great American business builds their next factory in the United
States and that that great foreign competitor of the United
States builds his or her next factory in the United States. And
we want to make sure the Tax Code is working to encourage those
kind of investments and not to discourage those kind of
investments.
And it is very important, when we think about fiscal policy
choices, we look at them through the prism of what is going to
be a better strategy for growth and investment. It is not
simply an exercise of reducing future deficits. Although this
is very important to future growth, how you do it is critically
important. And you have to set priorities, and you have to make
sure, again, you are preserving the capacity to invest in
things that are important to the competitiveness of every
business in the country.
For example, any business you talk to in the country that
is engaged in manufacturing will tell you that they need better
access to high-quality engineers. They want our schools to do a
better job of producing people with the skills they need to
compete. They need to make sure they have better designed
incentives in the Tax Code to encourage investments here in the
United States. The proposal we made to make permanent the R&D
tax credit and expand the credit is a good example of those
kind of incentives.
But we just want to make sure that we look at these fiscal
choices through the prism of what is going to be good for
growth and investment in the United States.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you. And the CR is a disinvestment
proposal at the time we need more, not less.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, again, I think the challenge is I
think we all recognize we are going have to reduce spending. We
all recognize we are going to have to reduce our long-term
deficits. The question is how to do that and how to do that in
a way that preserves incentives for investment here, allows us
to improve education, strengthen our public infrastructure.
That is the challenge we face.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Herger may inquire.
Mr. HERGER. I thank the Chairman, and I join in greeting
the Secretary to our hearing.
Secretary Geithner, on page 2 of your written testimony,
you state that, quote, ``We must restore fiscal responsibility
over the long term by reducing the rate of growth in health
care expenditures,'' close quote. I couldn't agree with you
more. In fact, that is one of the main reasons why I voted
against the Democrats' health care overhaul twice in the last
Congress.
The Obama administration's own Medicare actuaries have
predicted that national health care expenditures over the next
decade will be $311 billion higher because of the Democrats'
health care overhaul. In other words, the health care law bends
the cost curve up, not down.
Yet, on page 7 of your testimony, you assert that, quote,
``Independent analysts have estimated the Democrat health care
law will significantly slow the growth rate of medical costs,''
close quote.
Mr. Secretary, could you tell us, who are the analysts you
are relying on for this claim? And is there a reason you are
choosing to ignore the findings of your own administration's
actuaries?
Secretary GEITHNER. Excellent question, and thanks for
giving me a chance to respond to that.
As many of you have said, our long-term deficits that we
face over the next century are primarily driven by rapid rates
of growth in health care costs and, to a lesser extent, by
Social Security obligations. The most important thing we can do
to reduce those long-term costs is to reduce the rate of growth
in health care costs.
Now, in our system, in our country, we rely on the
independent, nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office to analyze
for the Congress and for the administration the impact of
reforms on costs. And it is the judgments of the CBO that bind
all of us. They bind the Congress and ultimately bind the
administration.
And it is in the judgment of the nonpartisan, independent
CBO that those reforms, if enacted and held to over time, will
substantially reduce the rate of growth in health care costs
for the public sector. And they, in fact, make the largest
contribution to entitlement reform that this country has
considered in generations.
And it is, of course, in recognition of the fact that the
only path to long-term fiscal responsibility is through health
care savings that these reforms made it through the Congress
are so important. And, of course, we recognize that we are
going to have to build on that. We haven't solved that problem
definitively. And we would welcome the chance to join with you
in figuring out ways we can help make a further contribution,
even greater contribution to reducing the rate of growth in
those costs.
But I would rely on CBO's estimates.
One more clarification: If I am not mistaken, I think what
the actuary said, was if Congress does not enact those reforms,
then costs will grow more rapidly. He was making a prediction
about what Congress might ultimately do, not what the reforms
would produce in terms of savings.
Mr. HERGER. Last summer, in an interview on ``The Kudlow
Report,'' you said that the administration wanted to prevent
the rates on capital gains and dividends from rising beyond 20
percent. Can you please clarify whether this 20 percent rate is
inclusive of the new 3.8 percent tax increase included in the
Democrat health care law?
Secretary GEITHNER. No, it is not. But we do propose in the
budget to make sure that the top rates on dividends and capital
gains don't rise beyond 20, because, again, we want to have a
budget that is encouraging investment in the United States.
Mr. HERGER. So it is not inclusive. So it does rise beyond
20 percent in this area.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, maybe this is a simplifying
convention, but when we think about the rate on dividends and
capital gains, we view it--we look at the statutory rate
established in the budget. And, again, we think there is a good
case for trying to make sure that we keep the overall tax
burden on investment income in the United States at a modest
level. We think that is good for future growth. We think we can
afford do that.
Mr. HERGER. Again, Mr. Secretary, our concern is, at a time
when the economy is what it is, that we really hold to this.
The American public, certainly those who are creating new jobs,
cannot afford to have more money taken out. That money could be
used for investment.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, the Congressional Budget Office shows
permanent deficits in the Social Security program, meaning that
Social Security payroll taxes can't fully cover benefits. In
other words, the cost of paying benefits is now more than the
revenues coming in to pay them. You would agree.
We are on a very tight time schedule here, so I will ask a
few simple questions, and I would ask you to be brief in
responding, if you would.
How are we paying benefits if we don't have sufficient
payroll taxes? Is the Treasury paying Social Security interest
it is earning from the IOUs Treasury gave the system when it
borrowed payroll taxes from Social Security to pay for other
government spending?
Secretary GEITHNER. Congressman, we have the ability to
meet our commitments to Social Security beneficiaries, and we
will continue to meet that obligation.
But we recognize, as do many of your colleagues, that, over
the longer term--but we have some time to get this right--we
need to make sure that we strengthen Social Security, secure
Social Security for future generations. And that is going to
require some changes. And we are, as the President has said, we
are willing to work with all of you to figure out a best way to
do that. But----
Mr. JOHNSON. How much are those interest payments going to
be in 2012, do you know?
Secretary GEITHNER. I don't know right now, but I would be
happy to respond to you in writing----
Mr. JOHNSON. It is about $127 billion, according to the
Trustees Report. According to the President's budget, in 2012
the budget deficit is expected to hit $1.1 trillion--the fourth
year in a row of trillion-dollar-plus deficits. Meanwhile, the
debt held by the public will be near $12 trillion next year,
double what it was in just 2008.
Mr. Secretary, where will the money come from to pay the
interest owed to Social Security?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, again, I think you
are making our point. It is very important that we find a way
to reduce our long-term deficits. That is not something we can
defer forever. And what the President's budget does is propose
a detailed mix of policies, both spending restraint as well as
tax reforms, that will bring those deficits down dramatically,
dramatically, over the next----
Mr. JOHNSON. I understand that, but where are you going to
get the money to pay Social Security? You are going to have to
borrow it, right?
Secretary GEITHNER. We have the resources to meet those
commitments for a substantial time to come. Now, of course, we
don't want to put off those questions forever. It would be good
for the country, I think, for us to come together on ways to
strengthen Social Security. And we are willing to begin that
conversation with the Congress soon.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, clearly, we are borrowing at record
levels. That is a crisis this nation faces, the fear that the
rest of the world soon won't want to lend to us.
What percentage of our borrowing comes from foreign
sources?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, as a whole, we are
borrowing much less from the rest of the world than we were
just 3 years ago. Right now, our current account deficit, the
amount we borrow from the rest of the world to meet our
obligations, is now about half the level it was at the peak in
2007. And what that means is that Americans are saving more and
they are funding a larger share of these deficits.
But a substantial share of our outstanding debt, like is
true for every major economy, is held by foreigners. And,
again, we agree and what this President's budget reflects is a
recognition that, if we are going to grow in the future, we
have to make sure we agree on reforms that bring down those
long-term deficits.
Mr. JOHNSON. The President's budget this year says 47
percent comes from foreign sources.
Thank you, sir.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel may inquire.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for sharing your views with
us.
As we discuss the budget for 2012, soon, and very soon, we
will have to look at the continuing resolution for this year
and next. Having said that, at one point in time, the President
of the United States indicated that he was only advocating an
extension of the tax relief for those people making less than
$250,000. But in this agreement, as they said, the President
didn't ask for it, but he did agree that it would be for
everybody. Having said that, I understand the cost of the
relief given to the upper-income people is over $100 billion.
Now, the CR that the majority has given to us has a
substantial number of cuts in spending, but that doesn't
necessarily mean that it is not going to be ultimately a cost
that we are going to have to pay.
My question to you: Have there been any comparisons between
the cost of extending this relief to where economists say we
should not expect economic growth as a result of it and the
negative impact of cutting programs which could cause an
additional spending? Has your office reviewed this to give us
direction?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, you are raising
exactly the right point, which is that, as we think about ways
to reduce these deficits, we have to make sure that we are
doing things that are going to be supportive of future growth,
that are going to have a high return, as you say, a large bang
for the buck, if we are making investments. And you want to
make sure you are not cutting into things that will hurt future
growth, raise unemployment in the future, raise our long-term
deficits in the future.
And what the President's budget does is reflect our view of
where those choices should be made. So, again, we want to make
sure we are increasing investments in education, in
infrastructure, in research and development, not cutting those.
Because if we do a smart job of making investments in support
of reforms in those areas, future growth will be stronger, it
will be more competitive, our deficits will be lower in the
future. If we cut deeply into those investments, we will be
weaker as a country, it will be harder to solve our long-term
fiscal problems.
But those are exactly the kind of tradeoffs that this
Committee and your colleagues in both houses will have to make.
Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Secretary, really I have to go vote, but
the point I am trying to make is that the insistence on the
overall tax cuts for the upper income did increase the deficit,
and that money was borrowed in order to do it. And so, to come
back now and to talk about savings, it seems to be a dramatic
inconsistency in supporting both of those themes.
Secretary GEITHNER. Those temporary tax cuts were
expensive. We can't afford to make them permanent. And I agree
that if we are going to make cuts in spending, as we have to
do, we want to make sure that those savings go to support
investments and cutting future deficits, not sustaining tax
cuts for the top 2 percent of Americans that we can't afford.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Brady is recognized.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, this budget don't add up, either for job
creation or tackling these dangerous deficits. And the two are
tied together, as you say, because consumers aren't confident
that America is going to really tackle its fiscal deficit, and
businesses don't believe Congress is serious about this.
I think you are repeating 2 mistakes from the last 2 years.
One is using rosy economic forecasts, as you did last year and
the year before--the White House, excuse me, Mr. Secretary, not
you. These forecasts are 0.4 and 0.5 percent higher than CBO
and OMB. Doesn't sound like much, but just that difference
wipes out three-fourths of the purported savings in this budget
over the next decade.
And then, secondly, on job creation, I don't understand why
the administration comes back with higher taxes on U.S.
companies trying to compete and win overseas. Because all we
are doing in this budget is encouraging companies to
manufacture oversees--$87 billion more in energy taxes, again,
on U.S. energy companies, encouraging them to send their
workers overseas.
And then, finally, this budget takes a whack at real-estate
partnerships, traditional partnerships that build our shopping
centers, apartments, movie theaters, office buildings, none of
which can stand an almost tripling of their taxes.
So, how in heaven's name does the White House believe it
will gin up the economy, which is very sluggish, by taxing the
manufacturers and job creators most likely to get us out of
these tough times?
Secretary GEITHNER. Congressman, excellent questions. And
let me just respond quickly on each one.
I actually think, if you look carefully at the economic
assumptions in the budget, they are actually quite realistic
and quite conservative. You are right, at some parts of the 10-
year horizon, some of the estimates look a little higher than
the consensus forecast, but in other cases they are lower and
more conservative.
But I think if you look at these--I will just give you one
example. The average growth rate estimated over this period of
time is significantly lower than the average strength of past
recoveries. So we are trying to be conservative.
And, again, one great strength of our system is, in the
end, CBO's assumptions govern, in this case. And you will be
able to rely on them to make sure that we are being balanced.
But I think they are reasonably conservative.
Now, very important that as we think about tax policy that
we are doing things that encourage investment. Now, you are
right that we are proposing to reduce some tax benefits that go
to some parts of the American business community. But we are
proposing very substantial and very broad-based incentives for
investment, too. And if you look at the overall net income
impact of those in terms of tax revenues, it is a very, very
modest change. And I think, again, what it does is shift the
incentives in the Tax Code, if these were enacted, to encourage
the next company to build their next plant here in the United
States.
Now, I know you are right that we are proposing to
eliminate some loopholes, some preferences, things that we
think are expensive and don't have much impact on growth. And
we know people are going to disagree with those things, but it
is just a reflection of the fact that we don't have unlimited
resources, we face some tough choices, and we can't do
everything we want to do.
And every time we look at a tax provision, we should ask
ourselves two questions. One is, is it improving incentives for
investment here? And does it have a substantial return, in
terms of growth impact? And if it is too expensive relative to
that, then our view is we should phase it out.
Mr. BRADY. Just a final, and I will close out. And, again,
this isn't your budget, necessarily, but the White House. But
please carry back to the White House this message: Because they
kill jobs, those tax increases are dead on arrival in this
House. We have to find a better way, we will work together with
you, to get this economy going.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman.
Mr. TIBERI. [Presiding.] Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. I guess it is
just you and me for the time being.
Secretary GEITHNER. Let's solve some problems.
Mr. TIBERI. I was pleased to hear the President, in his
State of the Union, talk about lowering corporate tax rates as
a way to expand jobs. Within the budget, however, I am worried
that the administration isn't paying as much attention to small
businesses, in terms of creating jobs.
Obviously, you know--I don't have to tell you--the way that
small businesses are set up, most pay as passthrough entities
their income taxes. And, therefore, I believe there are a
number of things within the President's budget that impact
those small-businesses owners.
And so, if I could just kind of read you a list of things I
am interested to hear your ``yes'' or ``no'' answer, if you
think that any of these are a tax increase on small-business
owners.
The President's budget, as you know, proposes to phase out
personal exemptions on itemized deductions. In addition, the
President's budget proposes to limit otherwise allowable
itemized deductions, commonly known as the Pease limitation.
Do you consider these two tax increases on small
businesses? Those passthrough entities that are oftentimes
partnerships, S corps, many of those often itemize their
deductions.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, to make it easier, I agree on the
following, which is, again, that those tax changes only impact
2 to 3 percent of small businesses. And those small businesses
affected overwhelmingly are businesses that earn substantially
more than a million dollars. And you are right that many of
them are structured as passthrough entities. But, in that
context, most of the ones that are affected by this are, you
know, typically like a law firm or an investment partnership.
Mr. TIBERI. The President's budget proposes to reclassify
many groups of independent contractors as employees--you have
testified to this before--for tax purposes. And many of those
small businesses contract with those outside individuals.
Do you consider the new payroll tax on those small
businesses a tax increase on them, since you reclassified----
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, I wouldn't describe it that way.
Let me just tell you what the objective of this is.
As you know, this is a very complicated provision of the
Tax Code, and it is very hard for people to comply with it. And
what we are proposing is a very simple thing. It is that
Congress authorize the IRS to issue guidance for comment on how
to make sure that we simplify the ease of complying with this,
to make sure that businesses are on a level playing field.
Because right now, the current system, apart from being way
complicated to comply with, creates a lot of unfairness across
businesses, and it gives some businesses the opportunity to,
frankly, lower their tax burden in a way that is unfair to
their competitors.
So we want a level playing field and a more simple thing to
comply with. And what we are proposing is just that Congress
give the IRS the authority to issue guidance for comment. And,
of course, once the IRS goes out with a draft, anybody affected
will have a chance to comment on that and suggest how that
could be improved.
Mr. TIBERI. Would the small businesses be paying more,
though, if they had those employees?
Secretary GEITHNER. It just depends on their circumstance.
Again, what we think is fair is, we want to have a Tax Code
where businesses pay roughly the same amount of income tax
relative to earnings. In our current system, as you know, it is
deeply unfair. Some companies pay a lot more than the average,
some pay less than the average. And we think we want to move to
a system where, again, it is a more level playing field and it
is a more fair, simple system to comply with.
Mr. TIBERI. Another rate in the President's budget that has
changed is the top rate for the estate tax. Obviously, many
small-business owners, farmers are concerned about what happens
in 2 years to the estate tax.
Is the rate that goes up to 45 percent, is that an increase
in taxes for small-business owners?
Secretary GEITHNER. It absolutely is a change in the estate
tax. And, again, what we are proposing is that we restore the
rates and the exemptions to the levels that prevailed in 2009.
And, again, with those rates and those exemptions, a tiny,
tiny, tiny, small fraction of estates are affected by those
changes.
And, again, we think that is the best way to balance our
obligations for fiscal responsibility with all the other
objectives we share, how to make sure we are strengthening the
economy as a whole.
Mr. TIBERI. In my State of Ohio, there are roughly 50,000
people that are employed by the independent oil and gas
industry by producers. It is a pretty big industry. Most of
these individuals are employed by small-business owners, a lot
of family-owned businesses. And, as you know, the President's
budget proposes to repeal the marginal well tax credit, to
repeal the expensing for intangible drilling costs, and to
repeal the percentage depletion.
Do you consider this a tax increase on independent oil and
gas producers?
Secretary GEITHNER. I would, yes.
What it does is, again, reduce a very, very substantial
subsidy that now goes to the oil and gas industry. And we are
proposing to eliminate that because it is very expensive and it
works against a national priority, which is to encourage the
economy, as a whole, to shift to less carbon-intensive forms of
energy use in the future and to reduce our ultimate dependence
on the types of energy that, again, contribute to climate
change and could threaten future growth prospects. That is the
rationale for that change.
Mr. TIBERI. One of my constituents is a small-business
owner, a family operation. He says that if this proposal
becomes law, it will evaporate the industry in Ohio.
Last year, Joint Tax suggested that this will not only hurt
the domestic production of oil and natural gas, but it will,
ironically, increase our dependency on foreign fossil fuel. Do
you agree with that?
Secretary GEITHNER. No, I don't.
But here is a different way to look at this. When we allow
parts of the American economy to pay much lower taxes than the
average, that means taxes are higher on all other businesses in
your State. And I think what you have to ask yourself is, is
that fair and does that make sense? It adds to inefficiency. It
probably hurts growth overall, because what it means is people
who sit in this room are allocating investment, not the market
as a whole. And, again, we want the market to decide which
businesses grow, not the community of tax lobbyists and tax
planners.
Again, when we allow certain parts of the economy to pay
much less than their fair share of taxes, then it means every
other business in the country is paying higher taxes as a
result.
Mr. TIBERI. One final question: Do you consider the
individual mandate within the health care bill, the penalty
levied upon people who refuse to accept to take on individual
insurance, the penalty that they have to pay to the IRS, a tax?
Secretary GEITHNER. Congressman, I think you know my answer
to this question, which is, we do not. But that is not a
judgment I ultimately make. That is a judgment that is going to
be made in different rooms, different bodies than this.
But I can tell you that I fully support the health care
reforms that were passed because I think they are very
important to helping make sure that the cost businesses bear
for health care are reduced over time and that we can restore
fiscal responsibility, fiscal sustainability to our long-term
deficits.
Mr. TIBERI. Do you think, though, it is kind of ironic that
the Treasury Secretary thinks it is not a tax but the Justice
Department argues that it is a tax?
Secretary GEITHNER. I cannot begin to explain when lawyers
and financial people disagree on some things, but I can give
you lots of other examples where that is the case.
Mr. TIBERI. I thank you for your patience.
We are going to take a break, about 10- to 15-minute break.
Refill your water glass, take a restroom break. Votes should be
done in about 10 minutes, and we will resume our hearing.
So the hearing will be in recessed for about 15 minutes.
Chairman CAMP. [Presiding.] Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for taking the time to
explain much of this to us.
We have recently received a letter from over 270 prominent
economists--I presume you were one of the 270--which stated
that the Affordable Care Act contains essentially every cost-
containment provision that policy analysts have considered
effective in reducing the rate of medical spending.
Could you comment on how you feel the Affordable Care Act
will relate to constraining health care costs?
Secretary GEITHNER. Congressman, very important question,
and thank you for asking it.
What these reforms do over time is change the incentives
for how Americans use health care and set in motion what we
believe are the most powerful sets of ideas out there for
reducing the rate of growth in health care costs over time.
And, of course, there is a lot of uncertainty that
surrounds these estimates, but, as I said earlier, we rely on
the CBO to make these judgments for us. And, in their judgment,
these reforms over time will very, very substantially reduce
our long-term deficits by reducing the rate of growth in costs.
Now, as the President has made clear, we want to build on
those reforms. Ultimately, we are going to have to do more. And
we would welcome the chance to work with people on both sides
of the aisle to strengthen those reforms so they can deliver
even more savings in the future.
But I agree with your characterization that the bill
includes, we think, many, if not most, if not all, of the best
ideas out there for reducing the rate of growth in costs.
Mr. STARK. Well, Mr. Secretary, you, every once in a while,
blog. And I have been given a quote from a blog you did some
time ago, talking about in the absence of health care reform.
And I wonder if you could dig back on your Facebook someplace
and send us a copy of that blog for the record.
Secretary GEITHNER. I would be happy--to I don't really use
that term and don't do Facebook. But I would be happy to give
you our analysis and our reports about what the reforms would
do for our competitiveness as a country.
Secretary GEITHNER. Again, you know, I think it is
important to recognize, if you ask businesses what they care
about most among their concerns, they care a lot about the
burden rising health care costs puts on them. And so, if we
care about competitiveness and growth and jobs, not just access
to affordable care, you have to make sure these reforms take
hold or are allowed to work over time.
Mr. STARK. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for joining us today, Mr. Secretary.
I would like to switch subjects to a different area that is
very current from a standpoint of job creation and job
sustainment, and that is to talk about unemployment insurance
for a moment.
Could you tell us who pays unemployment insurance taxes?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, as you know--and I am sure you
know this based on your question--businesses pay the
unemployment insurance taxes.
Now, if you are an economist, you would give a more complex
answer to that, because, ultimately, of course, the economy as
a whole pays those taxes. But----
Mr. DAVIS. But, ultimately, it comes out of someone's
pocket.
Secretary GEITHNER. Yeah, the direct incidence is on
businesses. You know, some people would say that--well, I won't
give you the more complicated answer.
Mr. DAVIS. I guess that leads to my next question. Have you
been an employer and paid these taxes? I mean, I have. I have
written the checks every quarter to the----
Secretary GEITHNER. I, unfortunately, have been in the
public sector all my life. But I have helped manage substantial
organizations of people.
Mr. DAVIS. Okay. No fault in that, but it does give a
difference in context.
The reason that I wanted to clarify that, the
administration's budget, pages 184 and 191, describes your
unemployment insurance proposal as offering $9 billion in
relief to employers through 2013, and then subsequently tax
hikes totaling $67 billion over the next decade.
If you were an employer, as I was or many of us on the
Committee were, paying those checks and were looking at long-
term capital investment forecasts, trying to decide whether to
hire or not hire, what to do, if you were an employer having to
face that decision, would you think that getting, for example,
$9,000 in relief now in exchange for a $67,000 tax tab in the
future through increased unemployment insurance taxes is really
a good deal?
Secretary GEITHNER. Oh, I do think it is a good deal,
because our job is to figure out what makes sense for the
country at a time when we have limited resources. And, as many
people on your side of the aisle have said, we have to
recognize that we face unsustainable long-term deficits. So we
are going to have to do things that are going to be painful.
The choice is to--we want to make those choices in a way that
is careful and sensitive.
But what this proposal does--remember, this is just a
proposal. You know, Congress has to reflect on this and
consider it. And we are completely open to suggestions of how
better to design it. But what it does is, it marries some
short-term relief for States and for employers with reforms
that make the base of these assessments more fair across
companies as a whole.
And, again, there may be different ways to do this. We may
not have gotten it perfectly right. Open to suggestions, happy
to work with you on a better way do it.
Mr. DAVIS. I appreciate that perspective. I think 2014 may
be the ultimate year of fulfilling that Mayan prophecy
economically, with all of these taxes coming to bring the end
of the business world. The concern that I have is that, in
fact, we have so many issues that are coming if there are not
reforms to the reform in health care and other things like
this. I hear constantly from employers back in my district that
there is a lot of fear, frankly, at the small to mid-sized
business levels about hiring. Now we add on
another issue with UI and the proposed tax increases in the
budget.
I guess my final question would be this: If you were an
employer and you were trying to make decisions with cash
longer-term, do you think that, with this looming tax hike,
that you, personally, would be eager to take on new liabilities
to hire people?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, again, what I would
try to look at is the following. I would say just two things.
One is, look at what businesses across the country are doing
today. And if you look at what has happened to the recovery
over the last 18 months, businesses are expanding investment at
an accelerating rate, pretty strong rate, much more rapidly
than GDP is growing overall. And we have created more than a
million private-sector jobs just in the last three quarters,
much more and much more quickly than the last two recessions
that were much milder recessions. And so, we have a long way to
go, but we are making progress.
Now, I would look at the overall mix of proposals in the
President's budget on the tax side, because it is my view that
if you look at their overall impact on businesses and
competitiveness, they are very strong, very powerful, help
improve incentives for investment in this country, help improve
incentives for innovation, that we think those are good for
growth long-term. But you have to look at the overall package
of it, not just the specific tax cuts for businesses, but the
broader reforms as a whole.
Mr. DAVIS. Yeah, I appreciate your sentiment. I guess if I
were in the personal and capital gains tax rate to 44 percent,
combined with things like this, it might create a bit of a
disincentive for that. But we will weigh in in a different
place on that.
And, with that, I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome.
I remember 2 years ago your first visit to this Committee,
and I think my question was on trade. You may recall that. I
was a little concerned there was only one sentence attached to
the no-cost stimulus, as it has been referred to, to trade.
And so I am happy to say that I am really encouraged with
the President's position and latest action on his Export
Initiative Council, which I am a member of, and then also his
recent developments in negotiating the Korean trade agreement.
So I am excited about the job possibilities, the doubling of
exports, and the engine it will provide to our economy. So
congratulations on that.
It shows you how much can change in a couple of years.
There is something that I am concerned about and am hoping that
you might change a position that you have taken. I would like
to remind you of a letter that 118 Members of Congress signed,
along with myself and Eric Cantor, voicing our opposition to
the tax simplification program, dubbed ``Simple Return,'' that
you considered last Congress. This proposal would basically
have the IRS prepare your taxes for you and mail you a bill.
This is, in my opinion, hardly tax simplification. It is
more like the fox guarding the henhouse. I think there would be
a lot of people that might agree with that.
I want to assure you that we are still aware of that
proposal, and I wanted you to be aware of our opposition and
hope that there might be some change in your thought as we are
now a year or 2 later.
I want to move on. I really want to get back to this small-
business thing. I am concerned that the administration's budget
targets small businesses, as has been said. Some of the figures
have been already tossed about. But, as you said and I think
most people recognize, much of the burden, really, is going to
fall on these passthrough businesses, the S corporations,
partnerships, and sole proprietorships, whose income is
reported on their owners' individual tax return.
And, as you said, that is 3 percent of small businesses.
However, the Joint Committee on Taxation found last year that
roughly 50 percent of the higher Federal tax revenue would come
from small businesses.
I am particularly concerned about its impact on the
millions of small businesses that are located all over the
State of Washington and across this country. So do you believe
that this is 50 percent of our income?
Do you believe that higher taxes on hundreds of thousands
of small businesses, mom and pop stores, is really a way to
create jobs?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, let me just start with where you
started. And thank you for what you said about the export side.
And I want to say, it is very encouraging, what you are seeing
now, which is, export growth is very strong. It is leading the
recovery. Exports are growing really quite rapidly. And it is
really across the board, from agriculture to high-tech. And it
shows how fundamentally strong and resilient this country is.
And you are right to emphasize, though, the question for us
for the future is how to make sure that continues. And for that
to happen, you want to make sure that you see more investment
in the United States by U.S. companies, by foreign companies.
And that will help contribute to the stronger export growth. We
need to do that alongside these trade agreements.
And I heard you on your second concern.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you.
Secretary GEITHNER. Now, the way I would think about it is
this, which is--and, again, I think this is the fairest way to
do it. Those proposals, again, apply to a very small fraction
of small businesses, only 2 to 3 percent. And the incidence
falls mostly, overwhelmingly on businesses in that category
that make substantially more than a million dollars a year.
So----
Mr. REICHERT. How do you address the fact, though, that 50
percent is from small business income?
Secretary GEITHNER. Because that income that you are
referring to, again, is concentrated in businesses that are
actually not small. They are actually quite large. And,
overwhelmingly, those businesses are businesses structured like
law firms and firms similarly structured like that. You could
say those are like communities of individuals that earn a lot
of money because they are very productive, and they are allowed
under our tax system to structure themselves that way to reduce
their taxes.
Mr. REICHERT. But is this really the way to encourage
economic growth?
Secretary GEITHNER. Oh, again, I think it is.
I think, as many people on your side have said, again,
future economic growth depends on two really important things.
One is better incentives for investment in this country, and
confidence that we are going to reduce our long-term deficits.
We have to do both. If the business community, if the American
people, if foreign investors are not confident we are going to
reduce those long-term deficits, then they are going to invest
less here, and future growth will be weaker.
So we just have to balance these different objectives. And,
again, those are the rates that prevailed during the 1990s,
which was the best record for small-business creation, best
record for investment growth, best record for productivity
growth, best record for income growth, employment growth, than
we have seen in more than 30 years.
So we think that that is a prudent response at a time when
we don't have unlimited resources.
Mr. REICHERT. We will agree to disagree on that one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. McDermott is recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for coming.
The President's budget has cuts in it that are huge cuts to
the deficit but still invests in the country. The alternative
plan by the Republicans--we are going to vote on it in about 48
or 72 hours--is cut spending and use the savings to protect tax
cuts for the wealthiest top 4 percent.
Now, the Republicans' spending plan, in my view, is a dark
view of the future, one that throws the middle class under the
bus. The Republican plan, if you read it carefully, sends one
message to America's middle class, to the unemployed, and to
the working poor: We don't care about you.
Now, for example, they want to cut spending for States to
repair highways and bridges. They want to cut Social Security
Administration, so Social Security offices close across the
country for a month next year. These programs won't help put
America back to work, they don't grow the economy, and they
keep the lights out for senior citizens.
For example, Republicans want to cut $758 million from the
Women, Infants, and Children program, the WIC program. Now,
that program provides funding to keep low-income mothers and
soon-to-be mothers, as well as their children, get food and
health care referrals. The program was signed into law by none
other than the great icon, President Reagan, to which all the
Republicans in the Congress pray every day as their patron
saint.
Now, these are just a few examples of the drastic and
disastrous cuts the Republicans are proposing. They don't cut
defense, even though the Secretary of Defense is desperately
calling us to stop buying weapons his department doesn't need.
They don't seem to think that the wealthy have any
responsibility to this country or for those who have less
fortunate lives in it.
It also seems the Republicans don't understand the idea of
investing. Now, Paul Krugman has called these Republican
spending cuts ``eating the future.'' That comes from a Native
American saying, that you can tell when a tribe is on its way
down when they eat their seed corn. Now, basically, the
Republican focus on cutting spending from these programs, they
cut things that don't have an immediate benefit but they really
take a hit in the long term. And the Republicans, as they eat
our seed corn, are doing it at the expense of the middle class
and the poor.
Now, the President has taken meaningful steps to balance
the budget and bring manufacturing back to the United States.
And I would like you to talk about the question about the Build
America Bonds and the other investments, and contrast that with
what is in the Republican budget. There is, we understand, $2
trillion sitting in private hands, and they won't invest it. So
we have no alternative but to do it from the government level,
because the private sector is not doing it.
I would like to hear you talk about the President's
investments.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, I can't improve on
the contrast you described, although I agree that the choice we
face is a pretty stark choice in different strategy for the
country. And what we are trying to lay out is a more confident
vision of what it is going to take for us to grow in a world
where we face a lot of competitive challenges.
I want to just highlight, again, some of the proposals in
the budget which we think are going to be good for investment
and future growth. Again, we propose to make permanent an
expanded credit for research and development; zero capital
gains for small businesses; an expansion of a very valuable tax
credit to help families afford college for their children; low
taxes on dividends and capital gains so that we are, again, not
hurting investment incentives; investments in education so that
we improve the quality of education; investments in improving
the overall quality of infrastructure. I mean, if you are a
business in the United States today and you have to deal with
our infrastructure, it is like a tax on competitiveness.
So those things, we think, are critical to our capacity to
grow in the future, to compete with these countries around the
world that are getting very good at things that we used to be
uniquely good at. And, again, we have to make sure that, as we
think about the budget, we think about what is a better
strategy for growth.
And, of course, we have to do that in a way that is going
to be viewed as fair to the overwhelming majority of the
American people. We are coming out of a financial crisis that
caused devastating damage not just to low-income Americans but
across middle-class Americans. You see that in high
unemployment rates, in millions of Americans still on food
stamps, millions of Americans still at risk of losing their
homes, and after decades of very substantial increases in
inequality.
And so we have to find a way to make these fiscal choices
to restore a balance, restore a gravity to our fiscal position,
but not at the expense of our ability to grow and compete in
the future and not at the expense of some basic principles of
fairness for a country that is still suffering deeply because
of the recession.
Could I say that the Republicans are going to have the
chance, not just in the debate about the CR, but when they put
together their budget resolution, they are going to have the
chance to lay out a 10-year plan, like the President does, that
explains how the Republican leadership in the House believes we
can bring these deficits down over time and what mix of
spending restraint longer-term, what mix of tax reforms that
will help achieve that.
And that will give us a chance to have a good debate. And
we will have a good debate. And we won't agree on everything,
but we will agree on some things. But the important thing is
that the strength of the economy depends on us making sensible
choices.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Nunes is recognized.
Mr. NUNES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just continuing your thought there, Mr. Secretary,
President Obama, this is his third budget. And I just find it
peculiar that you would state just now that you are waiting for
us to lead. Isn't that why you----
Secretary GEITHNER. No, no, I wasn't saying that. I am
sorry, I didn't mean to imply that. Let me just correct that.
Obviously, the President, as President, has the
responsibility for laying out to the country and the world
every year a budget that lays out a 10-year path to reduce
deficits. And that is the beginning of the process----
Mr. NUNES. You said you are waiting for us to come up with
our ideas?
Secretary GEITHNER. No, no, no, not at all. We have to take
the lead and the initiative, and you are going to disagree
about some of those choices, and we will have to figure out
what makes sense.
But what I meant is that I know that you are having this
debate about current spending for this fiscal year, but as
important as that debate is that you are going to have the
chance to lay out an alternative vision about how we bring
those deficits down.
My point is, just to come back to where we began, you are
focused, understandably, as we are, on how to demonstrate to
the American people we can bring some restraint to spending
that is unsustainable. That----
Mr. NUNES. Well, Mr. Secretary, in your budget, on page 52,
you state or I should say, the President's budget, not your
budget--``Even with this fundamental change, however, an aging
population and a continued high level of health costs will pose
serious long-term budget problems. Medicare, Medicaid, and
Social Security will absorb a much larger share of Federal
resources than in the past, limiting what the government can do
in other areas. The level of high debt to GDP that is projected
risks unsustainability without further policy changes.''
But you kind of punt on entitlement reform and other
subjects in your budget.
Secretary GEITHNER. No, no. Congressman, I have listened to
your colleagues say that, but I guess I would say the following
in response.
We have an unsustainable deficit over the next 10 years,
which we have to deal with. We have to bring that down to
something that is sustainable. And after that decade, we face
unsustainable long-term deficits primarily driven by health
care costs.
Now, the Affordable Care Act brings about very, very
substantial cost savings that will help reduce those costs, but
we recognize we need to build on those. The President made a
few suggestions in the budget of how to go beyond the
Affordable Care Act to build on those things--for example,
reforming medical malpractice----
Mr. NUNES. Well, Mr. Secretary, I am actually glad you
brought up Medicare in your savings. When you look at page 281
of the Medicare Trustees Report, which you are using for your
brilliant savings that now have solved the Medicare crisis over
time, where now it is only $2.4 trillion, according to your
math--but, in the back, the chief actuary says this. The chief
actuary doesn't believe the long-term projections, because here
is what he says: ``For these reasons, the financial projections
shown in this report for Medicare do not represent a reasonable
expectation for actual program operations in either the short
range or the long range.'' I am assuming that is because we
didn't deal with SGR and unfunded liabilities, et cetera, et
cetera.
Now, do you agree or disagree with the chief actuary of the
Medicare report?
Secretary GEITHNER. A very important clarification: In the
way the Congress works, in the way the laws of the land work,
CBO is the judge of what reforms cost and save. What the
actuary was doing is making a prediction about what future
Congresses may or may not do. That is really your job, your
decision and CBO's.
Now, of course, if Congress does not enact these reforms or
repeals them or modifies them, then they will save less money
over time. And that is what that report refers to. That is a
prediction about what Congress will do, not a prediction about
what the law would do if Congress were to stick with it.
Mr. NUNES. So you think, if we just stick with the
President's current budget, without any policy changes to
entitlements, that we are going to be okay.
Secretary GEITHNER. No, no. I would say this. If you enact
the President's budget, which is unlikely, because you will
want to change it, but if you enact that degree of deficit
reduction over the next 4 to 5 years, then you will stabilize
our debt as a share of the economy at an acceptable level. And
if you leave in place the Affordable Care Act, then you will
have made a very substantial contribution to those long-term
deficits that start to accelerate in the decades ahead.
Now, what the President said----
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Secretary, I think the last 3 years I have
heard you say almost exactly the same thing, just worded
differently. And every year, the budget problem gets worse over
time.
Secretary GEITHNER. No, actually, in some ways, it is
getting better because the economy is doing a little better
than we expected.
But the way our Constitution works, the President proposes,
Congress has to legislate. And you will now share with us the
privilege of how to make decisions about these long-term costs.
And, again, what I think is very important for us do, and
this is a better way for us to do it, is to lock in multiyear
savings over time. If you try do it in 1 year, you will kill
the economy. And you need to give the business community and
families the chance to look ahead and the chance to adjust to
the change that is to come over time.
But that is something we are going to have to do together.
We can't do that on our own.
Mr. NUNES. My time has run out. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary Geithner, it is good to see you again before
the Committee.
Secretary Geithner, at a time when every American is
concerned about our ability to compete, whether here or abroad,
it is apparent to many of us that the administration has
launched a full-scale assault on American energy security.
Now, there have been denials by the administration that a
moratorium on drilling exists, but permits are not being
granted. And, in fact, just this past weekend, the second
largest shallow-water drilling company in the United States
filed Chapter XI. One thousand jobs are at stake.
This is all solely due to the administration's policies. It
is not because of the economy; it is not because of some
foreign event. It is solely due to policy made in the White
House.
Now, I have questioned you before and we have gone back and
forth through letters on energy policy. In a letter you sent to
me a while back, there was one line in there that really
bothered me. I will read it back to you. It says, ``To the
extent the credits encourage overproduction of oil, they are
detrimental to long-term energy security.''
This is referring to the eight--I believe it is eight-
different provisions in the budget that will be repealed. These
are tax preferences for oil and gas that have been in existence
for quite a long time.
So my question is--it is a very simple starting question:
Is there an overproduction of oil in the United States today?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, I think I would come
at that question this way: When you allow individual industries
in the United States to pay much lower tax rates than other
businesses pay, that means all other businesses pay higher
taxes. And that makes the country, as a whole, less
competitive.
Mr. BOUSTANY. But do we really have an overproduction of
oil in the United States today?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, you know, as you know, I don't--
--
Mr. BOUSTANY. It is really kind of a ``yes'' or ``no''
question, isn't it?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, I don't run energy policy, don't
feel equipped to address that question.
But, again, what I would say is, it makes sense at a time
when we have unsustainable deficits and we are worried about
our long-term energy-security issues that we have to figure out
ways to, frankly, clean the Tax Code out of special benefits
that go to a limited number of industries that mean that the
rest of Americans pay higher taxes. That is the rationale for
this.
Mr. BOUSTANY. But if we are looking to compete and grow,
stimulate the economy and to grow the economy, do you believe
that oil is a very necessary part of our energy security and
our energy economy today?
Secretary GEITHNER. I am sure it will be part of our energy
security and meeting our energy needs for a long time to come.
But, again, we think it is good policy for the country to not
provide very generous incentives that encourage the production
dependence on very carbon-intensive forms of energy.
Mr. BOUSTANY. You say ``very generous incentives,'' but if
you compare actual equivalent energy metrics with wind and
solar, the subsidies for those are much higher on a per-unit
basis of energy than they are for oil and gas.
Secretary GEITHNER. True. But, again, I am not an
economist, but I think we would argue that the overall return
on those investments for the economy, as a whole, are higher.
Mr. BOUSTANY. But that is not proven yet.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, you know, people may disagree on
that, but, again, we think for the country, as a whole--and I
know that this is going to be painful for parts of the energy
industry. But I think overall----
Mr. BOUSTANY. It is going to be painful for every American,
sir.
Secretary GEITHNER. No, I don't think so. I think that
overall----
Mr. BOUSTANY. I disagree with that. And, sir, if we tax our
current energy production, then obviously prices are going to
go up, whether it is electricity or fuel at the pump----
Secretary GEITHNER. No. I think the problem with these tax
benefits and the virtue of changing them is that they will not
affect the price of energy for the American people. What they
do do----
Mr. BOUSTANY. I don't agree with that, and that is not what
I am getting from economists that I have consulted with.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, unfortunately, about economists,
you know about economists, they can disagree on almost
anything. But we have to make these judgments.
And, again, when you look at these industry-specific tax
benefits, I think it is important to recognize that they only
exist because other businesses pay higher taxes. So if you care
about overall competitiveness of the American industry, you
should care about trying to scale those back over time.
Mr. BOUSTANY. There is also a provision with regard to
dual-capacity companies. And this is going to affect U.S.
companies that do drilling overseas, making them less
competitive than American companies.
Now, I have to question, why should U.S. tax law favor
state-owned enterprises, Chinese state-owned enterprises, a
Venezuelan state-owned enterprise, over and above U.S.
companies?
Secretary GEITHNER. I definitely would not support that,
and I very much doubt that these proposals have that risk.
But, again, Congressman, we are not going to agree on this,
but I would be happy to talk to you about this. And I
understand the concerns you began with, about the impact of all
these changes on specific companies. And I would be happy to
have my colleagues work would you on how best we can limit
those effects.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I am delighted with Dr. Boustany's comments,
because I know now that I will be able to count on him with
Bermuda and Switzerland as they compete in the reinsurance
market in his part of the country with domestic companies.
I am going to give you a chance to speak, Mr. Secretary, on
this. Could you give us an idea of where we were with TARP,
where we are with TARP, and where we are going with TARP?
I am delighted with your modified proposal on reinsurance.
You can already sense that the Bermuda and Swiss companies who
are receiving a subsidy to compete with American companies are
taking note of what you proposed.
And the last issue is that the Department of Labor is
proposing some new rules on fiduciaries, with their public
hearing next month. And, at the same time, SEC is proposing new
rules under Dodd-Frank to create a uniform fiduciary standard.
I am hoping that Treasury will be involved in this
rulemaking so that you will have some enforcement
responsibility, as IRAs are solely in your purview. And you
know I have your auto IRA that I have carried for the last two
sessions.
But I am asking, I guess, in the three instances here what
the Treasury role will be in each instance.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, let me start with where you
ended. We will follow that debate very closely. And, of course,
we share your interest of trying to make sure these come out
with a reasonable balance. But we will watch that stuff
carefully.
You understand what we are proposing on the reinsurance
side. I don't need to go into that. But, again, we are trying
to make sure there is just a level playing field for American
companies.
On TARP, where you began, let me just say a few things
about where we are on TARP.
When I came into office, the CBO estimated this program
would cost us about $350 billion. We now believe that, outside
of housing, these programs will show a positive return to the
American taxpayer, very substantial amounts. And that is
because we ran a strategy that had private capital, not the
taxpayers' money, come in and bear the largest burden of trying
to solve our crisis, recapitalizing the banking system, et
cetera. And we have been very, very successful in managing
those investments to generate, if you just look at the bank
investments, for example, billions and billions in dollars in
positive return that we can use to meet our long-term
challenges.
These programs were incredibly successful in restructuring
the automobile industry, restoring it to profitability. And we
have a much stronger private financial system today than we had
going into the crisis because of the success of the President's
strategy. We have not just saved, you know, hundreds and
hundreds of billions of dollars of taxpayers' resources, but we
are going to show a positive return, outside of housing, that
is very substantial.
I think it will prove to be the most successful financial
rescue in modern history, even recognizing that we still face a
lot of challenges ahead in digging out of this crisis,
repairing the damage caused by it.
Mr. NEAL. Well, as one who supported that initiative, I
would point out and I think it is important to acknowledge
again, that that legislation took place in October of 2008. So
we are grateful for your efforts to make sure that the
initiative worked, understanding that, even though it was
proposed by the previous administration, that it is one of
those instances in the House of Representatives where moderate
Democrats and moderate Republicans cast the correct vote.
Secretary GEITHNER. And the current Speaker of the House
played a decisive role in helping make that happen. And there
were a lot of courageous votes in this body in support of that
legislation. It was very unpopular legislation, but it was a
courageous and necessary act.
Now, when we came in, we had to finish the job and get the
money back. But it was absolutely essential to helping break
the back of the financial crisis.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Heller is recognized.
Mr. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here.
You keep exempting housing every time you talk about the
economy turning around, and I would like to home in on that for
just a minute.
As you are probably aware, I am from Nevada. We have some
real housing problems in Nevada. In fact, for the last 4 years
straight, actually 49 straight months, Nevada has continued to
have the highest foreclosure rate in the United States. One in
every 79 housing units in Nevada has received a foreclosure
notice. We have one county, where I believe 1 in 49 homes has
received a foreclosure notice.
We have over 400,000 households that owe more on their
mortgage than they are worth. To put that in better
perspective, three-quarters of the people in their homes are
owing more now than their homes are worth. A couple of
examples: We have a housing unit in northwest Las Vegas that
were originally priced at $735,000, built in 2006. One of them
went for $62,500 at auction last year. There is also a condo
unit in Las Vegas that was selling in 2006 for $625,000, now
selling for $106,000. I am just trying to put this thing in
perspective, help you understand.
When I talk to my constituents, of course they blame the
banking industry, saying they are not willing to negotiate.
When you talk to the banking industry, they blame the FDIC.
When you talk to the FDIC, they blame you. Now, I am not asking
you who you blame; I am just trying to set this picture in a
manner to which you can respond.
I want to give you two quotes, two of your quotes. I don't
disagree with these quotes, but I think you can help shed some
light on them. You said, ``I personally believe that there is
going to be a good case for the government preserving some type
of guarantee to make sure that people have the ability to
borrow to finance a house even in a very damaging recession. I
think there is going to be a good case for that.''
You also said, ``I think we are not going to preserve
Fannie and Freddie in anything like their current form. We are
going to have to bring fundamental change to that market.''
Some people would say that those two conflict with one
another. The more I read it, I think it makes more sense.
For my sake and perhaps my constituency's sake, could you
shed some light, perhaps, on where we are going in the housing
industry? And so that we are not exempting housing every time
we talk about the economy improving, that perhaps there is a
direction that we are moving or this administration is moving
that we can fully understand.
Secretary GEITHNER. Excellent question. And I am glad that
you emphasized this basic reality still, which is, again, the
scars of this crisis are still very deep and broad, and they
are present still across the country.
But the housing crisis was very much concentrated in your
State and three other States and in a series of cities across
the country. And it is still very, very hard. And, to be
realistic, I think it is going to take several more years to
heal the damage caused by that crisis.
Now, we are trying do two things. One is we are trying to
make sure that we can reach as many Americans as we can to give
them a chance to stay in their home if they can afford it. The
programs we have helped put in place have helped roughly 2.5
million Americans have a chance to take advantage of a modified
mortgage that lowers their monthly payment and stay in their
home.
We can't help everybody, because a lot of people got
themselves way overextended, and we don't think we can justify
using the taxpayers' money to help them stay in homes they
can't afford. But we are going to try to make sure we reach as
many people as we can. Those programs that are still in place
now are making a huge difference for millions of Americans. And
we want to make sure that, again, they do as much as they can.
Now, longer term, obviously we have a housing system that
is a mess and did not work, overwhelmingly dependent on the
government now still. And what we laid out last week was a plan
to gradually wind down Fannie and Freddie, gradually restore
this market to a market where private capital provides most of
the mortgages in this country, but still has the government
play a limited role, a targeted role in helping provide
affordable housing alternatives, rental as well as ownership,
to low-income Americans.
And we proposed a variety of other models for trying to
make sure that the government is providing some kind of
protection against the risk of a very severe recession in the
future. We are not going to do that with Fannie and Freddie,
though. We don't think they can be part of that solution.
And we want to begin a debate in Congress with the relevant
Committees about how best to craft legislation that would
achieve those objectives: wind down Fannie and Freddie; restore
the private market to the dominant place in housing finance,
but with better protections for consumers; more capital against
risk; homeowners holding more equity in their homes; and some
protection in a future crisis against the risk that you have a
mild recession turn into a depression. That is a very difficult
challenge to do.
And, of course, for the reasons you began with, we want to
make sure these reforms are phased in gradually. Because we are
not going to take any risk that we slow the process of
repairing the housing market or we damage the recovery.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Gerlach is recognized.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for testifying today.
One of the statements the President made in his State of
the Union, which I felt was very positive, was his desire to
address the corporate tax situation. And while he did not
express, necessarily, where he felt the rate should be lowered
to, it was a very positive statement that that is an issue he
wants to work on.
Do you have a sense of where the President wants to go,
from the 35 percent corporate rate to what level?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, my own view is, for it to be
worth it, you have to move it substantially lower. The
average----
Mr. GERLACH. So, in the 30s? Or below 30, into the 20s?
Secretary GEITHNER. The average rate of our major trading
partners now is in the high 20s. And for it to make a
meaningful difference, you want to get it down substantially
towards that level.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. And are you of the belief that, by doing
that, you are incentivizing more domestic activity, economic
activity, trying to encourage more investment here domestically
rather than abroad?
Secretary GEITHNER. Absolutely. I think that there are two
very important rationales for doing this.
One is, again, you want the market allocating investment,
you want the market choosing which companies grow, which
companies succeed. You don't want the tax system making those
judgments, getting in the way of those judgments. And so, if
you can clean up the tax system, lower the rate, broaden the
base, you probably improve overall growth and efficiency.
But as important as that, you want the Tax Code working
with, not against, the objective of encouraging investment here
in this country.
Mr. GERLACH. Would those same goals apply to an individual
taxpayer?
Secretary GEITHNER. I think, generally, we are going to
have to do comprehensive individual tax reform, too. And, as
many people have proposed in the past, probably the best way to
do that, to simplify the system, make it more fair, is to also
lower the rates and broaden the base.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. As I understand it, under the
President's 2012 proposal, he actually wants to raise the two
top marginal rates from 33 to 36 and from 35 to 39.6, both of
which would be over the corporate rate that we are talking
about reducing. If those same goals apply to corporations as to
individual taxpayers, why would the administration want to see
an increase in those rates?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, again, what I would do is
compare--if you think about those rates in context, they are
the rates that prevailed in the 1990s, and we were doing fine
as a country then. Actually, it is a record that was the envy
of the world then and we would be thrilled to recreate today.
So I think those rates are something that is completely
consistent with the strategy of making sure we are more
competitive, we are growing. And it recognizes that, again, as
many of your colleagues have recognized, we have unsustainable
fiscal deficits. And if we are going to save money together in
reducing spending, we want to make sure those savings go to
deficit reduction and improving incentives for investment in
the country.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. Well, we don't have the same economy in
2011 as we did in the 1990s. And I would hope that we would all
work together to reconstruct a Tax Code that works for the
current economy, both domestically and in the world, rather
than going back to the 1990s and try to reconfigure the same
kind of tax structure that may not be applicable to what we
need do today.
And I can't understand if we, on the one hand, agree that
we need to lower the corporate tax rate to stimulate
investment, why you also want to increase taxes on individuals
if we want those same taxpayers to take their hard-earned
money, invest it in the economy, create economic activity, and
do the things that we all want to see happen to raise
everybody's boat.
So it seems to be a little incongruous that we would want
to decrease or lower the corporate tax rate, and yet, at the
same time, still in an economy with 9 percent unemployment, you
want to increase taxes on people who we want to see invest in
this economy.
Secretary GEITHNER. Congressman, again, you are raising
very important questions that just reflect the difficulty of
the choices we face.
But I will tell you, you know, my sense is, if you gave
businesses the choice, they would choose that mix. They would
say, we are comfortable living in an economy where we see a
modest increase in marginal tax rates for only 2 percent of
Americans and we see a more competitive tax system. I think
they would prefer to play in that economy than the one we have
today.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Becerra is recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, good to see you. Thank you for being here.
I am going to detour from asking you about the President's
budget for next year for a moment, because the plan House
Republicans released on Friday pertaining to this current
year's budget could create an immediate crisis for millions of
Americans who depend on Social Security.
The Republican proposal cuts the Social Security
Administration's operating budget for the rest of this current
year by $1.7 billion below what the Social Security
Administration needs for this current year, 2011. That is over
$500 million below what the administration spent to serve the
public last year with a smaller population of beneficiaries.
As a trustee of Social Security, I am wondering if you
could give me comments as to whether or not you think that is
the way we should be stewarding the most important program that
the Federal Government has for Americans, especially those of
retirement age.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, again, Congressman, as you would
suspect, I would not support those changes, for just the
reasons you said.
Mr. BECERRA. Okay. Now, my understanding is that, from what
we are being told, that if the cut is made as the Republicans
propose in their current-year budget proposal, it would mean a
loss of 3,500 jobs, it would shut down the Social Security
Administration's offices for 1 month, which means each and
every one of us who services seniors in our office, disabled
Americans, in our offices through constituent services would
have to explain to members in our community that, for a period
of about a month, there would be no one answering the phones,
no one responding to queries, no checks going out to
beneficiaries, no Social Security numbers issued to newborn
babies.
Over half a million retirees, widows, and severely disabled
workers would face these delays, starting with the creation of
a budget like this. Is that something you think, as a trustee
for Social Security, that we can at this stage handle?
Secretary GEITHNER. No. Again, I would not support cuts
that would have that impact, for just the reason you have said.
Now, again, I just want to be careful. I haven't seen those
cuts. We don't know what the House is going to actually pass.
And we would take a very careful look at anything the House
passes and try to make sure that people understand the full
implications.
But the most important thing, again, is, as we find a way
to restore gravity to our fiscal position, we are not cutting
into basic services and critical investments that will hurt the
economy longer-term--not just short-term, but long-term as
well.
Mr. BECERRA. And now, on a related note, our Republican
colleagues are threatening to shut down the government unless
certain cuts are made in certain programs. And that would come
through a vote on the debt ceiling limit. And they would vote--
some have said that they would vote against it.
Some Members on the Republican side have said that they
would vote against increasing the debt limit and keeping the
government operating unless there were cuts to Social Security.
I know that there are some who have made a proposal that
would--I would call it the proposal to pay China first; that
before you pay any money for any program, whether it is a
Social Security beneficiary or Medicare beneficiary, you have
to first pay other creditors, including China and others who
have lent us money. That is why some of us call it the ``pay
China first'' proposal.
Do you believe that we should be holding the government and
all those who depend on the services that the government
provides hostage in order to make certain cuts that could
ultimately have a devastating impact on Americans?
Secretary GEITHNER. I don't, Congressman. As you know, I
believe that America has to meet its obligations, that we are a
country that pays its bills, we meet our commitments. And we
cannot afford to do anything that would create a risk of
jeopardizing this recovery, slowing the pace of expansion,
slowing the pace of employment growth. And to create any
uncertainty in the minds of the American people and the broader
investment community that America will not meet its obligations
would be very damaging to the recovery.
And, again, just to take the more confident side of this,
of course I am completely confident Congress will act, as it
always does, to raise the debt limit. And I very much welcome
the comments made by the Republican leadership, both in the
House and the Senate, that recognizes that America has
obligations and is going to have to meet them.
Now, we are going to have to have a very important debate
about how to restore fiscal responsibility. And we are looking
forward to that debate, again, because that is a necessary
debate for us to have. But we are going to have to work that
out and still make sure the world understands that we are a
country that meets its commitments.
Mr. BECERRA. We are going to have a further discussion
later on, not just through the discussion of the budget but in
coming up with tax reform policies, on what we do with all
these tax loopholes. The President's fiscal commission, which I
was privileged to serve as a member of, called these tax
loopholes ``tax earmarks,'' because essentially we are
earmarking money to certain segments of the American economy,
whether it is businesses or individuals. And they get the gain
while the rest of the population doesn't.
And you do touch on them some. In fact, you had a
conversation with my colleague Mr. Boustany about the tax
loopholes that go for the oil industry. Are those the types of
things that you are going to continue to try to seek out some
consensus and try to make reform to our Tax Code?
Chairman CAMP. If you could just answer briefly. Time has
expired.
Secretary GEITHNER. Yes.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Chairman CAMP. Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for joining us today on what
really, I think, is one of the most important issues for our
constituents. They understand that our fiscal house is not in
order, and they are demanding that it be put in order.
Just by way of clarification, I think it is also important
to appreciate that the President is the one who holds the keys
as to whether or not the government gets shut down. He has said
that he won't sign something--fill in the blank. Whether or not
this government gets shut down is squarely in the President's
lap.
You said just a moment ago that you thought it was
appropriate for the market to decide which companies grow and
succeed. Many of us on our side of the aisle and many Americans
believe that this administration has grossly distorted the
market and made it much more difficult for companies to be able
to succeed in the way that the normal business processes work,
where the government isn't coming in to bail out their
competitor or to change the playing field.
So I think it is incredibly important that we recognize
that the kind of things that are being said here don't
necessarily square with what the reality is, or at least the
perception of folks out there.
But I want to talk about what you have said and what the
President said. This is a 10-year path. You said today, we need
to take the lead and the initiative. And so, for so many of us,
we are just dumbfounded, astounded by the fact that the
administration hasn't taken this opportunity to address the
issue of entitlements.
Clearly, the automatic spending that is in the budget, in
the Federal Government, just continues and continues and
continues. And if there is no change, obviously that is what
will make us Greece, with no pejorative opinion on Greece, but
certainly the financial situation.
Why didn't you all address the entitlement situation?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, at the risk of
repeating myself, what the President's budget does is reduce
our deficits to roughly 3 percent of GDP over a 5-year time
frame----
Mr. PRICE. I got that.
Secretary GEITHNER. --which is the level necessary to
stabilize our debt burden at a level that is acceptable for us.
Mr. PRICE. In 5 years, are we any more capable of
addressing the challenges of Medicare and Medicaid than we are
right now?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, you are right to point out, as we
do, that that is just a first step, and solving the 10-year
deficit, which is essential and important, does not, by itself,
solve the long-term deficits.
Mr. PRICE. So would you say----
Secretary GEITHNER. But, again, this President and this
body has already passed and put in place the most sweeping
entitlement reform to reduce costs that we have considered as a
country. And just contrast it with, for example, what this body
passed in the previous decade, which was a large expansion of
Medicare to cover pharmaceuticals without paying for it, adding
to our deficit----
Mr. PRICE. Actually, Mr. Secretary, I wasn't here when that
passed, but----
Secretary GEITHNER. You weren't. I don't blame you for
that.
Mr. PRICE. I would suggest that what was passed in the area
of health care in fact will increase costs to the Federal
Government, increase our deficit and our debt, as opposed to
decrease it.
So it really is remarkable, again, when you say, we need to
take the lead and initiative. There is no evidence of this
administration taking the lead and initiative on entitlement
reform. You have taken the lead and initiative on expanding
entitlements and expanding automatic spending.
I want to address a particular issue in the area of health
care as a physician, the issue of the sustainable growth rate
and how physicians are compensated for the remarkably high-
quality care that they deliver.
My reading of the budget, and it is just recent, is that
over the 10-year window, I think it is about $341 billion,
somewhere in that range, to allow for the SGR to continue.
Where are you getting that $341 billion? I haven't been able to
determine that.
Secretary GEITHNER. We identify ways to cover the costs of
that for, I believe, the first 2 years----
Mr. PRICE. Yes.
Secretary GEITHNER. --but not for the remaining 8.
Mr. PRICE. Correct.
Secretary GEITHNER. And we are assuming--and it is an
assumption, or it is a prediction, it is a hope that Congress
will, as they have done the last 2 years, figure out a way to
make sure they can sustain those rates at levels Congress seems
to want to, and do it in a way that they pay for it. But we
only identify how to do it in the first 2 years.
Mr. PRICE. So the assumptions are that Congress will take
care of that and that money will be there.
Secretary GEITHNER. Not all on your own. We will probably
have to join you in figuring out ways to pay that. But we don't
solve it, we don't identify how to do it over the full 10
years.
Mr. PRICE. Okay. Well, let me just register, finally, my
real concern about what I believe is a remarkable lack of
leadership on the part of this Administration in not addressing
the issue of Medicare and Medicaid reform.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Doggett is recognized.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary.
The budget that the President has presented seeks to add
some improvements in our fiscal operations both through revenue
and spending changes. And, as important as those spending cuts
are, some of them even painful cuts in spending, the revenue is
also very important. In fact, it is the principal job of this
Committee.
You don't believe that we can achieve a balanced budget
without some additional revenues, do you?
Secretary GEITHNER. No, I don't. I don't think you can
achieve the necessary reduction in deficits that are critical
to long-term growth without looking at sensible, carefully
designed tax reforms, as well.
Mr. DOGGETT. Right. And with reference to those tax
reforms, one that you have been involved in of late is
corporate tax reform. We recently, as you know, had a hearing
in this Committee on this.
According to a Bush administration Treasury report, taxes
on U.S. corporations represent a smaller percent of their
profits, in fact, than in other developed countries across the
OECD. I believe that last year there was a report out that
corporate tax receipts represent a little over 7 percent of
Federal tax revenues. Fifty years ago, it was about three times
that amount that we got.
President Reagan, which I think provides us some guidance
here, when he approved the 1986 Tax Reform Act, he actually
raised corporate tax revenues for the Federal Treasury by about
$122 billion.
You have said that the guiding principle here, and the
President has said in his State of the Union, is that, at a
minimum, we should not borrow money or shift more of the tax
burden to individuals in order to have corporate tax reform.
And I want to assure that that is a firm and unyielding
position of the administration, that we will not be borrowing
from the Chinese to finance such a reform, and we will not be
shifting more of the burden to individuals.
Secretary GEITHNER. That is right. When we say revenue-
neutral, we mean we would not support tax reform that reduced
revenues from the corporate sector, but it also means that we
don't think it is realistic or achievable or desirable to try
to raise revenues from higher taxes on businesses, because we
live in a much more competitive world. And though what you said
is right, the average effective tax rate on U.S. businesses
today is about the average of our competitors, but our
statutory rates are much higher, their statutory rates are much
lower, and that creates a playing field that works to our
disadvantage.
And we don't think realistically we can shift more of the
burden to the business community than they already bear because
of that new competitive world. So when we say revenue-neutral,
we mean revenue-neutral.
Mr. DOGGETT. You are not going to have them contribute less
than 7 percent.
Secretary GEITHNER. Not going to reduce and not going to
try to go materially higher.
Mr. DOGGETT. You have included in this budget proposal,
again, international tax loophole closures that you have had in
the past. And one of those that I have been particularly
interested in is the one that deals with corporations that
develop intellectual property, patents, various other forms of
intellectual property, formulas and the like here in the United
States, perhaps even using our research credits, and then just
before they are to be marketed they shift the ownership or they
joint-venture it offshore.
We had testimony on this last year at our hearing from
Assistant Secretary Shay, who said that the administration
would support moving forward to deal with this narrow but very
costly problem that I believe your budget that you just
submitted says costs us about $20 billion over 10.
And my question to you is, does the administration continue
to support dealing with this serious problem of shifting
intellectual property overseas as a separate, independent
matter from broader reform we hope to eventually achieve?
Secretary GEITHNER. We do. We can do it in two different
ways. We can do it by reforming the current system, as we
proposed, to reduce the opportunity our Tax Code provides to
shift income outside of the United States, income from
intangibles like you suggested. Or we can do it through
comprehensive reform.
But, again, the overriding objective should be to make sure
that we are reducing both the incentives and the opportunities
in the tax system to shift income and investment outside of the
United States.
Mr. DOGGETT. And I believe that there are proposals not
unlike the one Mr. Becerra talked about for Social Security in
this continuing resolution to make significant cuts to Internal
Revenue Service tax enforcement. I know some people who would
like to see that amount cut to zero, but we have had testimony
in the past that, for every dollar that we cut in tax
enforcement, we are reducing revenues by $3 to $14.
Does that remain true, that significant cuts to the
enforcement will actually worsen our budget deficit problems?
Secretary GEITHNER. Absolutely. The independent analysts
that look at this say, for every dollar you put in to IRS
resources, customer service enforcement, you raise at least $4.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank----
Secretary GEITHNER. Every dollar you cut has the same cost.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your time and your service.
We heard earlier commentary on Social Security and what
could be accomplished or what could not, perhaps, speculatively
be accomplished. Now, a furlough, as apparently was suggested,
would that not be an administrative prerogative?
Secretary GEITHNER. You know, I don't have the privilege or
the responsibility of managing the Social Security
Administration, so I can't--and I haven't had a chance to look
at these cuts. So I was very careful in responding to that
question by saying that, if the cuts had that impact, then I
think it would be imprudent and unwise and unnecessary. But I
haven't had a chance to look at them. And I don't know how we
would meet whatever Congress would propose.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Well, I appreciate that. And I guess I
would like to certainly do my part for not participating in
hyperbole and, you know, ramping up rhetorical statements for
various reasons. But, certainly, I think you can agree, we are
facing some significant challenges.
We have touched a bit on taxes here today. You know, the
estate tax, I hear a lot of input on that from back home, rural
Nebraska. They say it is double taxation. Do you agree with
that?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, you know, I--I don't know what I
would describe--how I would describe it. But what I would say
is that the rates and exemptions we proposed would make sure
that that tax only affected, we think, less than one-half of 1
percent of estates in any given year.
And, again, we are not proposing it because we like doing
it. We are only proposing it because, as you are saying over
and over again, we have unsustainable obligations,
unsustainable deficits, and they will hurt future growth and
make us weaker as a country if you don't fix them. And we are
going to have to do a bunch of things to spread the burden of
that.
But, again, our proposals would only affect less than one-
half of 1 percent of all estates in any given year.
Mr. SMITH. Well, I can appreciate that. I mean, it
certainly reduces the political pushback. I would hope that you
would share the concern of many of my constituents, not just
about the estate or death tax, but the narrowing of the tax
base, that fewer and fewer people are paying taxes. Whether it
is the Federal income tax that fewer and fewer people are
paying or other taxes how do you think we could address that?
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, if you look at our tax system
today, there is lots of unfairness across the system. And you
refer to one piece of it, which some people think is unfair,
which is lower-income Americans pay payroll taxes but many
don't have to pay the income tax as a whole. But the vast
majority do pay the payroll tax.
But I will take the other side of it. It is also true that,
as many of our, you know, most successful executives have said,
you can be a very successful businessman today and pay a much
lower effective tax rate than people who work for you. And that
doesn't seem fair either.
And, again, we are trying to propose some initial reforms
to help leave us with a more simple, more fair system.
Mr. SMITH. All right. And I can appreciate that, as well.
Now, on the capital gains tax rate, is there any concern
that letting that go back up or even pushing it back up could
actually result in fewer dollars of capital gains tax being
recovered?
Secretary GEITHNER. Not at 20 percent, no. Again, we are
proposing to make sure that--but, you know, Congress has to
make this choice--that we would only see, if those goes up for
the highest-income Americans, they only go up to 20 percent.
And we think that is a very modest rate on capital income.
Mr. SMITH. But still by increasing the penalty per se of a
transaction, there would be no risk or very little risk of
actually having fewer transactions?
Secretary GEITHNER. I don't think--I think it is a very
small effect.
You know, we are also, as I said, proposing to eliminate
capital gains on investments in small businesses. We have some
offsetting things that are good. But I think that would be a
very modest change, and no material impact on the economy or
investment decisions.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for joining us today.
Chairman CAMP. If the gentlewoman would suspend, because of
short time, as the Ranking Member and I have discussed, we are
going to go to 3 minutes per member to try to accommodate every
single Member.
Secretary GEITHNER. And, again, I am happy to respond in
writing to any questions. And I am sorry that I have to leave
at 3:30.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Once again, thank you, Mr. Secretary, for joining us.
As a result of an agreement last December, the estate tax
for the next 2 years will be imposed at a top rate of 35
percent with a $5 million exemption. And effective for 2013,
President Obama has proposed to make permanent the estate tax
parameters that were in effect in 2009, a top rate of 45
percent, $3.5 million exemption, which would not be indexed for
inflation.
I am a sixth-generation Kansan, raised on the family's
dairy farm in Holton. My kids are the seventh generation to
grow up in eastern Kansas. Mr. Secretary, as you probably know,
Kansas is an ag State. I hope you have an appreciation for the
importance of the family farm to this nation.
Do you even happen to know what the price of a new combine
is?
Secretary GEITHNER. I have never been a farmer, do not
know.
But I will say one thing, which is, the agricultural
community in the United States today is one of the strongest
parts of the economy today. And you are seeing in exports of
agriculture, in basic growth in agriculture, a lot of
encouraging signs of how strong this country is in agriculture.
And we want to do everything we can to make sure we are
reinforcing that.
Ms. JENKINS. We feel like we are under attack here. A new
combine costs over $300,000; a new tractor, over $225,000. That
is with nothing attached to it. If you want to attach a high-
priced implement, it is $170,000 on top of that. So, as you can
see, the cost of the necessary equipment to manage a farm can
be quite high. In fact, it can easily top $1.5 million just in
equipment.
Several years back, the USDA did a study. There were nearly
11,000 Kansas family farmers that had land and buildings valued
at over $2 million. So the cost of implements and land values,
when added together, it is really not hard to get to the $3.5
million cap on the estate tax that the President's budget is
proposing.
And, in addition, I want to note, the average net income on
a family farm is approximately $45,000 a year.
Now, I have heard the President state that everyone needs
to pay their fair share of taxes, but under the President's
proposal, it is not unreasonable to expect that a significant
percent of Kansas family farms could be placed at risk when
trying to comply with Federal tax laws and most likely could
not meet the capital requirements to maintain ownership between
generations.
So I just would like to see if you realize how this
proposal negatively treats family farms. I would ask you, how
do you advise family farms address this challenging issue?
And perhaps as a follow-up, it has been promised that taxes
wouldn't be raised on those earning below $250,000. With the
net income of the family farm being $45,000 a year in Kansas,
again, how do you explain hitting them with a tax increase that
could cost many of them their livelihood?
Chairman CAMP. Just very briefly, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary GEITHNER. Could I just say one thing?
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Secretary GEITHNER. Again, the estate tax changes would
affect only less than one-half of 1 percent of estates in any
given year, including the families that you are concerned
about. And we share those concerns.
One very important point: In the tax package passed by the
Congress at the end of the year, the President proposed, and it
was included in that, a provision for 1 year, any business in
the country can fully expense capital investment, fully write
off against their taxes the cost of a new combine, a new
tractor. And that is one reason you are seeing capital
investment expenditures start to accelerate now in the
beginning of the year.
So, again, if you look at the overall mix of things we are
proposing, we have put in place, they will substantially
improve the capacity and the competitiveness of American
businesses and American companies.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson is recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here.
And if the gentlewoman from Kansas is truly interested in
saving family farms, I have a bill for you. See me after the
hearing.
I think it is important that we discuss this budget today,
on the same day we are beginning the debate on the CR. And a
couple of my colleagues have juxtaposed some of the
differences. I think one of the major ones speaks directly to
the issue that I think it was Mr. Herger raised, that he was
interested in a budget that gets people back to work. And that
is kind of the antithesis of what the CR does, given the early
analysis that that would cost us about 800,000 jobs.
And so, if you juxtapose what is happening today in the CR
and the President's budget, specifically things such as the
Build America Bonds, which were so successful--I know
Sacramento airport used those. They generated 1,250 jobs. And
probably every district across the country can say something
similar. And I would like to hear how you deal with that,
because that is certainly a job creator, visavis the job killer
in the CR.
And also, on energy issues, I notice the President's budget
extends the 1603 Treasury grant program, which is so important
for renewable energy, and the section 48(c) provision, the
manufacturing tax credit, which is important to keeping those
jobs here in America.
And I would like to hear about that and what you see as an
opportunity for us, through encouraging and investing in
renewable energy, how we can use that to create more jobs.
And I should also mention, because it was brought up today
by someone on the other side about the potential loss in
traditional energy jobs, that the CR makes some cuts that will
make it impossible to get permits renewed and issued for those
traditional energy jobs, which, again, puts us at an energy
disadvantage.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, Congressman, you highlighted a
range of things we think are some of the most important things
we can do to help the economy recover, not just in the short
term but long term.
And I would share the caution that, as you look at how to
make these tough choices across the deficit as a whole, be
careful not to cut investments that will hurt jobs and be
careful not to cut investments that will hurt our
competitiveness in the future. And when you think about our
broader fiscal challenges, make sure you bring a long-term
perspective and that you are putting in place restraint that we
can live with over time, that balances that need to make sure
we are strengthening the recovery of the economy as a whole,
and also brings some gravity to our fiscal position.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Geithner, for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this meeting.
The biggest concern I have is about taxation, in terms of
the President's budget, but I want to touch on a couple of
things.
One, we are all interested in jobs, because we know if we
grow jobs, it cuts the deficit. So we have to do that. I think
you agree with that.
But let me tell you the reality. I am a guy who has been in
business 30 years, had a thousand employees 4 years ago, so I
understand the middle markets pretty well. I was Chairman of
the Florida Chamber. I dealt in these middle-market and small
companies.
Let me give you my observations from Florida. One, there is
a severe lack of credit for small- and medium-sized businesses.
You know that; I have seen you acknowledge it numerous times.
Compared to what was 4 years ago, it is very difficult to get
credit. Today, they can talk about credit, but unless you are
going to put up a half-million-dollar CD, you are not going to
get that line of credit, whatever you need.
The second thing is health care. To me, it is a big
entitlement program for 32 million or 50 million people, but it
doesn't do anything to bend the curve for small- and medium-
sized business. I had one of our largest employers the other
day in from Sarasota. They are getting ready, ideally, to hire
300 people. They could hire more. Their health care bill went
up a million and a half dollars. But that goes across the
board, even with small companies. Everybody says, ``Vern, I
just got my health care bill. It went up 20 percent.'' It is
killing jobs. Lack of credit is killing jobs.
Now, the third thing that comes to the budget with the
President is increasing taxes. I want to go back to a point
that you made. You said that it only raises taxes on 2 to 3
percent of small businesses. That was in your opening comment.
That might be true of the percentage of businesses, but how
many jobs do they create? There are a lot of people, and most
of them that might make a million dollars today, but they have
700 employees. They need more capital. But this budget suggests
we raise their taxes in a climate with a lack of credit and
health care costs going up. A lot of these businesses, as you
know, are passthrough entities.
So how
do you respond to the tax aspect of the President's budget?
Secretary GEITHNER. Okay, again, very briefly, you are
right about the credit problem. And I agree with you, it is
very important. And, you know, after a period where credit was
too easy, it is too tight now in pockets of the country,
particularly for businesses that were unlucky in their choice
of bank. Because their bank got overextended, they were the
victims of the bank having to reduce leverage and strengthen
capital.
But we are hoping that is going to start to improve. The
numbers suggest it is starting to improve. The price of credit
is much, much lower than it was at any time in the last 2 years
or so.
And this small-business program that is now working its way
through the system is going to help a little bit, help small
banks get capital from the government, help States provide a
little more financial power into their credit programs.
And we have to make sure that the examiners, the
supervisors, and the bank supervisors aren't----
Mr. BUCHANAN. But getting to that tax piece, I really
want--you said 2 or 3 percent. I want you to make a comment on
that.
Secretary GEITHNER. Now, again, it is very important to
understand, so I am glad you asked it again. And I am just
telling you the numbers that the independent tax people tell
the Congress, or inform the Congress of.
It is 2 to 3 percent of small----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Of companies.
Secretary GEITHNER. Of companies. And----
Mr. BUCHANAN. That employ how many?
Secretary GEITHNER. And you are right, they employ
substantial numbers of people. But the vast bulk of those
companies affected by that are companies that make substantial
amounts of earnings.
Now, you are right that their taxes----
Mr. BUCHANAN. They are not all law firms and investment
firms. I can tell you that----
Secretary GEITHNER. No, they are not all law firms. But
those that are not law firms and investment firms are
overwhelmingly still earning substantial amounts of money.
And, again, these are the rates that prevailed at a time
when the small-business community in this country----
Mr. BUCHANAN. But we don't have the circumstances we have
today. That is my concern.
Chairman CAMP. All right. The time has expired.
And, Mr. Secretary, I know we agreed on a hard stop at
3:30. We do have three Members on each side that have not had
an opportunity to question. I don't know if I could prevail on
you----
Secretary GEITHNER. Could I listen to the questions and
then, if I don't have time, I will respond to them in writing?
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Why don't we have them at least pre-
sent their questions to you. I appreciate your generosity in
staying.
So Mr. Blumenauer is recognized. And then, once you
complete your question, we will go on to the next person.
And then if you want to try to summarize at the end, I
would appreciate that, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Mr. Secretary, first of all, I would just
identify with my friend, Mr. Thompson, about the energy.
But my specific question that I would pose to you deals
with what my friend from Louisiana talked about, about
potential downside impacts of the President's proposal to
eliminate outdated fossil fuel subsidies for the oil companies
and invest in energy for the future. By the way, some of us--I
have introduced legislation that would do exactly that, and I
have a number of cosponsors.
I would hope that you could analyze for us, in a world oil
market where a barrel of oil is fungible and a price is
determined internationally that is in the range of $2 trillion
to $3 trillion, or more if it keeps going up, what impact $8
billion would have on the $2 trillion to $3 trillion--the
extent to which it has any benefit, would that inure to
Europeans or Chinese, if it made any difference at all.
It seems to me that would be useful for us, to have this
proper context.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Berg.
Mr. BERG. My question comes from North Dakota. Back in the
1980s, we had a real financial problem, and we increased taxes,
and the problem just continued. A decade ago, we had the same
problem, a lot of other States did, after the dot-com bubble
burst. And, really, we took the opposite approach. We tightened
our belt. We didn't raise taxes. We encouraged the private-
sector growth. And today we are below 4 percent unemployment.
We encouraged the oil and energy industries to grow, encouraged
those kinds of jobs, and they have had positive growth.
So my question to you really relates to the importance of
small business. My own experience is, when you tax small
business, that is negative for them. It creates uncertainty.
And so, in this budget, I see the taxes going up on small
business. A lot of small businesses, are passthrough entities,
and so they are paying taxes at ordinary income rates. In fact,
I think 50 percent of small business is paying their tax as
ordinary income.
So, again, my question to you is how can we increase the
taxes on these small businesses, and how can that be good for
our economy?
Secretary GEITHNER. Again----
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, I am sorry. I said I wouldn't
respond, but I will come back at the end.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here.
I, too, have a follow-up question about the fiduciary
definition that is being worked on by Labor and SEC, but I will
submit that in writing and hopefully get a response from you.
But I don't know if you are or are not aware, but the
Economic Policy Institute, a nonpartisan, independent group,
finally had a chance to analyze the Republican continuing
resolution that is before us this week. And they determined
that, if enacted as proposed, it would result in over 800,000
jobs being lost in both the private and public sector, given
the policy implications behind their continuing resolution.
I find that 800,000 number very fascinating, because, the
day President Obama was sworn in, you may recall that we were
losing 800,000 jobs a day. Since then, we have had----
Secretary GEITHNER. A month.
Mr. KIND. A month, A month. Since then, we have had 11
consecutive months of private-sector job growth. The day he was
sworn in, $17 trillion of wealth had already been destroyed in
the stock market. Since then, over $13.5 trillion has been
restored.
And the day he was sworn in, he inherited from the previous
administration a $1.5 trillion budget deficit. Now, the first
year in which you guys had control of the budget, it was
revised downwards by $150 billion. It is going up again next
year, but that is primarily due to the continuation of the Bush
tax cuts that all of them supported on the other side.
And I think we just have a very stark contrast between two
different visions for our country right now: one that is
offering a very cold, dark assessment about the future of our
nation and the possibility of economic growth, and one that is
more hopeful and optimistic.
I see that in the budget that this administration has
proposed, especially in the area of innovation and
competitiveness. I agree, and I think most people would agree,
with the President in the State of the Union when he says, we
have to out-innovate, out-build, out-create, out-compete the
rest of the nations in the world. And there are smart
investments in doing it and bad spending that we have to get
control of in order to bring balance to all of this.
And I would be interested, again, if you want to submit a
written response or whatever, to highlight some of the more
important investments you feel we have to move forward on in
order to create the sustainable long-term economic growth that
we face in this nation.
Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mrs. Black is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Geithner, I want to read from your written testimony
here. You say, ``Our deficits are too high, and they are
unsustainable. Left unaddressed, these deficits will hurt
economic growth and make us a weaker nation. And we must go
back to living within our means.'' I couldn't agree with you
more.
But this budget predicts, over the next 10 years, that we
are going to lower our deficit to 3 percent of GDP. And I am
just thinking about my 14-year-old grandson. And 10 years from
now, what I can say to him is, ``You know, Dylan, I am really
sorry that we could only lower this to 3 percent. And, by the
way, you are going to have at least a $15 trillion deficit that
you and your family are going to have to pay back. And I am
really sorry that I just couldn't get it quite done for you.''
Why is that our goal, to still be at a deficit, not a
balanced budget, and not growing our economy to the point where
we can start paying down our debt? That just seems like not a
very good goal to me.
Secretary GEITHNER. Excellent question. I agree with you;
it is a place to start, but it is not enough.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Geithner, let's put to bed once and for all, if you
would--and I think you need to address this directly--that we
did not--maybe the President did not address it for the other
reasons, the entitlements. But it is not true that Federal
health care reform adopted many--they did adopt many of the
recommendations from Congress' own independent advisory
commission. I hope you read it. The Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission, very specific recommendations. And that by having a
Medicare center for innovation, Medicare can now test and use
new payment models to improve patient care and to bring the
cost down. I have never heard anything about that from Fox.
Ever, ever, ever will I hope to hear that.
And my second area I think you should address is, we are
cavalierly talking about public employees like they are
chattel. That is what we do with cops and firemen and teachers.
And they are not. They have given their lives to this country.
If they have some bad ones in the mix, get them out of there.
But you can't paint with a wide brush.
We are now having a weird situation of increasing private
jobs and the public jobs going down. And if you don't think
that is going to cost us money, you are wrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Schock is recognized.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Geithner, for being here.
There are two questions I want to highlight, one dealing
with what some are calling the TARP tax, the tax being levied
on institutions with assets over $50 billion. I am specifically
interested in a couple of things: one, why in one step we are,
with a broad brush, taxing all institutions with assets above
$50 billion, whether they took TARP or not; and then, at the
same time, we exempt out some entities that actually took TARP.
And then, I think the question that is begged is, when the
administration says we are making money on TARP, why would we
need a tax to begin with?
The other question deals with the budget, which really
seeks to penalize those companies that utilize deferral. And
for those of us that have companies in our State that are large
multinationals, I guess my question would be, how does that
help create jobs? And, more importantly, how does it help us
become competitive in a world climate? For a company that may
only have 10 or 12 percent of their operations overseas, we may
be able to get the skin, but if 70 or 80 percent of what they
sell is manufactured and sold in other countries, I would
suggest that perhaps they are just going to leave if we
continue to make it more and more uncompetitive for them to
remain in America.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Crowley is recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I will be brief. I was hoping to have more of a
discussion with you, Mr. Secretary. I appreciate your being
here today.
With respect to the health care reform law that we put in
place and that you so ably helped to lead the charge on and to
talk about the impact on the U.S. economy, I would have liked
to have had a conversation and heard from you and your thoughts
about what we are hearing more about, the taxation on America's
middle class that that bill will bring about, how it is going
to kill jobs in America. I would have liked to have talked to
you about that. Or how it is going to kill small businesses,
that small businesses will never use the tax credits that they
have been afforded under the new law.
I would have liked to have had a conversation about a lot
of the falsehoods that have been spewed about this, and
continue to be, even though small businesses are using tax
credits, even though we are not killing small businesses in
this country, nor are we killing job creation and growth, as
you have just said, that we have consistently over the last 11
months continued to see growth in the private job market. And
that there is not going to be an increase, because of that
bill, on taxes in the middle class.
I would have liked to have had an opportunity to talk to
you about that. I wasn't able to, so I think I answered the
questions for you. But thank you very much for being here
today.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you for your time. You were
very generous. I will certainly give you the opportunity to
respond now, if you like, to touch on any of those things or to
respond in writing at your discretion. If you would like to
comment now, you may.
Secretary GEITHNER. Well, can I just say a few final
things?
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Secretary GEITHNER. Let me just make a few final points.
If you care about entitlement reform and our long-term
fiscal deficits, the most important thing Congress could do is
to make sure the reforms that were put in place to reduce the
rate of health care cost growth remain in place, are enacted,
that Congress sticks to them. And if we can find ways to go
beyond, we welcome a chance to do that.
A second observation to make: We had a lot of discussion
about the state of the economy and what is going to be good for
future growth. I just want to emphasize that, by any measure
you can look at the fact that the stock market is up about 100
percent since when we came into office, or you can look at
overall levels of profitability for the American business
community as a whole the American private sector you look at
productivity growth, you look at the dynamics of innovation,
what is happening in expert growth, the American business
sector is in a dramatically stronger position today because of
the actions taken by Congress and the President and the Fed
over this period of time. Our job is to help make sure we
reinforce that, because we have a lot of challenges ahead
still.
On the TARP tax, just a quick response: The law that
authorized the TARP requires the administration to propose a
fee to cover any losses so that we hold the taxpayer harmless.
And those costs have come down dramatically.
And, as I said, outside of housing, we are likely to earn a
positive return. But because the independent estimates still
estimate we still have some risk of loss, we felt obligated to
put in the budget how would we propose to recoup that so the
taxpayers aren't exposed to that. And we have proposed a very
modest fee, only on those firms that were eligible, the largest
firms that were eligible for the emergency assistance.
Just one final thing on deferral: As you think about
deferral, think about it this way. The current tax system at
the margin makes it more likely that a company in your State is
going to build a plant outside of the United States rather than
inside of the United States. And what it means is that, if you
have two companies in your State competing together, the
current tax system will favor, with a lower tax burden, the
company that builds that next plant outside of the United
States.
This is a complicated thing to fix, and we are committed to
fixing it. That is one reason why we are proposing
comprehensive tax reform. But as you look at these changes, I
think you want to join with us in making sure that the tax
system is working with our broad objectives at trying to
strengthen incentives for investment here in the United States.
And, again, any time you give any particular industry a tax
benefit, tax credit, it means all other businesses, on average,
pay higher taxes. That is not fair, and it makes us less
competitive. That is something worth changing.
Nice to be here today. Thank you. Excellent questions, good
discussions. I look forward to continuing them with you. And
let's see if we can do corporate tax reform.
Chairman CAMP. All right, thank you. And thank you for
being so generous with your time.
And if Members have questions, they will submit them to you
in writing. And I hope that we could receive a response.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you again, Mr. Secretary.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:46 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Questions submitted by the Members to the witnesses
follow:]
The Honorable Pat Tiberi

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.013

The Honorable Dave Reichert
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.014

The Honorable Rick Berg
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.015

The Honorable Diane Black
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.016

The Honorable Mike Thompson
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.017

The Honorable Ron Kind
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.018

[Submissions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 67470.025


