- HEARING ON THE INDIVIDUAL AND EMPLOYER MANDATES IN THE DEMOCRATS' HEALTH CARE LAW

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING ON THE INDIVIDUAL AND EMPLOYER

MANDATES IN THE DEMOCRATS' HEALTH CARE LAW

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 29, 2012

__________

Serial 112-HL09

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
78-672                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer Safavian, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

WALLY HERGER, California, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of March 29, 2012 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

PANEL 1:

Carrie Severino Chief Counsel, Policy Director, Judicial Crisis
Network........................................................     8
Testimony....................................................    11
Steven G. Bradbury Partner, Dechert LLP........................    18
Testimony....................................................    21
Joseph D. Henchman Vice President, Legal Projects, Tax Foundation    30
Testimony....................................................    33
Neil S. Siegel Professor of Law and Political Science, Duke
University School of Law.......................................    41
Testimony....................................................    43
PANEL 2:

Diana Furchtgott-Roth Senior Fellow, Manhattan Institute for
Policy Research................................................    84
Testimony....................................................    86
Sylvester J. Schieber Consultant, Council for Affordable Health
Coverage.......................................................    93
Testimony....................................................    95
Thomas J. Shaw President, Barton Mutual Insurance Company........   115
Testimony....................................................   118
Stephen LaMontagne President and CEO, Georgetown Cupcake, Inc....   120
Testimony....................................................   123

MEMBER SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Bill Pascrell......................................   139
The Honorable Jim McDermott......................................   154

PUBLIC SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Farm Bureau Federation, Statement.......................   158
Center for Fiscal Equity, Statement..............................   160
Chamber of Commerce, Statement...................................   165
NFIB and Small Business Coalition for Affordable Healthcare,
Statement......................................................   168

HEARING ON THE INDIVIDUAL AND

EMPLOYER MANDATES IN THE DEMOCRATS'

HEALTH CARE LAW

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:05 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Wally
Herger [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairman Herger Announces Hearing on the

Individual and Employer Mandates in the

Democrats' Health Care Law

March 29, 2012

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Wally Herger (R-
CA) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
to explore the constitutional concerns raised by the individual mandate
and economic problems caused by the employer mandate which were created
in the Democrats' health care law. The hearing will take place on
Thursday, March 29, 2012, in 1100 Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 9:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of witnesses
will follow.

BACKGROUND:

The ``Affordable Care Act'' (P.L. 111-148 and 111-152) imposes two
highly coercive federal mandates on both individuals and employers.
Beginning in 2014, the Federal Government will mandate that nearly
every American purchase government-approved health insurance or pay a
penalty. The United States Supreme Court will soon hear arguments in
the days before the hearing about whether such a requirement is
constitutional. Also, beginning in 2014, the Federal Government will
mandate that many employers provide government-prescribed health
insurance or pay a fine. Economists and employer groups have expressed
concerns that the added costs associated with the employer mandate will
impede their ability to hire and retain workers and result in lower
wages. In announcing the hearing, Chairman Herger stated, ``The
majority of Americans remain opposed to the Democrats' health care law,
and an even larger number of Americans believe the individual mandate
is a violation of their constitutional rights. The public remains
concerned about the impact the law will have on their lives and with
good reason. At its core, the Democrats' risky experiment relies on a
federal mandate, forcing Americans to purchase a product--even if they
can't afford it--or pay a fine. Furthermore, the law's new mandates and
regulations are standing in the way of job creation at a time when
unemployment remains high and our economy desperately needs more jobs.
Although the courts are actively engaged, this hearing will allow for
an open and candid discussion in Congress, where the law was passed,
but where it did not receive the debate and dialogue that these issues
deserve.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the constitutional questions surrounding
the individual mandate and the economic impact of the employer mandate.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Thursday, April 12, 2012. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Chairman HERGER. The subcommittee will come to order. I
want to apologize for Ranking Member Stark, who has been caught
in traffic so we will move ahead. Without objection, his
opening statement will be made part of the record.
[The prepared statement of The Honorable Pete Stark
follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.002

Chairman HERGER. We are here today at the actual end of an
extraordinary week in the history of the Democrats' health care
overhaul. Last Friday marked the 2-year anniversary of the law
and for 3 days this week the Supreme Court considered its
constitutionality. Today, the subcommittee will examine two
mandates at the center of the law.
Beginning in 2014, the individual mandate will require
Americans to buy government approved health insurance even if
they can't afford it, or else pay a penalty. This mandate
fundamentally changes the relationship between the individual
and the Federal Government, and for the first time in history
requires individuals to purchase a private product and enter
into a private contract. Not surprisingly, the individual
mandate is the subject of one of the most important and closely
watched Supreme Court cases in modern times. The individual
mandate is also deeply unpopular with the American people. A
constitutionally suspect mandate that is opposed by the public
is not a very stable cornerstone of a health reform plan, and
yet, and yet, the administration claims it is essential.
The individual mandate is unprecedented, unlimited,
unnecessary, and dangerous. Never before has Congress required
individuals to purchase a private product. If Congress has the
power to compel commerce, then its power becomes virtually
unlimited. Indeed, the Obama administration has not put forward
any limiting principle.
Finally, the individual mandate creates a Federal policy of
police power, a power reserved in the Constitution for the
States. This is dangerous because our dual system of
sovereignty is essential to protecting individual liberty.
Our first panel will examine the constitutionality of the
individual mandate. Not everyone was able to secure a seat to
hear oral arguments at the Supreme Court this week, but it is
important that the public as well as Members of Congress
understand the constitutional questions raised by this coercive
mandate. We have a distinguished panel of attorneys, each of
whom have authored or coauthored influential amicus briefs in
this historic case.
The second panel will discuss the economic problems created
by the employer mandate. I can sum up those problems in one
word. Jobs. The employer mandate places additional cost burdens
on employers, which is the last thing job creators need during
these tough economic times, and it would discourage the hiring
of additional workers. In a recent U.S. Chamber of Commerce
survey, over 1,300 small business executives found that 74
percent say the recent health care law makes it harder for
their business to hire more employees. Given how long we have
suffered with high unemployment, the employer mandate makes
absolutely no sense.
In addition, the employer mandate will force employers to
scale back their existing workforce, particularly workers at
the lower end of the wage scale. Equally troubling, the mandate
encourages employers to eliminate the health insurance they
offer to their employees because the penalty associated with
not offering coverage is far cheaper than the costs associated
with offering and maintaining health insurance coverage.
In summary, the cornerstones of the Democrats' health care
law are crumbling under the weight of scrutiny. The entire law
needs to be repealed and replaced with real constitutional
reforms that reduce the price of health insurance.
Before I recognize the minority for the purpose of an
opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that all members'
written statements be included in the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey for opening
statements.
Mr. PASCRELL. Just very briefly, Mr. Chairman. Let's make
it clear before we start today that we are already paying, for
the members of this committee who are here and who are not
here, we are already paying for those folks who do not have
insurance. Let's make the record clear on it. Let's not have
confusion on that issue. And I think we do a disservice to the
subject as well as to the American people to in any way infer
or conclude that if we sustain the system that we are trying to
move away from, that this will keep money in our pockets. We
are going to continue to pay for those people who do not have
insurance. There is no other way to pay the bills. And so I
think that needs to be made very clear.
And I would like to know, you know, you talk about
frivolous lawsuits, let's talk about what will be accomplished
from this hearing. I am trying to think about that, think into
the future. What is going to be accomplished in this hearing as
we await the June decision from the Supreme Court?
And thirdly, when we say we need more constitutional
reforms for health care, and if as many of the folks on your
side of the aisle, in all due respect, reject the health care
act, then what are you suggesting in its place? I would like to
hear that before the end of the day. What are the
constitutional reforms that you think are necessary in order to
bring about a change to a system which both of us admit is not
sustainable, which exists now? Then what do you suggest? And I
would like those to be codified and sent to all the members,
and then maybe we can have a debate on what you folks have been
talking about. And I frankly don't know what you have been
talking about, because I don't know that any of those
constitutional reforms that you recommend have been put on the
record.
Many of the people on your side, Mr. Chairman, have picked
out certain parts of the health care act and said that these
aren't so bad. We certainly wouldn't vote against this. We
wouldn't vote against that. But I don't know what you stand for
yourself. And I think we need to know that before we get into
this discussion, or perhaps the members of the panel would
suggest that we should continue to sustain the old system that
we are trying to get away from. I don't know what they think.
And I know one thing, that we are paying for those people who
are uninsured.
Now, first, we have got to find out how many people are
uninsured. Then we have to find out how much we have been
paying, and we can calculate that. Right, Dr. Price, we can
calculate that. How much the folks----
Mr. PRICE. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. PASCRELL. Sure.
Mr. PRICE. The fact of the matter is, many of us have put
forward positive solutions. H.R. 3000 is the comprehensive one,
Empowering Patients First Act, that we put forward. And I would
just like to correct the gentleman, that the gentleman says we
are already paying for those that aren't covered. In fact, what
happens is that the people providing the care eat the cost for
it. So the doctors and the hospitals are eating the cost. There
is no more cost shifting, and so the gentleman is inaccurate.
Mr. PASCRELL. Can I take back my time? That is off the
wall, and you know it, Dr. Price. You know, you know who is
paying these bills. It is no different than when Walmart, which
part-timed its whole workforce, who paid--the question is, who
paid for those folks that had to go and seek medical attention,
be in the hospital, go to a doctor? The answer: You. You paid,
and I paid. That is the only answer. When you say well, the
insurance company.
Mr. PRICE. Will the gentleman yield----
Mr. PASCRELL. Which insurance? They don't have insurance.
Sure.
Mr. PRICE. Let me just ask you, please. When you are home
over the next 2 weeks, please go visit a physician's office who
sees patients.
Mr. PASCRELL. I do it all the time.
Mr. PRICE. Ask them how much bad debt they are unable to
collect and that they are not being compensated for that care.
Just ask them, that is all I ask you.
Mr. PASCRELL. Reclaiming my time, I am very aware of the
physicians in this country, and you being one yourself, I would
appreciate that fact that you are trying to protect your
profession in a professional way. I have no problems with what
you just said. But we know why the debt is accumulated, when
people aren't paying their bills. And why aren't people paying
their bills, Dr. Price?
Mr. PRICE. You want me to respond?
Mr. PASCRELL. Sure.
Mr. PRICE. I am happy to respond. I think it is because of
the taxation of this society, the regulation, the regulatory
burden and oppression that this administration puts on them so
that we can't have a dynamic economy, and the lawsuit abuse
that exists out there is astounding, astounding.
Mr. PASCRELL. Reclaiming my time. I know you have accused
this administration of everything but thunderstorms, and you
will get to that some day, I am sure.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. PASCRELL. May I just finish my sentence? Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. But we are paying, my grandfather, may
he rest in peace, said we pay. The average person pays, and
they don't even know it.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time is expired. We will
hear from four witnesses on our first panel. Carrie Severino,
General Counsel, Judicial Crisis Network; Steven Bradbury,
Attorney with Dechert LLP; Joseph Henchman, Vice President of
Legal Projects, Tax Foundation; and Neil S. Siegel, Professor
of Law and Political Science, Duke University School of Law.
You will each have 5 minutes to present your oral
testimony. Your entire written statement will be made part of
the record. Ms. Severino, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARRIE SEVERINO, CHIEF COUNSEL, POLICY DIRECTOR,
JUDICIAL CRISIS NETWORK

Ms. SEVERINO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
committee. If men were angels no government would be necessary.
We have all heard the famous quote from James Madison in
Federalist 51, but rarely do we hear the rest of the quote even
though it is absolutely crucial. ``If men were angels, no
government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men,
neither external nor internal controls on government would be
necessary. In framing a government which is to be administered
by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: You must
first enable the government to control the governed; and in the
next place oblige it to control itself.''
I submit that the Patient Protection Affordable Care Act
embodies precisely the type of uncontrolled government power
that Madison and the founders recognized as a fundamental
threat to our liberties. Having just fought in and won a
revolution against a despotic central government, the framers
of our Constitution were not about to tolerate the least slide
back to tyranny. So they divided government power among three
branches and were careful to limit Congress' legislative
authority to a specific list of powers and no more.
Congress explicitly invoked its power under the Commerce
Clause as its authority for the health care law and its
individual mandate in particular. It was wrong for three
reasons:
First, the individual mandate goes against 200 years of
history and precedent. In every Supreme Court affirmation of
Federal power under the Commerce Clause, from regulating home-
grown wheat to home-grown marijuana, you can always avoid
government impositions by simply not participating in the
regulated activity in the first place. But with the health care
law, you are automatically subject to regulations simply, as
Justice Breyer noted, by virtue of being born.
Now, if the Federal Government has always had such a direct
and unavoidable power over its citizens, it would have surely
exercised it long ago and for emergencies far more pressing
than health reform, such as during the Great Depression or
World War II, but it did not. And that lack of historical
support is strike one for the individual mandate.
Strike two for the mandate is the fact that compelling
individuals to buy a product is a far different thing from
regulating an existing market. This is why the administration
struggles mightily to blur this distinction by, for example,
complaining that people who choose not to buy health insurance
now can nevertheless be regulated now because they are likely
to consume health care services sometime in the future.
But there is a constitutional difference between actual and
potential participation because after all we are potential
participants in every single market that we consciously choose
to avoid, where still bystanders forced into the health
insurance market now will have only one legal exit, and that is
moving to another country.
The third problem with the administration's argument is
that it lacks any limiting principle. The Supreme Court has
repeatedly said that the Federal Government's power must have a
stopping point because the structural limits on our government
are central guarantees of individual liberty. The learning
principle relied on by the administration really just boils
down to a claim that health care is different. But the market
for health insurance, or even health care is not unique. There
are many other products in life like food, clothing, and
shelter that every American must purchase now or some day and
are just as, if not more, necessary to human happiness than
health care. As Justice Kennedy noted Tuesday, the government
is calling this unique today, but it will just call something
else unique tomorrow. And if the Federal Government can force
Americans to purchase insurance to lower National health care
costs, there is nothing stopping it from issuing the broccoli
mandates or compelled gym memberships in the name of lowering
health care costs.
But let's presume the administration is right and health
care is somehow unique. That still isn't a limiting principle,
but an invitation for government to label any grand scheme it
wants to impose on Americans as unique, simply because it is
grand. At that point the theoretical limit on the power of
government will be the power of one's imagination.
I think the administration recognizes these weaknesses in
its argument, and it has hedged its bets by emphasizing the
Necessary and Proper Clause in its most recent Supreme Court
brief. But the Necessary and Proper Clause is not a
freestanding grant of power. It merely gives Congress the
authority for carrying into execution its other enumerated
powers. The administration argues that the individual mandate
necessarily flows from the need to cover the massive costs that
will be imposed on insurers by other parts of the health care
law. But that is simply not carrying into execution those
provisions. It is avoiding the negative consequences of the
same provisions. Otherwise, it would mean that the greater the
harm caused by a piece of legislation, the more power Congress
could claim as necessary to fix the self-created harms. This is
the epitome of bootstrapping.
As Members of Congress, you bear an independent
responsibility to ensure that the Legislative Branch stays
within its constitutionally enumerated powers. To once again
summon Madison: Because government is not made up of angels,
limits on governmental power are absolutely crucial. Because
the individual mandate shatters these limits, it should be
deemed unconstitutional by you and the Supreme Court.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Severino follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.010

Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Bradbury, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN G. BRADBURY, PARTNER,
DECHERT LLP

Mr. BRADBURY. Chairman Herger, Ranking Member Stark, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, it is an honor to
appear before you today. I would like to focus on the economic
realities behind the individual mandate as laid out in an
amicus brief we filed in the Supreme Court on behalf of 215
leading economists. Justice Alito alluded to our brief when he
made the following points to the Solicitor General at oral
argument this past Tuesday.
Justice Alito noted that the Congressional Budget Office
estimates that the average premium for a single health
insurance policy in 2016 will be around $5,800 per year. He
then observed, based on calculations presented in our amicus
brief, which were derived from public HHS survey data, that the
typical young, healthy individual who is the real target of the
individual insurance mandate, incurs on average only $854 in
annual health care costs. That is less than one-seventh of the
medical costs incurred by the average American per year, a
number frequently cited by those defending the mandate.
Indeed, just focusing on emergency room costs the average
annual emergency room costs for the young and healthy are only
$56. Highlighting this dramatic difference between the
insurance premium a young, healthy individual can be expected
to pay in complying with the mandate and the relatively modest
health care costs that that same individual can be expected to
incur, Justice Alito pointed out the obvious: ``What this
mandate is really doing is not requiring the people who are
subject to it to pay for the services that they are going to
consume. It is requiring them to subsidize services that will
be received by somebody else.''
The very same point was driven home by the Washington Post
in its editorial earlier this week supporting the mandate. The
Post was very candid when it wrote, ``Insurance companies would
be unable to offer affordable coverage to those with
preexisting conditions unless they also were guaranteed
enrollment of the young and healthy customers who are less
likely to consume health care services.''
These economic realities show that the individual mandate
has almost nothing to do with cost shifting in health care
markets, since the people primarily targeted by the mandate,
those who can afford health insurance but who voluntarily
choose not to purchase it because they reasonably expect the
cost of insurance to outweigh their foreseeable medical costs,
account for only a small fraction of the $43 billion of
uncompensated costs identified by the Solicitor General.
Instead, the mandate was actually enacted not to stop cost
shifting, but to compel millions of Americans to pay more for
health insurance than they receive in benefits as a means to
subsidize the insurance companies, and thereby to mitigate the
steep rise in insurance premiums that would otherwise be caused
by the guaranteed issue and community rating requirements
created by the Affordable Care Act itself.
The Act prevents health insurers from making the basic
actuarial decisions made in every other insurance market.
Insurers may no longer withhold health insurance from those
with preexisting conditions or price insurance premiums to
match customer's known actuarial risks. By requiring health
insurers to cover the sick and set premiums based on average
costs, these Federal requirements would dramatically increase
health care premiums for all insured Americans unless Congress
at the same time forces the young and healthy with relatively
little need for comprehensive health insurance to enter the
market on terms that are economically disadvantageous.
Whether or not these regulatory requirements are good
policy, what is clear as a constitutional matter is that
Congress is not regulating how health care consumption is
financed, as the Solicitor General has put it, but rather is
compelling the voluntarily uninsured to purchase insurance at
disadvantageous prices as a quid pro quo to compensate for the
enormous costs imposed by the law's regulatory burden. The
economic data proved the point and they belie any claim that
the mandate is constitutional on the ground that it regulates
economic conduct with a substantial effect on interstate
commerce.
The mandate is not a regulation of commerce. It is a forced
subsidy meant to ameliorate the costs of Congress' own
regulatory policies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bradbury follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.020

Chairman HERGER. Thank you very much, Mr. Bradbury. Mr.
Henchman is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH D. HENCHMAN, VICE PRESIDENT, LEGAL
PROJECTS, TAX FOUNDATION

Mr. HENCHMAN. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, Members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you
today about the Tax Foundation's perspective on whether the
health care law's individual mandate is within Congress' power
to levy and collect--lay and collect taxes granted by Article
1, Section 8 of the Constitution. Since our founding as an
organization in 1937, we have advanced the ideas of simpler,
more sensible tax policy with reliable research and principled
analysis of tax issues at all levels of government. The
government's primary argument, in this case to sustain the
individual mandate, is that under the Commerce Clause it has
the power to regulate interstate commerce, and that is a
subject of much of the discussion in the briefs and of the
court.
But the government secondarily argues that the mandate is
an exercise of Congress' power to levy taxes because it is
projected to raise revenue. We authored our brief in the case
because we are very concerned by this argument and by the
reasoning associated with it. One of the primary goals of our
legal program at the Tax Foundation is to keep vibrant an
understanding of the differences between taxes, fees, and
penalties. Taxes are exactions imposed for the primary purpose
of raising revenue for general spending. Penalties are
exactions imposed for the primary purpose of punishing for an
unlawful or undesirable act.
Now, we argue in our brief that the evidence shows that
this is a penalty here. Everyone says that the primary purpose
of the individual mandate is not for the revenue it is going to
generate, but to discourage behavior. The statute calls it a
penalty 12 times. It calls it a tax zero times. JCT calls it a
penalty 24 times, and they include it under their regulatory
provisions, not under their revenue provisions. The IRS cannot
use liens and levies to enforce the mandate the way they can
with taxes. The President told all of us when the bill was
being considered that he absolutely rejects the notion that it
is a tax. And the Justices this week seem very critical of the
government's attempts to persuade them otherwise.
Now, you may ask why this matters. I assure you, it is not
just some obsession of the Tax Foundation but has a real impact
in the real world. There is three reasons why it is very
important to keep a distinction between taxes and penalties.
First, there are countless laws at the Federal level and in
every State that treat taxes with some level of heightened
scrutiny that is not given to other laws, including fees and
penalties. Some examples: The Federal law that says you can't
challenge a tax until it is collected, so the governments can
have the revenue they need to operate; tax uniformity
requirements, which exist in every State; tax super majority
requirements, which exist in 16 States; voter approval
thresholds; multiple reading requirements, and so on. If these
provisions are to do what they are meant to do, you have to be
able to tell the difference between taxes and non-taxes.
Second, the definition I outlined is not something we
conjured up at the Tax Foundation. It is widely used and relied
upon by courts across this country. Our brief lists five pages
of cases from nearly every court in the land that has adopted
this definition. And in fact, we have identified only four
States that have departed from it. If the administration in
this case were successful in getting the Supreme Court to adopt
a completely new definition based on whether a revenue is
raised, then that jeopardizes all of those taxpayer protections
I mentioned and jeopardizes the ability of State and local
governments to collect fees and fines they depend on.
Third, it goes to the very heart of the conception of how
we pay for government. Taxes are the things we pay so that
there will be services for everybody. As Professor Randy
Barnett put it this week, they are your duty in return for what
government does to protect you and everyone else, and to equate
that to a requirement to do business with a private company is
to say that those are the same thing. That is very disturbing.
Now I am a good lawyer so this is the part where I say, if
you disagree with me on everything I have said so far, try
this: If it is a tax, it is not one that is permissible.
Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution says that direct taxes
must be apportioned by State population. Now, although the
founders disagreed on precisely what a direct tax was in a case
about tax on carriages, they did agree that a tax directly
levied on an individual is a direct tax. Alexander Hamilton,
not one usually suspicious of big government, called this
provision that prohibits direct taxes unapportioned by
population, the thing that would ensure that the government
could not tax in an abusive way.
So for all of these reasons, we think it is important that
a meaningful distinction between tax and penalty is vital to
give operation to all of those Federal and State provisions
relating to tax policy, and we are hoping that the Supreme
Court will agree with us.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Henchman follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.028

Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Siegel is recognized.

STATEMENT OF NEIL S. SIEGEL, PROFESSOR OF LAW AND POLITICAL
SCIENCE, DUKE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. SIEGEL. Chairman Herger, Ranking Member Stark, and
Members of the Committee. Good morning. I am honored to be
here. For three independently sufficient reasons, the minimum
coverage provision is within the scope of Congress' enumerated
powers in Article 1, Section 8 of U.S. Constitution.
First, the Necessary and Proper Clause gives Congress the
power to pass laws that are necessary and proper to carry into
execution Congress' other enumerated powers. All sides in the
Affordable Care Act litigation agree that the Commerce Clause
gives Congress broad authority to guarantee access to health
insurance by requiring insurance companies to offer coverage to
Americans with preexisting conditions.
Under well-established law, the minimum coverage provision
is necessary and proper to carrying into execution this
undeniably valid regulation of insurers. The question in the
Supreme Court's words is simply whether the means chosen are
reasonably adapted to the attainment of a legitimate end under
the commerce power, guaranteeing access to health insurance is
a legitimate end for constitutional purposes, and the minimum
coverage provision is reasonably adapted to the attainment of
that end. Without the provision there would be a perverse
incentive for people to wait until they are sick to obtain
health insurance. This adverse selection problem would
substantially undermine and indeed threaten to unravel
insurance markets.
Second, the minimum coverage provision is justified by the
Commerce Clause standing alone. A Federal law is valid under
the commerce power if it regulates economic conduct that
substantially affects interstate commerce. The minimum coverage
provision passes this test because it regulates how people pay
for or do not pay for the health care they unavoidably consume
and cannot be denied at a time they cannot predict, at a cost
potentially so high that others may have to bear it. Cost
shifting is undeniably an economic problem and its aggregate
effects on interstate commerce are substantial.
Third, the minimum coverage provision is also justified by
Congress' tax power. Although Congress called the ACA's
required payment for noninsurance a penalty, labels do not
determine whether an exaction is a tax for constitutional
purposes. As the Supreme Court has held since the 1930s, what
matters constitutionally is whether a required payment to the
IRS is ``productive of revenue'' and ``operates as a tax.'' The
Congressional Budget Office estimates that 4 million Americans
each year will choose to make the shared responsibility payment
instead of obtaining coverage. The CBO further predicts that
the required payment provision in the Act will produce $54
billion in Federal revenue from 2015 to 2022. Because the ACA's
required payment for noninsurance will operate as a tax, it is
a tax for purposes of the tax power.
Opponents of the minimum coverage provision insist that if
the provision is upheld, then Federal power is limitless. That
charge is incorrect. The minimum coverage provision respects
five significant limits on Federal power.
First, the provision addresses genuinely economic problems,
not merely social problems that do not involve markets.
Second, these problems are interstate in scope. Collective
action failures at the State level, interstate externalities
impede the ability of the State to guarantee access to health
insurance by acting on their own.
Third, the provision does not violate any individual
constitutional right, including the right to bodily integrity,
which would clearly be violated by mandates to consume certain
vegetables or to exercise a certain amount each week.
Fourth, unlike other purchase mandates, such as for food,
clothing, and shelter, the provision combats the unraveling of
a market that Congress has clear authority to regulate. In
light of the adverse selection problem that I just mentioned,
upholding the provision does not mean Congress can issue
whatever purchase mandates it wants. Rather, a decision
upholding the provision could hold narrowly that Congress may
issue a purchase mandate when, but only when, such a mandate is
needed to prevent the unraveling of a market that Congress is
already regulating in undeniably constitutional ways.
Fifth, the provision respects limits on the tax power. The
difference between a constitutional tax and an unconstitutional
penalty is the difference between the minimum coverage
provision and a required payment of $10,000 that increases with
each month that an individual remains uninsured. Unlike the
minimum coverage provision, that exaction would raise little or
no revenue because it would be highly coercive.
For these reasons, Congress should conclude that the
minimum coverage provision is within the scope of Congress'
enumerated powers, and the Supreme Court should decline the
invitation to issue what would without exaggeration be the most
consequential invalidation of a Federal law on federalism
grounds since the constitutional crisis of the Great Depression
and the New Deal.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Siegel follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.036

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Bradbury, in his ruling, the 11th Circuit Court
decisions wrote that, quote: ``Not only have prior
congressional actions not asserted the power now claimed, they
contain some indication of precisely the opposite assumption.
Instead of requiring action, Congress has sought to encourage
it.''
Can you give some examples of how Congress has encouraged
action, but not required it?
Mr. BRADBURY. Yes, Mr. Chairman. There are many, many
examples through history. The case of the wheat case, Wickard
v. Filburn, that was a restriction on supply in order to prop
up or promote the price of wheat to protect the farming
communities. It would have been much more potent and direct if
Congress believed it had the power to require every family in
America to buy two loaves of bread a week. Increasing demand in
the market would have been a more direct way to prop up the
price.
More recently, the Cash for Clunkers program. That is an
incentive to try to get people to turn in older, polluting cars
in order to buy newer, more energy-efficient vehicles. Rather
than a direct mandate that people do it, it was a cash
incentive.
So there are many, many examples like that throughout
history.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Ms. Severino, I want to read a quote from the 11th Circuit
Court decision ruling the individual mandate unconstitutional
and get your reaction to it. ``The government's position
amounts to an argument that the mere fact of an individual's
existence substantially affects interstate commerce, and
therefore Congress may regulate them at every point of their
life. This theory affords no limiting principles in which to
confine Congress' enumerated power.''
As troubling as the individual mandate is, it seems the
court is saying even worse things could happen in the future.
What does the court mean by no limiting principles to confine
Congress' power?
Ms. SEVERINO. What the court is looking for is some way to
say where the Commerce Clause ends, because if it doesn't have
a limit then none of the constitutional limits on Congress are
effective because the Congress could effectively regulate
anything via the Commerce Clause power.
To address some of the arguments against a limiting
principle that was just brought up, this is clearly a
regulation that violates all of these limits. If this is
regulating something that is economic and not just social, he
would say, but any social activity you engage in also has an
effect on the economy, and I would say additionally on the
interstate economy in a world that is not just nationalized but
globalized. There is also the claims there are no individual
rights violated doesn't answer the question about the Commerce
Clause. We need limits not just from the Bill of Rights, but
also on the Commerce Clause itself. And to allow Congress to
regulate to any degree a market that is already regulating,
well, I would submit that there are very few markets left that
Congress doesn't have some degree of regulation on, so that
also is not a limiting principle.
I think the Supreme Court, even more so than the courts of
appeals recognizes that they are the final backstop to ensure
these limits on the constitutional powers of Congress, and so
they are going to be very concerned as they consider this case
to make sure that their argument, their final analysis affords
such a limit.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Henchman, throughout this debate over the health care
law, we have seen the President and his Cabinet offer very
inconsistent answers to the fairly straightforward question of
whether the unpopular coercive penalty imposed on people who do
not comply with the individual mandate is a tax. President
Obama has denied that it is a tax. Secretary Sebelius told this
committee that it ``operates as a tax, but is not a tax, per
se.'' They argue in one part of the case it is not a tax, and
in the individual mandate part they argue it is a tax.
Is this just politics, or does it matter whether the
individual mandate is considered a tax versus a penalty?
Mr. HENCHMAN. Excellent question, Mr. Chairman, and it
shows that we have more work to do at the Tax Foundation in
explaining what a tax is to the American people. But
ultimately, I think it is driven by legal strategy. The
government feels that they might have a better case under the
taxing power if they can't make the Interstate Commerce Clause
argument, and that is why they have heavily relied on it.
And indeed this came up on Monday. Justice Alito asked the
Solicitor General, today you are arguing that the penalty of
the tax for purposes of the Anti-Injunction Act and tomorrow
you are going to be back and argue that it is a tax for
purposes of the Constitution. And he asked whether the court
has ever held that something is a tax for purposes of the
taxing power and is not a tax for the Anti-Injunction Act, and
they haven't. That has never happened. It is unprecedented.
You know, speaking as a person who works at the Tax
Foundation, I have to say that a tax is the same thing. If it
is a tax under the Anti-Injunction Act, it is a tax under the
Constitution, and it is a tax in the popular conception. It is
splitting hairs to try to define differences between those
things. We are very reliant on the view held, not only by us,
but also by nearly every court in the land that a tax is not
just something that generates revenue, but has the purpose of
generating revenue.
Professor Siegel's point that anything that generates
revenue is a tax, the Oregon Supreme Court agrees with him, but
that is about it. Everybody else disagrees with him, so that
view is outside the mainstream.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Stark is now recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank the witnesses for
their efforts today. Ms. Severino, I just wanted to correct
some of your testimony. You say that the only recourse to avoid
the mandate would be to leave the country. First, you could pay
the penalty and remain uninsured. And secondly, I am not sure
there is any country in the world which does not have uninsured
coverage and requiring the citizens to pay for it. So it would
be interesting to know what country you might have in mind.
Professor Siegel, you highlight the severe limitations that
would be put on the Federal Government if the Supreme Court
were to decide that the individual mandate in the health reform
law was unconstitutional.
Could you expand on that concern and list some of the
actions by the Federal Government that you think might be
impinged, and what that might mean to us?
Mr. SIEGEL. Yes, I would be happy to. I think this is a
case about limits. It is not just a case about limits for the
Federal Government. It is a case about limits for those who
want to undermine the powers of this Congress. What are the
limits on the limits that the opponents of the Affordable Care
Act want to impose on the Congress of the United States as an
institution?
So, for example, the argument is that Congress may not
regulate so-called inactivity under the Commerce Clause. Think
about the potential implications of this limit. Imagine a very
real possibility, a public health emergency, a flu pandemic
spreading around the country like wildfire. There is no doubt
in my mind that this Congress would have the power under those
very limited circumstances to quarantine, pursuant to the
Federal Quarantine Authority, to impose mandatory vaccination
to prevent widespread deaths. If Congress doesn't have the
power then every American is at the mercy of a single State
that doesn't mandate vaccinations.
Do we really want to decide for now for all time that no
matter how grave the circumstances, Congress can't mandate
certain action under the commerce power. Think about the
Necessary and Proper Clause, and take seriously the
bootstrapping objection. The objection is that Congress under
the Necessary and Proper Clause can't take action to help
alleviate a problem that is partially of its own creation. That
rewrites the Necessary and Proper Clause out of the
Constitution. The Necessary and Proper Clause is explicit
textural authority for bootstrapping. It gives Congress the
power to take actions that would otherwise be outside of the
scope of its other enumerated powers. If you take it seriously,
it means that Congress may not criminalize terrorist attacks on
military bases because the problem wouldn't exist if Congress
hadn't first created the bases and created the targets. It
means Congress can't prohibit mail robbery because there would
be no mail to rob if Congress hadn't established a post office.
And one could go on and on.
Just like in medicine, sometimes in law, interventions have
both socially beneficial consequences and unavoidable side
effects. And the Constitution gives this institution the power
to address both.
Mr. STARK. Yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is an
interesting conversation, you know. You talk about post
offices, but we don't need them. Fed Ex can do a better job and
has admitted they can. The post office is way in debt. You
know, I listened to the Solicitor General Tuesday. You sound
just like him. The only difference is you are not drinking
water about every two sentences. And I couldn't believe what he
was saying; neither can I believe what you are saying.
Ms. Severino, the 11th Circuit stated: ``Few powers if any
could be more attractive to the Congress in compelling the
purchase of certain products. Yet, if we focus on the modern
era when congressional power under the Commerce Clause has been
at its height, still Congress has not asserted its authority.
Even in the face of a Great Depression, a world war, Cold War,
recessions, oil shocks, inflation and unemployment, Congress
never sought to require the purchase of wheat or war bonds,
force a higher savings rate or greater consumption of American
goods, or require every American to purchase a more fuel-
efficient vehicle.''
Is the 11th Circuit correct? Is the individual mandate
unprecedented, and are there any other examples that Congress
requires the purchase of a commercial product, even in times of
crisis?
Ms. SEVERINO. No, you are correct, Mr. Congressman. There
is no other example of this, and this is something that the
Congressional Research Service and the Congressional Budget
Office, both nonpartisan organizations, have found, that this
is the first time the government has claimed this type of
expansive power. So to say that this is just like everything
else is, I think, more a matter of legal spin than actual
effect. The fact of the matter is the government hasn't taken
this step before.
Now, some will claim that there is a very broad commerce
power, and therefore it should be stretched one step further to
encompass this, this authority. But the fact of the matter is
that is not something that has ever been upheld under the
Commerce Clause power before because it simply hasn't been
tried before.
Mr. JOHNSON. Just an obstruction of freedom to America,
isn't it?
Ms. SEVERINO. Yes, sir.
Mr. JOHNSON. Ms. Severino, the 11th Court decision ruling
also stated: ``Americans have historically been subject only to
a limited set of personal mandates, serving on juries,
registering for the draft, filing tax returns, and responding
to the census. These mandates are in the nature of duties owed
to the government attendant to citizenship and contain clear
foundations in the constitutional text.''
What is the difference between these kind of mandates and
the Obamacare individual mandate?
Ms. SEVERINO. Well, those mandates are found on other
provisions in the Article 1 powers to the legislature. So for
example, the draft being related directly to the power to raise
an army. This is very different from the Commerce Clause power
which allows the power to regulate something. Regulate does not
mean to mandate it into existence. You can raise an army by
mandating that people join the Army. You cannot regulate
commerce by mandating that people enter into commerce. So there
is a fundamental difference in the way these powers are
conceived by the government. And I think that is why, as I said
before, this has never been claimed as a power before.
And finally, I think this goes back as well to the limiting
principle. Because commerce is so broad and basically can cover
every aspect of our life, you could say that brushing our teeth
or not in the morning affects Congress because it is going to
affect your market for dental care, et cetera. Everything
Americans do can affect commerce down the line in some way. We
can't claim that every aspect of American life is just going to
be governed by any of these other powers. So there is no
limiting principle because of the breadth of commerce itself.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yeah, we can't hide behind that clause. The
Constitution needs to mean something to all of us. Of the
people, by the people, for the people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. SEVERINO. Thank you, Congressman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, the key purpose of individual
responsibility requirement within the Affordable Care Act--by
the way, Ms. Severino, before I continue, would you answer this
question, please, if you can, yes or no? Does government have
any specific responsibility to the indigent as far as health
care is concerned? Yes or no.
Ms. SEVERINO. Do you mean Federal Government or State?
Mr. PASCRELL. The Federal Government. I am sorry.
Ms. SEVERINO. I don't believe the Federal Government has a
specific responsibility in that matter, but the State
government does.
Mr. PASCRELL. And if it did, where would that
responsibility be edified, within the Constitution?
Ms. SEVERINO. If the Federal Government had such a
responsibility?
Mr. PASCRELL. Yes.
Ms. SEVERINO. I believe it would be embodied in the
Constitution.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you. I think that its presence keeps a
lot of free riders who can afford to purchase health insurance
from forcing everyone else to ultimately pay for their health
care expenses. You need the mandate in order for things like a
ban on preexisting conditions to work. And the mandate we will
see whether it is constitutional or not. There is no such thing
as inaction in the health care market. You are going to use the
system eventually whether you like it or not. And we provide
care for you even if you don't have insurance. There is
precedent for this, and I believe it should be upheld.
I think it is important to remember that the individual
mandate was a bipartisan idea. That doesn't make it right. That
doesn't make it constitutional, but it was bipartisan.
It is interesting that only when the Democrats enacting
comprehensive health reform that all of a sudden the other side
became opposed to the idea of individual responsibility. I
mean, you can chronologically check this out. You may differ
with that chronology.
In 1991 Mark Pauly, are you familiar, the panel, with Mark
Pauly? Any of you?
He is a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. He
developed an individual mandate for then President George H.W.
Bush. I have a copy of one of his articles here. And I ask for
a unanimous consent to submit into the record a Health Affairs
article authored by Mr. Mark Pauly on the individual mandate.
Mr. Chairman?
Chairman HERGER. Without objection.
[The article follows, The Honorable Bill Pascrell:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.051

Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you. I agree with Mr. Pauly: ``Making
sure everyone pays their fair share is essential to controlling
health costs. The CBO estimates that if individual
responsibility is repealed, premiums in the individual market
will see an increase of 15 to 20 percent as compared to current
law.'' That is what CBO said. That is not what the Democrats
said; that is not what the Republicans said; that is not what
the President said; that is what CBO said.
Affordable Care Act is about keeping down costs and
reducing the number of uninsured Americans. When it comes to
health care, we are all in this together. I like to say that. I
like to say that.
Dr. Siegel, Professor Siegel, on Tuesday Justice Kennedy
noted the unique nature of the health insurance market. He
said, and I quote, ``but I think it is true that if most
questions in life are matters of degree in the insurance and
health care world, both markets,'' two markets we are talking
about, ``the young person who was uninsured is uniquely
approximately very close to affecting the rates of insurance in
the course of providing medical care in a way that is not true
in other industries.'' That is my concern in this case.
He comments to the lack of inaction of the health care
market. Professor Siegel, can you please discuss the idea of
inaction in the health care act in the market?
Chairman HERGER. Regrettably, the gentleman's time has
expired, but if you could respond in writing we would
appreciate it.
Mr. PASCRELL. Seriously?
Mr. SIEGEL. I think you are identifying a key part of----
Chairman HERGER. Again, the time is expired. If you could
respond in writing, please.
Mr. SIEGEL. Oh, I am sorry, sir. I didn't hear you.
Mr. PASCRELL. Can he give a response? Come on, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Well, 5 minutes is what each of us is
allowed. Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A quick question,
Mr. Bradbury. In your testimony you say Mr. Siegel argues that
if the individual mandate is unconstitutional, then the Federal
Government could not respond to a flu epidemic by mandating
vaccinations. How would you respond to that?
Mr. BRADBURY. I actually don't accept that. I don't agree
with that. In the hypothetical, the mandating of flu
vaccinations would not be mandating commercial transactions.
Yes, he is positing a very extreme situation, where there is a
national or a multi-state regional pandemic that is a major
threat to health and the economy, that falls within the
definition of a national security problem. The Federal
Government may respond to national security problems. We have
biosecurity planning for pandemics.
Actually, the way it would usually happen, of course, is
the States would mandate vaccinations. The Federal role under
existing statutes would be to support the States by ensuring
the supply of vaccine, by assisting in maintaining quarantines,
by assisting States in closing borders. But in the most extreme
hypothetical case where the State's ability to respond is
completely broken down, it becomes almost like an insurrection
situation. The Federal Government certainly has authority to
respond to protect national security in a situation like that.
I think it is very different.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you. Mr. Henchman, I want to go back to
your discussion about taxes and the question the chairman had
posed a little bit earlier in the discussion. So the individual
mandate must maintain a minimum essential coverage, but there
are some exceptions to those. I am a former sheriff, and of
course one of the exceptions is individuals who are in prison.
And I am going to get right back to that. The penalties here
for individuals, they begin at $95, and they go to $325, and
then it goes to $695, and then it is indexed to CPI. There is
also some penalties attached to the employer mandate. Is that
not correct?
Mr. HENCHMAN. Right. I believe the next panel is talking
about that aspect, but yes.
Mr. REICHERT. But just along the line of taxes, it is
$2,000, I think, if they don't supply enough insurance. It is
$3,000 if it is unaffordable insurance, and my question is,
this is all about freedom, really. I mean, the burden on
businesses and then the individual mandates, and I know this
might be outside of your scope a little bit, but I think it is
good for those out there who might be watching us today to
think about what happens if the individual can't pay the
penalty? Do you know?
Mr. HENCHMAN. Right. Well, it is certainly not about
revenue, and for this I will agree with Congressman Pascrell
who started and talked about why we have this mandate. And he
gave a very good reason. The reason he did not give is revenue.
And that is not the reason why this mandate was adopted. It was
adopted for some other purpose, some other primary purpose than
to generate a bunch of revenue.
Mr. REICHERT. Well, I know in my previous profession again
that I spent 33 years at, if somebody has a fine that they
haven't paid----
Mr. HENCHMAN. Right.
Mr. REICHERT [continuing]. The next step is jail. So, is
that in the plan? Do you know? Does anyone on the panel know?
Mr. HENCHMAN. Well, how it is structured, as you laid out
is, let's take 2016 for instance. The mandate is kind of fully
phased in at that point. People have a choice of either paying
$695, or 2.5 percent of their income. That is whichever is
higher above the filing threshold----
Mr. REICHERT. Right.
Mr. HENCHMAN [continuing]. Or getting insurance. The IRS is
not permitted to use levies and garnishment the way they can
with other tax obligations.
Mr. REICHERT. Right.
Mr. HENCHMAN. But it remains to be seen precisely how this
will be enforced.
Mr. REICHERT. Right, so let me just, because my yellow
light has gone on here. So we play this out. The fines are
added up. They get greater and greater. The person doesn't buy
their insurance. And according to one of the exceptions here,
if you go to jail you have health care. I know that because
when we had the Kane County Jail in Seattle, if you got
arrested we supplied health care. So I guess if you don't pay
your fine and you go to jail, you can get health care.
Mr. HENCHMAN. It remains to be seen how the IRS is going to
enforce it. If they put it on the tax form, I should note the
tax form has a perjury statement. If you say I have insurance
and I don't owe this, you would be committing perjury.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Kind is recognized.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, no fault of the witnesses who are here today
trying to do a good job testifying, and out of respect for you,
too, but I view this hearing as just a colossal waste of time
for this committee.
First of all, the Judiciary Committee, not the Health
Subcommittee of the Ways and Means, has jurisdiction over
constitutional law issues. And, secondly, unless you have been
living under a rock this week, the United States Supreme Court
is taking this very issue up to make a determination later this
summer. So if you wanted to have a constructive hearing today,
Mr. Chairman, we should have panel after panel of experts
talking about how are we going to explain to the 39,000
children in western Wisconsin with a preexisting condition that
your effort to overturn or repeal the Affordable Care Act will
leave them without adequate health insurance in their lives. Or
the fact that 15,000 small business owners in western Wisconsin
who qualify today for a tax credit for the health care that
they are providing their employees today won't have that tax
credit any longer. Or 9,000 seniors who are falling into the
donut hole this year, receiving a 50 percent price discount,
why they are going to have to pay all of that out of pocket
again because of the repeal or overturning of the Affordable
Care Act. Or how are we going to explain to citizens throughout
the Nation that their insurance companies can once again drop
them from coverage when they do get sick or injured, a policy
of rescission which now is prohibited under the Affordable Care
Act. Or reinstate lifetime limits on health insurance policies.
So if you want to do something constructive in the Health
Subcommittee of Ways and Means, we should be having panel after
panel talking about what plan B is, what the alternative is to
the Affordable Care Act, and the explanation we can give our
citizens if the Affordable Care Act is overturned or if you are
successful in repealing it.
Or how are we going to address the 50 million Americans who
are uninsured today because of the health care system?
That is what we should be doing today, is talking about
alternatives and plan B's. And my good friend, Mr. Price, said
they do have some ideas. Let's get that out. Let us have a
discussion about it. This Member of Congress is interested in
one thing: making sure that every American in the country has
access to affordable and quality health care. There may be
other ways of doing it, but just by repealing this law sets us
back to the status quo. And having this hearing on the
constitutional law issues that the Supreme Court is determining
themselves, doing their job this week, is in my view a colossal
waste of time.
But I will play along here with what time I have remaining.
Mr. Henchman, I think it is astounding that time after time
you are saying that whether you call this a penalty or tax, the
purpose behind the penalty wasn't for us to raise revenue to
help pay for the Affordable Care Act. As a member of the Ways
and Means Committee, that is exactly what we were trying to do
under the penalty, is to raise revenue, because one of the
prerequisites to passing this bill that President Obama was
demanding, and all of us agreed, by the way, who supported it,
was that this bill had to be paid for. And in fact, it was. And
under the Congressional Budget Office's analysis, not only was
it paid for, but it will reduce the budget deficit by $1.2
trillion over the next 20 years.
So again, if you decide to repeal this and go back to the
status quo, that blows another hole in our budget because this
legislation would reduce it by $1.2 trillion based on the
nonpartisan budget watchdog called the Congressional Budget
Office. So, yes, this was the purpose behind it, as a member of
the Ways and Means Committee, was to raise revenue.
Mr. Siegel, let me ask you because I found it interesting
listening to the Supreme Court questioning on Tuesday, Justice
Kennedy asking the Solicitor General, and maybe I missed
something, but it sounded like he was creating a whole new
standard of Supreme Court review under the Affordable Care Act.
Justice Kennedy to the Solicitor General: Assume for a
moment, you may disagree, but assume for a moment that this is
unprecedented. This is a step beyond what our cases have
allowed, the affirmative duty to act to go into commerce. If
that is so, do you not have a heavy burden of justification?
And he went on in that line of questioning and again said
to the Solicitor General: Do you not have a heavy burden of
justification to show authorization under the Constitution?
I thought it was a reasonable basis standard of the court.
Am I missing something here? Is Justice Kennedy trying to
establish a much higher burden of proof?
Mr. SIEGEL. And if I had been arguing the case, I would
answer it in the alternative. I would say: Justice Kennedy, you
yourself just said in that colloquy there is a presumption of
constitutionality. Congress gets a presumption of
constitutionality as a coordinate branch of government, and
that is what Madison is talking about in Federalist 51. He is
not talking about judicial review, let alone aggressive
judicial review. The presumption of constitutionality is how
the law has always been. So if you impose a special
justification now, you are moving the goalpost.
Mr. KIND. Professor, really the crux of the individual
mandate, why requiring it, is because those who choose not to
participate in the health insurance market is driving up the
cost for everyone else who is; isn't that the reason, the
basis, under the Commerce Clause, for the individual mandate?
Mr. SIEGEL. I think that is the basis under the Commerce
Clause. And I think there is also the adverse selection problem
under the Necessary and Proper Clause. All of the people in
Wisconsin you just talked about, they fall into the nongroup
market. And if they don't qualify for Medicaid or Medicare, and
if they don't have employer-based insurance, then if they get
sick and they don't have a job they and their families are in
serious trouble.
Guaranteed issue combats that problem, and the minimum
coverage provision combats the adverse selection problem that a
company is guaranteed issue in the absence of a mandate.
Mr. KIND. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. [Presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
Dr. Price, you are recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to agree with
Mr. Kind on one thing: the status quo is unacceptable. There is
no doubt about it. We would simply suggest that the bill that
has been adopted, the law that has been adopted moves us in
absolutely the wrong direction, not for doctors but for
patients. And it is patients that we ought to be concerned
about.
Mr. Siegel, you mentioned that you didn't know where the
limits of Congress were. Well, I would suggest to you that the
limits of Congress are well defined in the Constitution and the
Bill of Rights, and the 10th Amendment that you are very
familiar with, but it is important to remind ourselves, says
that the powers not delegated to the United States by the
Constitution nor prohibited by it to the States are reserved
for the States respectively, or to the people. It is pretty
clear what Congress' limits are. It is our contention that this
bill/law has gone beyond the limitations of the constitutional
provisions.
I want to talk about the consequences of the individual
mandate. Mr. Kind was concerned that we are talking more about
the law here in the Health Subcommittee of the Ways and Means
Committee, and I want to talk about, as a physician, to kind of
parse out exactly what the consequences of the individual
mandate are.
Mr. Siegel, you know that there are 10 categories of
essential benefits that are defined in the law. One of those,
for example, is the ambulatory patient services. What are the
minimum benefits required in this law for ambulatory patient
services?
Mr. SIEGEL. I don't know the answer to that question.
Mr. PRICE. Who decides?
Mr. SIEGEL. I think the Congress of the United States in
the first instance decides, or as delegated to a relevant
agency pursuant to Congress' authority to delegate.
Mr. PRICE. And the law has delegated that to the Secretary
of Health and Human Services?
Mr. SIEGEL. Right. Under a doctrine that has existed for
70-80 years.
Mr. PRICE. So the Secretary of Health and Human Services is
going to decide what is allowed to be ambulatory patient
services, outpatient services for the country.
Another category is maternity care. Is it correct that the
Secretary of Health and Human Services is going to decide what
is allowed for maternity care in this country; correct?
Mr. SIEGEL. I would be happy to answer questions about
whether that is constitutionally problematic.
Mr. PRICE. Do you believe that it is constitutional for the
Secretary of Health and Human Services to decide what the
maternity services are covered under this bill?
Mr. SIEGEL. The only possible objection I can see is a
nondelegation doctrine law. This objection has not existed in
constitutional law.
Mr. PRICE. Accept my premise that the law provides that
that definition is ceded to the Secretary of Health and Human
Services. What if the Secretary of Health and Human Services
said that midwifery weren't allowed in the minimum benefits
package, would that be constitutional?
Mr. SIEGEL. Tell me what the constitutional objection would
be?
Mr. PRICE. My question to you is would that be
constitutional? In your opinion, would the Secretary of Health
and Human Services under the current law as adopted by this
Congress and signed by the President be allowed to define that
midwifery is not included under maternity services?
Mr. SIEGEL. I would need to know a lot more about what the
basis for the decision was, and whether there was a basis and
reason under the nondelegation doctrine.
Mr. PRICE. The fact of the matter is that the Secretary of
Health and Human Services, through the power that the
legislative branch has given the executive branch, is now
allowed to decide what is included in all of those services,
which is our concern. And that is that patients are no longer
the ones that are going to be allowed to decide what kind of
health coverage that they are able to select; it is the Federal
Government. That is our concern. That is the fundamental basis
of the concern.
Ms. Severino, I noticed that you were coming out of your
bootstraps, no pun intended, when Mr. Siegel commented on your
argument about bootstrapping. And I wish you would expand on
what that means to real people and why it is such an important
issue in this area.
Ms. SEVERINO. Yes. I think it is kind of shocking that the
Necessary and Proper Clause is the constitutional textual basis
for bootstrapping because it is also part of limited powers.
Our framers assumed the government was given limited powers,
not unlimited powers. They weren't worried that we don't have
not limits on the limits that we are going to impede on
government power, they were worried about keeping government
small and tethering it to its appropriate jobs.
The Necessary and Proper Clause is supposed to carry into
execution other powers. So to build a military base, it is
clearly carrying into execution being able to raise an army or
maintain a navy. Building post offices and criminalizing
attacks on post offices and robbers is clearly carrying into
execution the ability to have an efficient and effective mail
service.
Nothing about the individual mandate carries into execution
the other provisions of the law. It doesn't carry into
execution allowing guaranteed issue. You can have guaranteed
issue without the individual mandate. Many States do. It
doesn't carry into execution community rating. Again, other
States have done this, and you can do it without the individual
mandate.
Now, what Congress found was when you do those without the
individual mandate, they have negative consequences. But that
is not the same thing as carrying into execution something.
Having negative consequences, we are creating a law. Or even
that we have created a law that says emergency rooms have to
provide coverage for certain individuals under certain
circumstances. That, while individual emergency rooms may want
to do such a thing out of moral obligations, creating that
requirement also creates a problem of cost shifting. Creating a
problem does not then open wide the constitutional door for any
solution Congress wants to create.
Mr. JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Doctor, you are recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Siegel, there is a tale of two States, Washington State
and Massachusetts. Washington State in 1993 passed a
comprehensive health care bill which had mandates in it and
guaranteed issue, and all of the things that are in the
Massachusetts law, essentially. Different format but basically
the same.
They then, in Washington State, in court lost the mandate.
The mandate was taken out, but they were left with the basic
guaranteed issue. In 1995, a woman coming in said I want
insurance. She bought insurance. She had the baby, she canceled
it; 1996 she came in, bought insurance, had the baby, and
canceled it. They spent $1,000 on premiums and Primera, Blue
Cross/Blue Shield spent $8,000. Primera lost $120 million in
Washington State until they pulled out their individual
coverage and we had no individual coverage in the State of
Washington for a period of time until the State legislature
repealed the guaranteed issue.
Now, what I want to ask you: What other way can you control
costs? Because clearly, you have to have both guaranteed issue.
If you have guaranteed issue, that is preexisting conditions
are out of the way, you must have universal coverage so you
have a big enough pool to spread the cost. Otherwise the sick
come in, do exactly what this woman did.
I would like to enter into the record and ask unanimous
consent, an article from the Seattle Times dated March 28.
Chairman HERGER. Without objection.
[The article follows, The Honorable Jim McDermott:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.055

Mr. MCDERMOTT. Give me the other ways that you can control
costs? If the Supreme Court is thinking if we don't go this
private sector route through the health insurance industry,
what other way will we have in this committee to do it?
Mr. SIEGEL. I think the most prominent alternative that
would both be effective in controlling costs, would also be
substantially more coercive. I think everyone in the ACA
litigation agrees that Medicare for all, a single payer, a
government takeover, would be constitutional. It would be
within the scope of the tax power. You would have to undo a lot
of preexisting law in order for that to be unconstitutional.
I think the Affordable Care Act alternative of guaranteed
issue and a minimum coverage provision, the intent there is to
respect concerns about liberty and choice to a greater extent
than the single payer would by giving people options,
alternatives about the insurance that they want, not just
having the government provide it.
So I think that would be an effective, clearly
constitutional way to do it. The Affordable Care Act
alternative is a way to preserve private markets.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So it is really preserving the private
sector in the health care issue?
Mr. SIEGEL. And that is why I think during the 1990s the
minimum coverage provision was very prominent in conservative
economic and political thought. It was an alternative to the
single payer. It was an alternative to the employer mandate.
People agreed or disagreed as a policy matter. No one made a
Federal constitutional case out of it. And I think this speaks
directly to the question of why is it that Congress hasn't done
this before.
So one theory that has been put on the table is that we all
knew from the founding that this was unconstitutional, and then
something happened. There was some kind of collective amnesia,
where the Affordable Care Act was being debated and now
something that had always been known to be unconstitutional was
suddenly thought constitutional by one of the two major
parties. In fact, I don't think that is a likely explanation. I
think the likely explanation is no one thought of this being a
real constitutional problem before this debate. In fact, more
conservative thinkers thought it might even be advisable as a
policy matter. But even if they didn't, they didn't think it
was unconstitutional.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Do you think the individual mandate came
from the Heritage Institute?
Mr. SIEGEL. It was Heritage. It was AEI. It was
conservative economists. It was Republicans in the Senate. At
one point it was Newt Gingrich. At another point it was Mitt
Romney. I believe Bob Dole for a while. Again, there was a
robust debate about the policy merits; just like there could be
a robust debate about whether we ought to have a post office.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I want to get one other thing on the record.
Dr. Price suggested that Secretary Sebelius sits down there
and picks and chooses whatever she wants. As I understand the
law, there is a committee at the Institute of Medicine that
makes recommendations to her, so she is not without
recommendations when she makes her decisions; is that correct?
Mr. SIEGEL. In truth, I do not know.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Okay. Well, that is the way that I read the
law and the fact is that Congress can come in and change. So
the idea that she is the czar is really kind of a myth, really.
Mr. SIEGEL. I think it is another issue about which we can
have a policy disagreement.
Chairman HERGER. [Presiding.] The time of the gentleman has
expired.
Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bradbury, your testimony and the briefs you have
written in this case have done an excellent job of explaining
the purpose of the individual mandate. The Democrats' health
care law has many provisions that make it more expensive, in
effect, for insurance companies to offer health care. The law
increases taxes on insurance. There are numerous other taxes,
mandate benefit packages full of bells and whistles, and there
are many new regulations on insurance companies. So to
compensate the insurance companies, Congress creates millions
of new customers by forcing individuals to buy their product, a
very restricted product given all of the regulations that have
come through. So the individual mandate is really in effect
about making insurance companies whole.
What is the difference between that and Congress forcing
car companies to make electric cars and compensating them by
mandating that Americans buy electric cars?
Mr. BRADBURY. I really think fundamentally as a matter of
economics there is not a difference. There has been a lot of
talk about insurance is different or unique or health insurance
is unique. But insurance is just a way, an overt mechanism, for
spreading risk across a larger base of participating
individuals. Well, that is true in any industry. The more
people buy electric cars, the lower the price of each unit
produced. If Congress imposes very strict and onerous
requirements on car companies, saying they can only produce
electric cars or super-efficient vehicles and the cost of those
vehicles per unit is much, much higher than the average
American is interested in paying, then under this theory
Congress could turn around and require that every American
family that can afford it must buy an electric vehicle and that
would drive the unit cost down because supply would increase
and production costs would go down on a unit basis. It is
really no different, as a matter of economics, from what is
being argued here.
Mr. BOUSTANY. It really struck me, and I was at the Supreme
Court on Tuesday and listened to the 2 hours of argument. There
was a discussion about insurance as a financing mechanism for
health care. But yet in listening to much of the discussion, it
was a very narrow type of discussion because it was almost as
if there was only one way to do this. For instance, in health
care law, we know there are significant restrictions on health
savings accounts which I as a physician believe health savings
accounts are a good way to help individuals finance their
health care needs. It promotes personal responsibility. It
promotes a more informed consumer of health services. And
knowing that health care, I don't call it a right or a
privilege, I think it is a personal responsibility, and so
things that we can do to promote that type of ownership of your
own health care destiny are really important. So in this narrow
view that I alluded to just a moment ago, it is interesting
that you have government creating a very restricted, very
regulated, even more so than now, marketplace, with the minimum
benefits package, restrictions across the board, in effect
narrowing choices for families, for individuals, for
businesses, narrowing it down and recognizing, in doing so, you
are forcing everybody like through a funnel into a one-size-
fits-all process, a more expensive process even by the
Congressional Budget Office's own estimates. And so what
happens, the individual mandate. I think you have highlighted
that fairly well.
Would anyone like to comment?
Mr. BRADBURY. I would say obviously one alternative
economically would be to open up the options for Congress to
free the markets on an interstate basis from restrictions on
what kinds of insurance can be offered. For example, from one
State to another. To actually increase or make it almost
unlimited what kinds of policies could be offered, and then
there would be many, many choices from bare bones policies to
Cadillac policies and people could pick and choose. I am not
saying that would cover everybody in every instance.
Preexisting conditions may always be a tough issue because that
is not insurance when you are actually buying a policy that
covers something you already have.
Mr. BOUSTANY. It is sick care.
Mr. BRADBURY. It is like an annuity. It is not an insurance
policy, it is an entitlement. So there will be those costs. But
over time as there are more options in the markets, then more
people will have mix-and-match policies they can choose that
are economically advantageous for them and get the coverage
that they need, and government can take care, State governments
can take care of the residual folks who can't get the coverage.
Mr. BOUSTANY. So create a real market for all of us. And
for those who have defined needs with very definable and
problematic health considerations, it is not an insurance issue
because insurance is bought to deal with risk. Once you are
sick, you are sick. Now there needs to be a way to finance that
separately.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Again, I want to thank our witnesses for
your testimony, and at this time I would like to invite our
second panel to step forward. While they do, I will introduce
them in the interest of time.
To better understand the impacts of the employer mandate,
we will hear from Diane Furchtgott-Roth, Senior Fellow,
Manhattan Institute of Policy Research; Sylvester Schieber,
Independent Consultant; Tom Shaw, President, Barton Mutual
Insurance Company; and Stephen LaMontagne, President and CEO
Georgetown Cupcake.
Ms. Furchtgott-Roth, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DIANE FURCHTGOTT-ROTH, SENIOR FELLOW, MANHATTAN
INSTITUTE FOR POLICY RESEARCH

Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
inviting me to speak here today on this very important subject
of how the Affordable Health Care Act affects employment. It
was interesting listening to the preceding discussion. The
views seem to be from some members that because health care was
essential and because everyone might need it at some time, it
was the role of the government to mandate it and employers to
provide it.
Well, there are many essential services--food, clothing,
housing--but we don't ask employers to provide them. If we feel
that low-income people need these services, food for example,
we give them foot stamps. Housing, we give them housing
vouchers. We don't ask employers to have a minimum provision of
food. We don't require them to provide breakfast or lunch or
snacks to their employees.
And it is the same with health insurance. We don't ask
employers to provide life insurance, auto insurance, other
kinds of insurance. I agree that people should have access to
health insurance. I don't agree that employers have to be the
ones who provide it. Why? It creates a great disincentive for
hiring.
One reason we have such a high unemployment rate, over 8
percent for more than 3 years in a row, well after the end of
the recession, is because there is a big cliff moving from 49
to 50 workers. If a employer moves from 49 to 50 workers, he
has to pay $40,000 a year in penalties. That is because the
first 30 workers are exempt. But moving from 49 to 50, you take
off 30, you multiply it by $2,000, you get $40,000 a year, and
that is a big disincentive to hiring. It especially hurts low-
skilled workers. $2,000 is 12 percent of the average earnings
in the food and beverage industry, which is an industry where
people often get their first jobs. I myself had my first job
scooping ice cream in Baskin-Robbins. This also hurts franchise
businesses, and I think this was probably not the intention of
Congress. If you have four Dunkin' Donuts or four Baskin-
Robbins and they each have 15 workers, they are subject to the
penalty because in all, the franchise would have 60 workers in
all. This means that these franchise businesses are competing
against smaller, nonfranchise businesses. So if there is a
Baskin-Robbins that is part of a franchise and it is across the
street from a Joe's Diner, for example, the Baskin-Robbins
would have to pay the $2,000 per worker per year in penalty.
Joe's Diner wouldn't, and this would be very hard on the
franchise businesses.
There are many franchise establishments. They are
responsible for about $468 billion of GDP. They create 9
million jobs. They employ many low wage, entry-level workers,
as well as higher paid workers. And our unemployment rate for
low skilled workers is about 14 percent right now. Our teenage
unemployment rate is 25 percent. Our African American teen
unemployment rate is even higher. This is not something that we
want employers to have to do because it reduces employment and
it slows GDP growth.
In the previous panel, there was a discussion of what to do
about the health care problem. We need to take it away from the
employer. Any premium should be tax deductible so that private
markets develop. You never hear anyone saying I am losing my
job. I am going to lose my auto insurance. I won't be able to
drive.
There are many bills that suggest how to go. One of the
best is Congressman Price's Empowering Patients First Act,
which would mean that a worker would have portable health
insurance. His employer could pay part of it and then if he
moves jobs, changes jobs, his next employer could pay part of
the same kind of insurance, just like an IRA or a 401(k) plan.
If that individual wanted, he could buy health insurance
outside of his employer also, and that is what we need to move
to. We know how insurance markets work. We have made them work
with auto insurance, life insurance, and home insurance, and we
should make them work also for health insurance. We can do
this. We know how to do it without penalizing employment,
without penalizing workers, and especially without penalizing
low skilled workers, the most vulnerable among us who need a
job.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Furchtgott-Roth follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.062

Chairman HERGER. Thank you very much.
Mr. Schieber, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SYLVESTER J. SCHIEBER, CONSULTANT, COUNCIL FOR
AFFORDABLE HEALTH COVERAGE

Mr. SCHIEBER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the
Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify today
regarding some research that I have been working on recently.
My prepared remarks summarize that work. The research that I
have been doing with Dr. Steven Nyce shows that many workers
have failed to get ahead in recent years, largely due to
growing health care costs.
Health reform has the potential to increase the demand for
health care services and could exacerbate an already bad
situation with adverse consequences for workers' economic
prospects.
Under ACA, many employers will be required to provide
workers with health insurance or pay a penalty for not doing
so. This will impose a significant fixed cost component into
compensation. If employers cannot make offsetting adjustments
to other compensation components, some workers will be unable
to maintain their jobs. The most vulnerable workers, as we just
heard, are those at the bottom end of the earning spectrum.
Table 3 of my remarks shows the average share of increasing
compensation required to finance health benefits over each of
the past 3 decades for full-time, full-year workers at 10
different earnings levels. Averages include those who did not
receive health benefits from their own employers. Declining
coverage, concentrated among lower waged workers, has mitigated
some of the crowding out effect shown in the table. But workers
who lost employer provided health insurance had to spend more
out of pocket for their health care needs, a classic example of
damned if you do or damned if you don't.
Table 4 shows how benefit costs have risen relative to
wages between 1980 and 2009 for workers actually enrolled in
their employer health benefit plans. These costs have grown
faster for the lowest paid workers than in Table 3. For
example, benefit costs relative to wages for the second decile,
these are people at the 20th percentile, were twice those for
workers in the ninth decile in 1980, and three times more than
in 2009. The lowest earners are most damaged by high health
inflation.
Peter Orszag and Ezekiel Emanuel, two of the architects of
the Affordable Care Act, have estimated that health reform will
have little affect on national health expenditures between now
and 2030. Richard Foster, the Chief Actuary at CMS, suggests
that health reform will provide little relief to the cost
trajectory of employer-sponsored health benefit plans in coming
years. That means that current inflation rates are going to
persist.
A full-time worker in the second earnings decile in 2009
earned somewhere around $25,000 in total compensation. If his
or her productivity goes up at the rate of growth that the
Social Security actuaries estimate, by 2019 this worker will be
earning around $36,600 in total compensation. But if current
health inflation persists, nearly 75 percent of that gain will
have been consumed by rising health benefit costs. If the
worker has family coverage, the cost of health benefits will
grow to consume more than his or her added productivity
improvement.
In 1980, employer contributions for health benefit plans
were only 3.8 percent of total compensation paid to workers. By
2010, they had risen to 9 percent. Excessive health inflation
now applies to a much larger base than it did 20 or 30 years
ago. For workers and plans, the cost issues are much worse than
the average for all workers. For those in the second earnings
decile taking coverage, the cost of health benefits rose from
just under 10 percent of their pay in 1980 to 31 percent of
their pay in 2009, so nearly a third of pay is being paid out
of their compensation for health benefits.
This ugly arithmetic suggests that employers cannot offer
many workers both health benefits and growing wages and hope to
remain competitive in a global economy. The mandate to provide
health insurance coverage may be an admirable goal, but has a
potential to limit employability of lower wage workers.
Some analysts believe that most employers will stay in the
game of offering health benefits even under these
circumstances. Our analysis, however, suggests that many
employers may eliminate their plans and let workers fend for
themselves in the new exchanges because the economics of
employing them simply doesn't work at current cost and
inflation rate.
At the margin, shifting an ever-larger share of low earners
into publicly subsidized health insurance programs might seem
desirable, but we cannot avoid the reality of a national health
care marketplace and the costs with it. Shifting health costs
from employer compensation packages to a mix of public
subsidies and worker contributions will not reduce health care
expenditures unless we bring medical inflation under control.
If health reform is not expected to bend this cost curve, then
I have to ask: Who is going to pay this bill?
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schieber follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.083

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Shaw is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS J. SHAW, PRESIDENT, BARTON MUTUAL INSURANCE
COMPANY

Mr. SHAW. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Herger and
Ranking Member Stark, and members of the Ways and Means
Subcommittee on Health, for the opportunity to testify today on
the important topic of the employer mandate and the impact it
will have on our business.
Barton Mutual Insurance Company, located in Liberal,
Missouri, is a single-state property casualty insurer. Our
company was founded in 1894 to provide fire insurance to
farmers in our county. We now provide insurance products for a
wide variety of risks, including commercial risks. We employ 58
people full time and have furnished health insurance for
decades. I have been employed as the CEO since 1986.
As health insurance costs rose, we adjusted accordingly and
explored different options. First we raised deductibles. We
examined self-insurance and purchasing reinsurance but
determined that was unfeasible. When high deductible health
plans were created, we jumped at the opportunity to place our
employees in control of directing their medical care
consumption. The practice of putting money in their HSAs, the
health savings accounts, led them to seek out more affordable
prescriptions and carefully plan and manage their doctors'
visits. Within 60 days, the anecdotal evidence of savings
buzzed around our office. Our employees enjoy the coverage and
responsibility and believe it makes them better consumers of
health care.
Our annual costs today are about $7,394 per employee. We do
not have a very healthy group. Last year, our costs increased
by 7.3 percent. If we continue to incur the same increase, 7.3
percent a year, when mandated coverage takes effect in 2014,
our costs will be approximately $8,513 per employee. Costs and
premiums continue to rise since the passage of the law with no
relief in sight. In addition to the mandated coverage, there is
the essential health benefits package and a tax on fully
insured health plans that will increase the cost of insurance.
Further, the lengthy regulatory process makes planning and
forecasting costs even more difficult.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act promised
lower costs and expanded coverage for all. We were told we
could keep our current plan. Instead, the employer mandate
forces employers with 50 or more full-time employees to provide
expensive government-prescribed health insurance or pay a fine.
We have witnessed higher costs and it is nearly a given we will
drop our group HDHD plan and pay the $2,000 penalty per
employee. The incentives are lined up in a manner that makes it
nearly impossible to maintain coverage.
This law does not fix any problems for small businesses of
our size, those employers above the 50 full-time employee
threshold, and the law makes it extremely unattractive for a
smaller business to grow above the threshold. Although the
savings from dropping would allow us to increase payroll to
some extent, cost pressures on all fronts will lead us to hold
those savings to tamp down overhead in what is a mature,
competitive industry. The full savings will not go completely
into taxable wages. We strive to meet market rates for salaries
today, and savings garnered in any area of operations will go
toward maintaining a viable business. We need to look for
savings wherever we can find them.
The new law is not helping my business. We worked for
decades to provide good coverage for our employees and continue
to work on doing so. However, there is little incentive to
continue to provide coverage. For employers, there will be
fewer choices of insurance products and self insurance
underwriting will essentially be eliminated. Consumers will
have fewer choices to make, which means decisions will be made
from the top down. This is exactly the opposite of increasing
choices and flexibility that could help small businesses
continue to provide affordable coverage.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shaw follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.086

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. LaMontagne, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN LAMONTAGNE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, GEORGETOWN
CUPCAKE, INC.

Mr. LAMONTAGNE. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Stark, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to
appear before you today to discuss the implications of the
Affordable Care Act on small and large employers.
My remarks represent the views of Georgetown Cupcake and
its owners. They are not necessarily representative of the
views of the small business community as a whole. We are not
economists. We are not constitutional scholars. We are business
people, and my hope is that we can provide some insight into
how some businesses think about health benefits as a component
of employee compensation.
Georgetown Cupcake was founded in 2008 by my wife Sophie
and her sister Katherine and over the course of the past 4
years, in a challenging economic climate, we have grown from
one location to now three locations, in Washington, D.C.,
Bethesda, Maryland, and most recently New York City. We have
launched a national shipping operation, and have two other
planned locations coming online this year in Boston and Los
Angeles.
Also during this time, we have grown from a staff of two to
a staff of well over 350 employees, including about 100 full-
time employees. So all this to say in a very short time we have
experienced every stage in the maturation process of a
business, from being a start-up to a small business to now a
growing business that is continuing to evolve and innovate.
As business owners, we strive to be a world class employer.
And in a highly competitive environment, we believe it is
necessary to offer a well rounded compensation package that
includes competitive wages and salaries, paid vacation and sick
leave, opportunities for growth within the company, a positive
organizational culture, and affordable health insurance
coverage. We believe that health insurance coverage is a
necessary component of a well rounded compensation package not
only because it enables us to attract and retain the very best
employees, not only because it helps us to remain competitive,
but also because we believe it is the right thing to do.
We offer our staff, our full-time employees, a menu of
coverage options through a major national insurance provider
and pay 75 percent of the monthly premium. Nearly all of our
full-time employees have enrolled in Georgetown Cupcake's plan
or are covered by the plans of their spouses or parents. Of the
employees who have enrolled in our plan, nearly all have chosen
coverage that features in network services, a zero deductible,
free well childcare, free physical examinations, mammograms,
cancer screenings and other procedures, low copays for doctor's
visits, free emergency room care and inpatient hospital
services with no maximum lifetime benefit. We are proud to be
able to extend this comprehensive coverage to our employees.
And as a result, many of our full-time employees have been with
the company since inception.
Under certain provisions of the Affordable Care Act that
come into effect in 2014, large employers, defined as those
with over 50 full-time employees, or full-time equivalents, we
are counted in that group, face potential penalties if they
fail to provide affordable health insurance coverage to their
full-time staff. Some studies have asserted that large
employers will elect to drop health insurance coverage
altogether because in certain cases the cost of the penalties
may be less than the cost of providing coverage. I believe that
these studies make oversimplified assumptions about the
decision making processes of small and large businesses. In our
case, we will continue to provide an option for our employees
to obtain access to affordable, high-quality care even if it
results in modest additional cost to us.
Time will tell what the true impact of the Affordable Care
Act will be on total enrollment in employer-sponsored health
insurance plans. We certainly applaud the intent of the
legislation to reduce the overall number of uninsured Americans
and to lower the cost of health care without sacrificing
quality of care, and we believe that all of the options on the
table are worth considering, including health insurance
exchanges designed to give consumers more educated choices
about their own coverage. Yet it is difficult to predict how
quickly these exchanges will be created, how effectively they
will be administered, how transparent they will be to
consumers, and how quickly consumers might transition to them.
In theory, if they can alleviate upward pressure on the cost of
insurance premiums while ensuring the same access to care and
quality of care, and if employers are allowed to participate,
then I think they could be a win/win for all involved. However,
we will have to wait and see how this and other aspects of the
legislation are implemented before being able to fully assess
the costs and benefits relative to existing options for
employer-sponsored coverage.
In summary, we believe that being a world class employer
means providing an option for affordable health insurance
coverage for your staff. We support the goal of reducing the
number of uninsured Americans, and we believe that employer-
sponsored coverage has been and will continue to be one
important component of a multi-pronged strategy to address what
is a multi-dimensional challenge of expanding coverage while
controlling costs. Above all we believe that most employers,
including and especially Georgetown Cupcake, want to do the
right thing and want to be part of the solution, whatever that
may be.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. LaMontagne follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.089

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Ms. Furchtgott-Roth, the Democrats' health care law
mandates that if you are an employer with at least 50 full-time
equivalent employees, you must pay for government prescribed
health care or pay a $2,000 per employee fine. Can you give
some reasons why some employers today might not believe they
can afford to offer health care to their employees?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Health care is going to be more
expensive because of the qualified benefit plan. Plans such as
catastrophic health care where you can have a health savings
account to pay for routine expenditures, and then have health
care to cover major expenditures such as getting cancer or
falling off your bicycle in traffic, those won't be allowed
anymore because they don't meet with the qualified benefit
plan.
So employers of low-wage workers are going to find that it
adds a lot to compensation. They are going to substitute with
other kinds of capital. We already see this happening in CVS
with self-scanning checkout counters, and other supermarkets.
We see many food trucks, for example, around the streets. This
saves them the cost of wages for services because people line
up to purchase the food. I have seen several cupcake trucks. I
don't know if it is Georgetown Cupcake. There are many of these
cupcake trucks, also.
So the incentive will be not to provide health care for
low-wage workers, to, in fact, drop these low-wage workers
altogether because of the penalty. For higher wage workers, the
employer can take it out of the salary and so we would expect
to see a lower take-home wage and paying the penalty. But the
burden is going to fall on low wage, low skilled workers.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Republicans on this committee
have long warned that the employer mandate will encourage
employers to drop the current health insurance plan people have
and like, is simple math. If an employer is currently paying
more for health care coverage for its employees than it would
pay in mandate penalties, it has an incentive to drop coverage
to both save money and remain competitive. In fact, the
nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office predicts that 3 to 5
million Americans will lose their current employer-sponsored
health insurance.
Mr. Shaw, I read in your testimony that you have already
made these calculations. How much do you expect your company to
save by dropping health insurance coverage in 2014?
Mr. SHAW. That is difficult to say since we don't know what
the mandated cost for the group insurance is going to be. But
if our situation is any indication, where we are not a very
healthy group, we are paying $8,500 per employee now, it is
going to be a lot cheaper to pay the $2,000 penalty plus the
lower wage penalty that comes along with it. The math is so
simple, why would we continue the group health. We know our
employees can be taken care of because the government says they
have to buy it at this point. They are going to find a way
through the exchanges to get health insurance. The employer
does not need to be in the middle of all of that and, with the
extra expense, pay the penalty.
Chairman HERGER. So does the difference between the $2,000
and the $8,500 you are paying per employee, multiplying that
out, would be the difference, particularly in a competitive
market?
Mr. SHAW. Approximately $300,000, I think. That wouldn't
all be savings because I am sure we would do adjustments to
payroll or somehow to make up some difference for the employee
to go out and get their own health insurance. We would try to
make those adjustments. But not fully, I don't anticipate.
Chairman HERGER. So the ObamaCare actually encourages
employers to drop health insurance?
Mr. SHAW. It looks that way to me.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Schieber, you make the point that as a
practical matter, employers cannot hire or retain workers whose
total compensation rises faster than their productivity. You
estimated that if workers enrolled in mandated employer health
plans, the rise in employer premiums would absorb more than 100
percent of the productivity gained for the bottom quarter of
wage earners between now and 2030. You add ``the likely result
will be fewer jobs or lower pay.'' Who is likely to be the most
impacted by this loss of jobs, management or entry level
workers?
Mr. SCHIEBER.Well, it is going to be the entry level
workers. If you think about somebody who is earning $20,000 or
$25,000 a year, and their productivity is going up a little
over 1 percent a year, that is what the Social Security
actuaries estimate is the average in the economy, next year
their added contribution to companies is around $250. If they
have family coverage, if they are covered under this plan we
just heard about, $8,000, $9,000, and the cost of that is going
up about 5 percent a year because of this excessive health
inflation, well, the cost of providing them health insurance
then is going up at $500 a year, but they are only bringing in
an added $250 to the table to pay for that. So the problem is
that we live in a market-based economy. These companies have to
cover the cost of their workers or they go out of business. And
so, you know, sometimes they call economics the dismal science,
and probably for a reason, but it does try to pay attention to
the laws of arithmetic, not just the laws that Congress
introduces.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panel.
Mr. LaMontagne, the critics of the Affordable Care Act have
suggested that the increased cost of compensation by providing
health care would impose a financial burden to employers and
force them to cut staff and wages and stop giving pay raises. I
presume that if you are in the franchise business, it doesn't
make any difference. If you have got a Burger King here and you
have one two blocks away and the minimum wage goes up, neither
Burger King store has an advantage, right? They each raise the
price of a hamburger to cover it or swallow it if they choose.
But competitively when you are making a standard product it
doesn't make a lot of difference. You may not like it, but it
doesn't.
Would employers have to cut staff and wages if there was an
increase in compensation costs? What would be your first
reaction? Stop putting frosting on your doughnuts?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. I can only speak for our business.
Mr. STARK. You are the only person running a business, so I
have to take your word for it.
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. If there were an increase in compensation,
either directly through an increase in the Federal or State
minimum wage, or indirectly through an increase in the cost of
total compensation to an employee, including health insurance
coverage, in our case we would not reduce staffing levels
because we staff based on the level of people that we need to
run our operation smoothly. If we had to take people out, the
cost to us in terms of inefficiency and loss of operational
smoothness, if you will, would be greater than the savings that
you would realize just by cutting one or two or three staff.
Mr. STARK. Would your tendency be for small increases or
decreases in your, ``production'' to either cut back hours for
everybody a few hours or go to overtime if you had to go the
other way rather than hire and train new workers every time
there was a minor change in your production?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. I think Mr. Shaw made a great point, which
is businesses face cost creep from all sides, not just labor
costs, not just health insurance costs, but from every
direction. We look at our budgets as a whole, and we have to
make decisions on how to streamline looking at them as a whole.
Again, in our case, we would not cut hours or shift to more
of a part-time labor force because we are a growing business
and we are investing in our employees because we want to
promote people from within so that they can grow with the
company. And you don't send a message to your staff that you
want them to grow with you by transitioning to an all part-time
work force.
Mr. STARK. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
your testimony today. In almost every health care hearing and
Ways and Means hearing on health care, I have mentioned a list
of things that have sort of been coming to light as we discuss
this health care law further. And one of the things that the
previous Speaker, Nancy Pelosi, said is we have got to pass
this bill first to find out what is in it. And of course, that
is what we are doing right now. We are finding out what is in
it. And some of these things are very harmful to small
businesses.
We discovered that the 1099 requirement was very harmful to
small businesses. The Democrats and Republicans together
finally agreed with that, and it was repealed. The CLASS Act
has been repealed. We discovered that we don't have the money
to implement that plan. And Mr. Shaw, you mentioned in your
testimony that you were frustrated because the promise was you
could keep your health care if you liked to keep your health
care, but I am not sure if you knew that the President himself
said at an event that I happened to be at that when he was
asked the question about whether or not this promise was really
included in the law, he said, well, there might have been some
language snuck into the health care law that runs contrary to
that premise. So I wonder what else runs contrary to a promise,
promises that were made about this bill, and we are finding out
more and more and more what is running contrary.
So I am interested in a couple of things here. So Mr.
Schieber, with the employer mandate, would revenues of a
business increase with the employer mandate?
Mr. SCHIEBER. The revenues of some health care providers
might increase because there could be substantially increased
demand for health care services. I don't know why Walmart's
revenues would increase or IBM's revenues would increase.
Mr. REICHERT. Will the employer mandate improve a business'
profit margin?
Mr. SCHIEBER. Well, it depends a little bit. We just heard
here, there might be a situation arise, and I actually believe
there might be a lot of them, where companies go through a
calculation where they can put some of their cost to the
government. And so they could conceivably become more
efficient, but that means that the government is going to face
a higher cost than maybe are being anticipated for this bill.
Mr. REICHERT. Where will businesses then find the money,
though, to provide this health care coverage if there is
additional cost, and they have this threat of $2,000 penalty
and there is a $3,000 penalty if the health care offered is
unaffordable.
Mr. SCHIEBER. Well, the fact of the matter is that
employers do evaluate whether or not workers are covering the
cost that it takes to hire them. And if you paid attention to
what has been going on in our economy in recent years, if you
go to a grocery store today or you go to almost any kind of
retail outlet today, they have now got these automated checkout
lines where you scan your own stuff. What they are trying to do
is they are trying to save money on labor costs, because those
workers are no longer bringing in additional revenue that is
recovering their costs. They are trying to get more efficient
because we are operating in an extremely competitive world. If
you go into any office building in almost any city this year
that is being cleaned in the evening, it used to be that part
of the staff of the company that operated that office cleaned
that building. That is no longer the case. That has all been
subbed out because those people are getting much lower pay.
They are getting much lower benefits than the people that
actually work in the office. There is a variety of ways that
this takes effect. And I believe that the high unemployment
rate that is concentrated in people without skills, people just
coming out of school, people without training, people at very
low wages is partly because some of these overburdened costs,
or actually underburdened, you can't see them. Most people
don't see them, but they are there and when you are doing your
budget you have to cover them.
Mr. REICHERT. Right.
Mr. SCHIEBER. And I think that is why we have got a lot of
the persistent unemployment rate at the lower end today that we
do.
Mr. REICHERT. I appreciate your answer, and thank you for
your time, and I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. The gentleman from Washington
is recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. LaMontagne, it
may be just my experience, but we also have a cupcake company
in Washington in Seattle, Cupcake Royale. The woman who runs it
has been back here and testified, and testified before
committees in Congress. We also have a woman named Molly Moon.
She runs a little ice cream operation. They give health care
benefits to all of their people, just like the women who
started your company give health care benefits to their people.
Now, I think that must be because they think that there is some
inherent value in it, that it is the right thing to do. And
what I find difficult is to listen to the CEO of an insurance
company say, well, if I could pay a penalty and pay less, I
would throw my employees off the plan and put them into the
exchange. And I would like to hear your own thinking about
whether you would go to your employees in the cupcake company
and say, it is cheaper for us, so we are not going to cover you
anymore. Go down to the exchange and buy your insurance, and we
will pay the penalty.
Now, tell me how you think about that. Because I think this
is a straw man that is put up here. We can't keep our coverage.
What it means is that the management of companies will take it
away from their employees by saying we are not going to pay any
more, and it is not that there is anything in the law that says
it can't be done. So I would like to hear you talk about how
you think about your employees and whether you would rather
involve yourself in their coverage or send them down the street
to the exchange.
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. As I mentioned previously, we believe that
in the system that we have now health insurance coverage is a
necessary component of a well-rounded compensation package. And
it is something that as we grew from a small startup into a
company that approached 30, 40, 50, full-time workers, our
full-time staff asked us for it because it mattered to them. It
is something that they wanted. And we thought that in order to
make sure that we could keep them on board, again we are a
growing company, we are making an investment in our staff. We
want them to internalize our processes and procedures, and make
a greater contribution in the future. We felt that it was
necessary and certainly the right thing to do to add that to
our total compensation package.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Was there anything besides staff morale
involved in that decision? I mean, did you make any other kind
of--was there any other level of decision-making that went into
that?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. Certainly, staff morale and responsiveness
was one element that went into the calculation. I think in a
competitive environment, where other employers are offering
health insurance as a part of their compensation packages, in
order for us to remain competitive it is necessary to add that
option as well. And also we personally believed that once we
got to that stage in our growth, that it was the right thing to
do to add coverage, and----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Do you think you would have lost any of them
if you did not respond to that request?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. Yes, I think we would have.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. The best people.
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. And we would have lost some very good
people.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. That is the experience of a lot of small
businesses. My son did a startup in the high-tech industry, and
he said, Dad, we had to give benefits or we couldn't recruit
anybody to our company, because if we didn't have a benefit
package people wouldn't come. So it seems to me if you want the
best people you have to have a benefit package, right?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. In the system that we have today, I believe
that it is necessary, yes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Are you familiar with anything in Hawaii? I
mean, Hawaii has the system where every employer who has a
full-time employee has to give benefits, right? Do you know
about that?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. I am not familiar with the Hawaii----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It is true. And the question I have is, for
anybody on the panel is, why does it work in Hawaii and it
doesn't work here? Why would it not work in the United States
on the continent when it works out in the island? How do they
do that? I mean, is Hawaii so depressed or they have no
business, or what is going on?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Well, I would be glad to answer that.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Sure. I would like to hear you.
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. So they take it out of the total well,
it is part of the total compensation package. So the cost of
health insurance comes at the expense of more take-home wages.
So an employer provides the compensation package. It consists
of health insurance, vacation, sick leave, and also a cash
wage.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. But no businesses are failing because of
this, right?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. What they are doing is providing----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Are businesses failing in Hawaii because
they have to give health care?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. I do not know the answer to that, but
I know they are providing a lower cash wage than they would
have otherwise if they did not have to provide the health
insurance.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time is expired. Dr. Price
is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you so much, and I want to thank the
panel. This has been very interesting because I think that the
unintended, or maybe intended consequences of this law, are
significant, especially in the employer/employee relationship.
Mr. LaMontagne, I want to applaud you for providing health
coverage for our employees. We did in my practice when I was in
the private sector. My understanding is you have three
different options available for your employees, is that right?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. PRICE. And what are those?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. One is the option that I described in my
statement which is the one that nearly all of our staff had
enrolled in, which is a very comprehensive level of coverage
for in-network services, and then, you know, small copays for
out-of-network services. And then the second option is a
slightly higher expense for out-of-network services, but
generally the same level of coverage for in-network services.
Mr. PRICE. Right.
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. And then the third option that we had was
one that involved health savings account option, which as it
turns out was not one of the options that any of our staff
selected. They opted for the most comprehensive coverage
available.
Mr. PRICE. So the choices that you put in place for your
employees, however, were the ones that you selected, not that
somebody else selected?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. I mean, these are choices that we met with
a broker for the national insurance provider. We had a dialogue
with our staff about what they were looking for, and----
Mr. PRICE. But you selected it.
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. And in 2014, the bill will stipulate that you
have got to pick. You don't get to pick. In fact, you have got
to comply with what Washington tells you to comply with. Do you
think that is fair? What if it is not what you want?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. I mean, in looking at the options that we
have and how the legislation defines minimum essential coverage
and affordable care, I think what we have available would
satisfy those criteria.
Mr. PRICE. What if it doesn't? What if they dictate
something else to you? Is that fair?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. As long as we can provide coverage to our
staff, and if employer-sponsored coverage is part of the system
that will eventually, I think, lead to the outcomes that
everyone hopes that we get, you know, we will look at all of
the options that are available.
Mr. PRICE. Do you think it is fair that the Federal
Government can say that a health savings account is not
something that ought to be available to folks even though your
employees didn't choose to select it? Do you think that is
fair?
Mr. LAMONTAGNE. I think any action to limit options is one
that I would not find--not find favor. I think----
Mr. PRICE. I think that is very wise. Ms. Roth, you
mentioned that a catastrophic plan that I just talked about,
sense, wouldn't be available. Why is that?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Well, it wouldn't be allowed under the
exchange. For this plan under the exchange you have to have a
qualified benefit plan. That means no copayments for routine
care, mandatory mental health, drug abuse. We found out last
week free contraceptives, recently, all unlimited lifetime
payments.
Mr. PRICE. So any high deductible catastrophic plan
wouldn't qualify?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Correct, because it doesn't have zero
copayment for routine care.
Mr. PRICE. So if an American wanted a high deductible
catastrophic plan, but was forced into an exchange they
wouldn't be able to select the kind of coverage plan that they
wanted, is that correct?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. That is correct and these health
savings accounts with catastrophic health insurance have saved
money. They have saved 11 percent to the State of Indiana, for
example.
Mr. PRICE. Absolutely. I want to revisit Burger King. We
talked a fair amount about Burger King, and I think it was Mr.
Stark that said that one Burger King had to comply with the law
and another Burger King had to comply. What about Joe's Burger
Shop across from the Burger King that doesn't have 50
employees? What are the requirements? What are the competitive
requirements on the Burger King because of Joe's Burger Shop
and what are the consequences of that for the employees?
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Joe's Burger Shop would not have to
pay the penalty that had 49 or fewer employees, and by the way
the Burger Kings, if they laid off all of their full-time
workers and replaced them with part-time workers they wouldn't
have to pay the penalty either. So the incentive would be to
lay off full-time workers, replace them with part-time workers.
Or if you had a Burger King across the street from the Wendy's,
if they shared workforces and the workforce was at half-time at
Wendy's, half-time at Burger King, then the Burger King and
Wendy's would be competitive with Joe's Burger. Otherwise Joe's
Burger would always be able to undercut the Burger King and the
Wendy's, and the incentive should not be like that.
Mr. PRICE. Exactly. So the perverse incentives in this bill
actually harm the lower wage worker in this country.
Ms. FURCHTGOTT-ROTH. Yes, precisely. And there is another
incentive that also harms the low wage worker. Firms only have
to provide affordable coverage for a single worker. They don't
have to provide affordable coverage for a family. But if the
worker gets affordable coverage from his employer as a single,
the rest of the family is not allowed to get subsidized health
insurance on the exchange. They are in limbo. They are
uncovered. They can purchase full-priced insurance on the
exchange, but many of them would not be able to afford to do
so.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think Dr. Price
raised a bunch of very important points that illustrate how
disruptive this is all going to be. Mr. Schieber, your
testimony highlighted a number of critical points and I think
it is fairly well-established in your testimony, and in general
terms, that the increasing cost of health care is hurting both
businesses and workers. I think that is fairly well-
established. And secondly, the problem of rising health care
costs started before the passage of this health care law, yet
those cost increases are continuing and we potentially will see
some price shocks in the insurance market. That is what I am
hearing from businesses, large and small, in my district and
around the country.
So I guess the remaining question then becomes, does the
Democrats' health care law make this fundamental problem better
or worse? So I have a series of questions for you. Does
imposing the employer mandate raise or lower the cost of health
care for employers?
Mr. SCHIEBER.Well, it would raise the cost for any employer
who is now required to cover a worker who is not covered. I
mean, there has been some intimation here, I wouldn't want
anybody to go away thinking that there is not an economic--
there is not a relationship between what people are paid and
whether or not they are now getting health insurance.
At the second decile in 2009, about 22 percent of full-
time, full-year workers were actually receiving health
insurance from their employer. At the fifth decile it was about
60 percent. At the eighth decile over 76 percent. There is an
extremely strong economic relationship between payment. So at
the bottom we are going to raise the pay of quite a lot of--the
compensation costs of employing quite a lot of workers.
Mr. BOUSTANY. All right. So also does the taxing health
insurance plans--there is a tax in this new law taxing health
insurance plans, does that raise or lower the cost of providing
health insurance?
Mr. SCHIEBER. It would raise the cost of providing health
insurance.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Right. What about mandating an essential
health benefits package? Would that raise or lower the cost?
Mr. SCHIEBER. If the package was richer than the package--
even if you had been offering a package, if the new package is
richer than the package you have been offering, it has got to
cost more.
Mr. BOUSTANY. It will cost more. What about mandating
employers to pay 60 percent of the actuarial value of the plan?
Does that raise the cost?
Mr. SCHIEBER. Again, it depends a little bit on what they
have been doing. But if they have been paying less than 60
percent, if it is a 50/50 plan, I pay half, you pay half, it
would raise the cost of the plan.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Okay. So now we have talked about a number of
provisions in the health law which, as you have stated, will
raise costs for employers. And I think you eloquently stated
earlier that a business faced with a fixed cost, paying a
penalty, or the variable cost, which we already know is higher
than the penalty, and rising, and perhaps going to rise by you
know, 5, 6, 7 percent or more. We don't know, but we know it is
rising. It is a pretty simple business decision, it seems to
me, and it is one of the things I am hearing from a number of
business owners around my district; fixed cost, lower; variable
cost and rising. What do you do?
Mr. SCHIEBER. Well, I would assume this fixed cost will
probably rise a bit over time. But it is not clear which one
would rise faster, but if you--if your variable, what you
characterize as the variable cost is higher than the fixed cost
you are going to have to pay, you would probably pay the fixed
cost.
Business people are rational economic beings. They try to
make decisions based on the arithmetic of running their
business, and they look at differential cost rates, and they
make decisions based on that in terms of how they run their
business.
Mr. BOUSTANY. And that same business person is going to
want choices that would promote a competitive marketplace
rather than simply a one-size-fits-all, this is it, take it or
leave it, and accept the cost?
Mr. SCHIEBER. Well, if you look in the retail industry, for
example, you would typically find a much different benefit
package than you would find in a computer engineering firm
where you are going to have extremely high-skill versus low-
skill relatively mobile workers. You find significant
difference. I worked in the benefits industry most of my
career. I have worked with a lot of employers. There are
definite differences, and when you look at those differences,
you can understand them when you look at the economics of the
business. These things vary by the economics of the businesses.
Mr. BOUSTANY. And so a business looking at this fixed cost
versus variable cost, will likely say, I am sorry, we are not
going to provide this benefit. We know you will get it in the
exchange, and yet we are seeing multiple problems with the
establishment of exchanges, which seem to be falling behind. So
again, it gets back to the point of the major disruptions in
coverage, on top of the fact that, I know we didn't discuss
this in this hearing today, but we have significant shortages
of physicians and nurses and specialists, which will further
lead to disruptions in health care as we know it, and
disruptions for the worse, not for the better.
Mr. SCHIEBER. You know, I don't think we can begin to
anticipate all of the changes we might face. There is a section
in my testimony about the implementation of Medicare in the
mid-1960s. We thought prices were going to be relatively
stable. We thought demand would be relatively stable. With the
introduction of Medicare, prices started rising very rapidly.
Demand exceeded considerably what was originally anticipated.
There were significant spillover effects to the employer
market.
During the 1970s, when Medicare was really taking its full
effect in the U.S. economy, employee-sponsored health benefit
costs were going up 6.8 percent a year faster than
compensation. So it can have spillover effect. So we can be
introducing a whole variety of inflationary effects we haven't
even begun to think of. And the people who have been costing
this out have assumed, at best, that costs are going to be
about the same as they were under the prior regime. So I think
we have got some tremendous hidden risks here that we are
really not talking about.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you. I see my time is expired. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Kind is recognized.
Mr. KIND. I appreciate the additional information, Mr.
Chairman. I appreciate it.
Chairman HERGER. Well, with that, I would like to thank our
witnesses and our panel for participating. I would like to
respond to a comment that was made by my friend from Washington
about Hawaii.
I am looking at an Associated Press article that indicates
that since its passage 35 years ago the cost-conscious business
owners, and it is talking about Hawaii, have found an easy way
to avoid the law by hiring more part-time workers who aren't
required to be covered. It goes on to say if it weren't for
that law the medical benefits are one area we could look to cut
because this is a recession. It hurts the business. You can't
pass it on to customers in this economy.
And again, I would like to thank each of our witnesses.
Mr. LaMontagne, I am one of the few small business people
on this committee. My heart really goes out to you and
gratitude goes out to you for obviously the hard work that you
have put into, and your family, to running your business. But
as a small business person, and as I talk to people in my
northern California district, there is a big difference between
those businesses that might be blessed to have a large margin
and those who are much more competitive, that the difference
between $2,000 and $8,000 can make a difference whether they
are in business or not.
But I want to thank you for running your business in such a
way that you have that margin, and also for being generous
enough and doing the right thing to continue with your
employees. My concern is that you are more the exception than
the rule.
It is apparent to me in this hearing from the testimony
presented today that the Democrats' health care law is
unconstitutional and will rob Americans of their current health
plan and further hinder economic growth. That is why I will
continue to call for a full repeal. The goal of health care
reform should be to make health care coverage more affordable
for all Americans, not to reengineer the contract between
private citizens and their government.
As a reminder, any member wishing to submit a question for
the record will have 14 days to do so. If any questions are
submitted, I ask that the witnesses respond in a timely manner.
With that, the Subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Member Opening Statement follows:]
The Honorable Pete Stark

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.091

[Member Submissions for the Record follows:]
The Honorable Bill Pascrell
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.106

The Honorable Jim McDermott
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.110

[Public Submissions for the Record follows:]
American Farm Bureau Federation, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.112

Center for Fiscal Equity, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.117

Chamber of Commerce, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.120

NFIB and Small Business Coalition for Affordable Healthcare, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78672A.123


