- SOCIAL SECURITY'S PAYMENT ACCURACY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SOCIAL SECURITY'S PAYMENT ACCURACY

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

and

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 14, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-OS5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-885                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

SAM JOHNSON, Texas, Chairman

KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   XAVIER BECERRA, California
PAT TIBERI, Ohio                     LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
RICK BERG, North Dakota              FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
KENNY MARCHANT, New York

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               XAVIER BECERRA, California
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, New York             JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
TOM REED, New York
ERIK PAULSON, Minnesota

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of June 14, 2011, announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

Honorable Carolyn Colvin, Deputy Commissioner, Social Security
Administration.................................................     9
Honorable Patrick P. O'Carroll Jr., Inspector General, Social
Security Administration........................................    21
Dan Bertoni, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office..................    29
Ann P. Robert, Deputy Director, Bureau of Disability
Determination Services, Illinois Department of Human Services,
on behalf of the National Council of Disability Determination
Directors......................................................    53
Joseph Dirago, President, National Council of Social Security
Management Associations........................................    63

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Social Security Administration...................................    93
Government Accountability Office.................................    99
National Council Of Disability Determination Directors...........   101
Huntington's Disease Society of America (HDSA)...................   103

SOCIAL SECURITY'S PAYMENT ACCURACY

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 14, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
joint with
Subcommittee on Social Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:40 p.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable
Charles Boustany [chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight]
presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairmen Boustany and Johnson Announce Hearing on Social Security's
Payment Accuracy

June 14, 2011

House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Chairman Charles
Boustany, Jr., MD (R-LA) and Social Security Subcommittee Chairman Sam
Johnson (R-TX) today announced that the Subcommittees on Oversight and
Social Security will hold a hearing on the accuracy of payments made by
the Social Security Administration (SSA). The hearing will take place
on Tuesday, June 14, 2010, in 1100 Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 2:00 P.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

According to the President's fiscal year 2012 Budget request, next
year the SSA is expected to distribute nearly $820 billion in benefits
to over 60 million people. These benefits will be paid primarily
through three major programs administered by the SSA: the Social
Security Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance (OASI) program, which will
distribute $620 billion to 45 million retired workers and their
spouses, dependents, and survivors; the Social Security Disability
Insurance (DI) program, which will distribute $135 billion to nearly 11
million beneficiaries unable to work due to disability and their
eligible spouses and children; and the Supplemental Security Income
(SSI) program, which will distribute nearly $50 billion to over 8
million low-income people who are aged, blind, or disabled.

One out of four American households receives some income from
Social Security, and distribution of such significant sums of taxpayer
dollars means that even a very low overpayment rate can result in a
substantial loss to the taxpayer and the Social Security program.
According to the latest available data, in FY 2009 overpayments
included $841 million in the OASI program, $1.7 billion in the DI
program, and $4.0 billion in the means-tested SSI program. Without
action, these error costs will grow significantly as benefit costs for
Social Security alone are projected to increase nearly 70 percent over
the next ten years.

For the five-year period ending fiscal year 2009, errors involving
the determination of ``substantial gainful activity,'' essentially
whether earnings are high enough to end eligibility for DI benefits,
account for the majority of overpayment errors, nearly $1 billion
annually, or 36 percent of total retirement, survivors, and disability
program error dollars. Of these error dollars, 64 percent resulted from
beneficiaries' failure to report their work activity. The other 36
percent were associated with the SSA's failure to schedule a work
continuing disability review (CDR) after the beneficiary notified the
SSA that they returned to work. Once a beneficiary notifies the SSA of
their earnings, it may be months or years before the SSA sends an
overpayment notice to the beneficiary, demanding repayment of sometimes
tens of thousands of dollars of accrued overpayments.

Other program integrity reviews generate significant long-term
savings for taxpayers and are critical to ensuring that only those
eligible continue to receive benefit payments. Medical CDRs are
periodic reviews conducted to ensure recipients are still disabled
according to Agency rules. In FY 2009, these reviews have generated
$12.50 in savings for every dollar invested. Despite their substantial
savings, the frequency of these reviews is declining. The number of
completed medical CDRs fell 65% between FY 2004 and FY 2008, with a
backlog of more than 1.5 million medical CDRs at the end of FY 2010.
The SSA Office of Inspector General (OIG) estimates that this backlog
may lead to as much as $1.1 billion in overpayments in 2011 alone.

SSI program integrity work has followed a similar pattern, with
funding levels and redeterminations peaking in 2003, falling through
2007, and then beginning to rise again in 2008. These periodic reviews
of non-medical SSI eligibility factors are used to determine if a
recipient remains eligible for the program and yield $7 in program
savings for every dollar spent. The use of SSI redeterminations has
decreased by more than 60% between FY 2003 and FY 2008, resulting in
$3.3 billion in lost program savings in FYs 2008 and 2009, according to
the SSA OIG.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``Whether
through error or outright fraud, overpayments across the government are
a substantial problem costing taxpayers tens of billions of dollars
each year. The Oversight Subcommittee is reviewing these overpayments
in a series of hearings, taking a closer look to identify how
overpayments occur and funding solutions to better protect taxpayer
dollars and program beneficiaries.''

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Johnson said, ``We are facing a
debt crisis because Washington spends too much and wastes too much.
Payments that are wrong due to fraud or poor management at Social
Security are unacceptable. Americans whose hard earned wages support
these programs want, need and deserve better.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The Subcommittees will examine the SSA's efforts to improve payment
accuracy for the OASI, DI, and SSI programs, including the backlogs
associated with these efforts and how these backlogs might be reduced
to better protect taxpayer dollars.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Tuesday, June 28, 2011. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. This hearing will come to order. Good
afternoon. I am pleased to welcome everyone to this afternoon's
joint hearing on payment accuracy in programs administered by
the Social Security Administration. As with past subcommittee
oversight hearings on Medicare fraud and refundable tax
credits, today's hearing is aimed at better understanding
improper payments in Social Security programs and how taxpayer
dollars might be better protected.
Next year alone, the Social Security Administration is
tasked with the enormous responsibility of distributing nearly
$820 billion to over 60 million beneficiaries. With the
staggering size and complexity of these programs Social
Security is particularly vulnerable to erroneous payments,
fraud, and management challenges.
We are here today to explore these challenges and consider
what might be done to correct them and better protect both
beneficiaries and taxpayers.
By any standard, the scope of these problems is
considerable. Social Security issued at least $8 billion in
improper payments in fiscal year 2010. According to GAO and the
Social Security inspector general, this number does not capture
the full extent of overpayments.
Regardless of whether a payment occurs because of simple
error or outright fraud, improper payments harm Social Security
programs in the long term, jeopardizing benefits for those who
may need them in the future. They also cost taxpayers billions
of dollars each year. With publicly held Federal debt set to
eclipse GDP in the coming years, we can no longer ignore
billions of dollars in overpayments, regardless of how they
occur. While the numbers involved with wasteful Social Security
spending might be overwhelming, the solutions that would reduce
them are no mystery.
Today we will be discussing proven methods for reducing
improper payments, such as continuing disability reviews and
redeterminations which can save the taxpayer as much as $15 for
every dollar spent. We will also be discussing how these cost-
saving activities are on the decline, falling as much as 65
percent in recent years, billions of dollars in overpayments
that might have otherwise been prevented.
There is much that needs to be done to reduce improper
payments and better protect taxpayer dollars. Social Security
should build on past successes, with data exchanges using
information the government and beneficiaries already have to
make payments more accurate. And they need not only to get this
information in a timely fashion, they need to put it to use
more quickly than they have in the past.
Too often the agency is not responsive to beneficiaries.
Many of us have heard reports from our constituents about the
agency waiting months or years to send out overpayment notices
which can lead to tens of thousands of dollars in additional
overpayments and underpayments. In other cases, beneficiaries
may inform the agency of a change in their income or medical
status, and years go by without action by Social Security. This
has to change.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today about
how these problems may occur and what might be done to prevent
them. With these programs, like others, every dollar spent on
an improper payment is a dollar that does not go to a
legitimate beneficiary, and each one further weakens the
program. And with the Social Security program heading towards
insolvency, a time when we could just kick this can down the
road is past, if there ever was one at all.
As the Ways and Means Subcommittees on Oversight and Social
Security, we have an obligation to Social Security
beneficiaries and taxpayers to understand the size of the
problem and what might be done to improve it.
I hope today's hearing will cast new light on these issues,
and I thank our guests for joining us for the support and
discussion.
Before I yield to the ranking member of the Subcommittee on
Oversight, Mr. Lewis, I ask unanimous consent that all members'
written statements be included in the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And now I yield to Mr. Lewis, the
ranking member of the Oversight Subcommittee.
Mr. LEWIS. I thank the chairman for holding this hearing
today. We both agree that improper payments should not happen.
However, we disagree on how to fix the problem. I believe that
we need to fund the agency. Republican budget cuts harm
beneficiaries, harm taxpayers, and harm the Social Security
Trust Fund. We will see this clearly today. The Republicans'
failure to fund the agency will cost taxpayers more than $200
million in improper payments this year alone. Some now seem
surprised, they seem very surprised, and are here asking the
agency, ``What went wrong? What more needs to be done?''
We and the witnesses all know the answer to these
questions. The agency needs more funding, more money, more
staffing, more resources. It is that simple. The President's
request for next year, if funded, will save taxpayers $9
billion in improper payments over the next decade and up to $58
billion in the long run. We do not need a hearing to learn
this. Therefore, I believe there must be something more. Why
are we having this hearing?
I again, and I have said at each hearing we have held, that
am troubled. I remain concerned by the path of this committee.
I continue to ask, ``Who is next? Who else is on your
list?'' We started this year with seniors and proposals to end
Medicare. The committee then moved to teachers and their
pension, and then to women's health and the uninsured. Last
month the targets were middle-class working families and the
unemployed. Now we have come back to the seniors and added
severely disabled adults and severely disabled children in very
poor families. I am concerned about the people being added to
this list.
Today we are witnessing a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Republican budget cuts are being used to put the Social
Security Administration in a very bad light. The truth is that
the agency's overpayment rate is extremely low. This agency
provides vital payments to over 60 million Americans and
families. One out of four households depends on these programs,
including my friend, your neighbor, and the grandparents who
live up the street. I ask that we all are mindful not to cast
these Americans in a bad light.
I want to thank each and every one of the witnesses for
being here today. Also I thank the employees of the Social
Security Administration for their dedication and for their hard
and good work each and every day.
Mr. Chairman, with that I want to thank you and I yield
back my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I now yield to Mr. Johnson, the chairman
of the Social Security Subcommittee.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Welcome, you guys.
The American people have been told by the trustees for
Social Security and Medicare that these programs are headed
toward insolvency. So when they hear Social Security is owed
billions due to wrongful payments. Americans want, need and
deserve answers. In fiscal year 2009, overpayments totaled $6.5
billion for the retirement, disability, and supplemental
security income, or SSI program, with most in the SSI program.
Worse, these numbers do not reflect lost savings resulting from
Social Security falling behind on eligibility reviews.
These reviews fall into three broad categories: first, so-
called SSI determinations or a periodic review of nondisability
eligibility factors such as income and assets. Social Security
reduced the number of redeterminations by more than 60 percent
between fiscal year 2003 and 2008, resulting in $3.3 billion in
lost program savings in fiscal years 2008 and 2009 according to
the Social Security's inspector general, who is out there.
The second category is work continuing disability reviews,
known as work CDRs, where Social Security checks to see if one
is making too much to remain on disability. Should someone
receiving disability benefits make over $1,000 per month,
referred to as a substantial, gainful activity, they may no
longer qualify. And for the 5-year period ending 2009, wage
errors in the Social Security disability insurance program
counted for nearly $1 billion annually, or about a third of the
total retirement and disability program overpayment error
dollars. Of these errors, two-thirds resulted from a
beneficiary's failure to report their work activity. The other
third were associated with Social Security's failure to timely
complete a work CDR after they were told by beneficiaries that
they had returned to work. As a result it can take months or
years before Social Security sends a notice demanding repayment
of sometimes tens of thousands of dollars of accrued
overpayments. That is kind of crazy.
As we will hear today, if Social Security had better data-
matching capability and completed more reviews of earnings
sooner, payment errors could be resolved more quickly or never
happen in the first place.
Lastly, Social Security has fallen behind reviewing the
medical status of those receiving disability benefits. In
fiscal year 2010, Social Security had a backlog of 1\1/2\
million medical CDRs. When these reviews aren't done on time,
people who no longer qualify will continue to receive benefits
that they don't deserve. Also, these reviews not only provide
savings to Social Security, they also provide savings to
Medicare and Medicaid. In fact, here is how much we stand to
save if they are done on time. For every dollar invested in a
medical CDR, $12 in savings is returned to these programs. The
return on each dollar invested in a work CDR is $15. Reviewing
the asset and income levels of SSI recipients returns $7 for
each dollar spent. In the name of fiscal responsibility that is
time and money well spent.
However, these savings won't be achieved if Social Security
isn't committed, as it should be, to protecting taxpayer
dollars. Recently the President and the Congress were able to
reach a bipartisan agreement on this year's funding for Social
Security's operations. I hope as we seek to achieve a similar
bipartisan result, we will also work together to ensure that
Social Security does all it can to fight waste, fraud, and
abuse. The American taxpayers who foot the bill deserve nothing
less.
Our witnesses today include those on the front lines of
case processing, who represent managers of the State disability
determination services and managers of the local Social
Security offices. We will also hear from the Social Security
inspector general about important work they do in their special
investigative units fighting fraud. We do need answers and I am
counting on all our witnesses to help provide them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Becerra.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this
hearing. Social Security is a sacred compact between Americans
of all generations. It ensures that billions of retirees,
disabled workers, and children can live a life of dignity.
This year 155 million workers will contribute more than
$690 billion in taxes to Social Security, and nearly 56 million
Americans will collect their earned Social Security benefits.
Social Security has never once failed to pay earned benefits on
time and in full, even through 13 recessions, including the
Bush recession we are recently going through. That is a track
record that most would die for and it is the reason Social
Security has the support and trust of the American people.
Some of my colleagues have suggested that Americans' hard-
earned tax contributions to Social Security are not real and
that Social Security is broke. That suggests a fundamental
misunderstanding and misrepresentation of Social Security. The
U.S. Treasury bonds in Social Security's Trust Fund are real,
and the trust fund is $2.7 trillion strong. Yet some insist on
misleading the public about it to support their proposals to
cut guaranteed benefits and take trillions of dollars out of
the trust fund for private accounts. I dare anyone, Mr.
Chairman, who is willing to take this challenge to find a
better all-in-one retirement, disability, and life insurance
plan in the private marketplace that can match Social Security.
The most immediate dangers to Social Security are the
reckless cuts to its operating budget that put at risk its
ability to deliver earned benefits on time in the right amount.
Mr. Chairman, we need to hold an oversight hearing on
Social Security budget. It is long overdue. The nearly $1
billion cut to Social Security's already lean but efficient
operating budget cuts into the bone. Social Security's costs of
operation are already less than 1 percent of its total budget.
Today's hearing topic, preventing improper payments to
safeguard the Social Security Trust Fund, is important; but my
colleagues seem to be ignoring the elephant in the room: You
get what you pay for. And the current budget driven by
Republicans in the House does not fully pay for the Social
Security Administration's efforts to prevent errors.
The Social Security Administration already has a very low
overpayment rate, three-tenths of 1 percent for Social
Security, and about 8 percent for the more complex SSI program.
In 2009 SSA saved $12.50 for every dollar it invested in
continuing disability reviews, which prevent payments to people
who are no longer eligible for benefits. Social Security's
actuary has estimated that if we simply funded the program over
the next 4 years, as the Social Security Administration has
proposed, the American taxpayer and Social Security would save
$58 billion.
But the Republican budget for fiscal year 2011 froze Social
Security's funding for program integrity. And the House
Republican fiscal year 2012 budget would cut the Social
Security Administration's operating budget a total of some $10
billion over the next decade. That is penny-wise and pound-
foolish. These budget cuts, like privatization schemes, put
Social Security's Trust Fund and the tax contributions of
millions of current and future beneficiaries in jeopardy. They
also handcuff Social Security in its efforts to protect the
trust fund and Americans' contributions by detecting and
preventing overpayments, the very stated purpose of today's
hearing.
Mr. Chairman, let me once again publicly request that this
Committee on Ways and Means, through its subcommittee of
jurisdiction, perform its constitutional duty of oversight over
the budget of Social Security. Rather than just nibble around
the edges, let us let the sun shine on every aspect of Social
Security's budget so that all Americans witness for themselves
what is going on with Social Security's funding.
Mr. Chairman, thank you and I look forward to hearing the
witnesses. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Now I would like to welcome our
witnesses. And thank you for being patient. We had a series of
votes that got us off to a late start.
First we have Ms. Carolyn Colvin, Deputy Commissioner for
the Social Security Administration. Welcome.
We have Mr. Patrick O'Carroll who is the Inspector General
for the Social Security Administration. Mr. O'Carroll, welcome.
Mr. Dan Bertoni is Director for Education, Workforce, and
Income Security Issues at the Government Accountability Office.
Welcome, sir.
Ms. Ann Robert, who is the Deputy Director for the Bureau
of Disability Determination Services for the Illinois
Department of Human Services, and is here today on behalf of
the National Council of Disability Determination Directors,
welcome.
And Mr. Joseph, is it Dirago or Dirago?
Mr. DIRAGO. Dirago.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Dirago, who is President of the National
Council of Social Security Management Associations.
I want to thank you all for being with us today. We look
forward to your testimony. You will each have 5 minutes to
present your testimony, which is our customary approach, with
your full written testimony submitted for the record.
Ms. Colvin, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CAROLYN COLVIN, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER,
SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. COLVIN. Thank you. Chairman Johnson, Chairman Boustany,
Ranking Member Becerra, Ranking Member Lewis and Members of the
Subcommittees, thank you for inviting me to discuss our efforts
to ensure the accuracy of our benefit payments. I am SSA's
deputy commissioner and the agency accountable official for
improper payments.
We pay nearly $60 billion in benefits to almost 60 million
people each month. We are committed to making those payments
timely and accurately. Minimizing improper payments is so
important that we made preserving the public's trust in our
programs one of our four strategic goals.
We have worked hard to improve our payment accuracy, but we
cannot maintain our recent success without adequate resources
that will allow us to do the work for which we are responsible.
Our complex programs require knowledgeable and experienced
employees to analyze cases, make decisions, and implement
changes.
The same employees who conduct our program integrity
initiatives also make determinations on SSI, retirement, and
disability applications and handle a wide variety of other
responsibilities.
Our employees are our best defense against improper
payments, and all of the SSI discussed today depends on having
an adequate number of well-trained staff to keep up with our
work, which has surged in the last few years and continues to
increase.
We have been innovative and proactive in adopting
strategies to allow us to meet the challenges we face. Our
information technology resources have been critical to our
success. For example, in fiscal year 2010, we reduced the time
it takes to get a hearing decision to the lowest point in 5
years. Currently the average wait for a hearing decision is
below 1 year for the first time since 2003. We kept pending
initial disability claims significantly below our goal, and
achieved the lowest average speed of answer and busy rates on
our 800 number since we began keeping statistics nearly a
decade ago.
We increased the accuracy of our SSI payments in fiscal
year 2009 and fiscal year 2010. We continue to increase on-line
claims with nearly 40 percent of retirement claims and about 31
percent of disability claims currently filed on line through
our highly regarded Internet site. I am happy to report that in
fiscal year 2010, 99.6 percent of our OASDI payments were free
of overpayments.
The supplemental security income, or SSI, program is more
complex, and our overpayment accuracy rate for the program
reflects that complexity. Still, with the increase in SSI
redeterminations we have improved. In fiscal year 2008 our SSI
overpayment accuracy rate was 89.7 percent. In fiscal year 2009
we raised it to 91.6 percent. And we continue this positive
trend in fiscal year 2010 by increasing it to 93.3 percent, the
highest it has been since 2005.
Our most valuable tools to maintain the integrity of our
programs are continuing disability reviews, or CDRs, and SSI
redeterminations. We estimate that every dollar invested in
CDRs yields at least $10 in lifetime program savings, including
savings accruing to Medicare and Medicaid. Every dollar spent
on SSI redeterminations yields more than $7 in program savings
over 10 years, including savings accruing to Medicaid.
We use technology to help us prevent and detect improper
payments. For example, unreported financial accounts and wages
are the major causes of improper payments in the SSI program.
Therefore, we have developed a process called access to
financial institutions, or AFI, to electronically identify
financial accounts of SSI applicants and recipients. We plan to
complete AFI rollout to all States by the end of this month.
After 2013 when AFI is fully implemented, we project that AFI
could yield a $20 return for every dollar invested.
We also made the SSI wage reporting process more efficient
and user friendly by implementing an automated system to report
wages over the telephone. This system automatically updates our
records, which increases accuracy and saves beneficiaries and
our employees time.
Before I close, I want to mention our hard-working,
dedicated employees who are the real key to maintaining the
American public's trust in our program. Our employees continue
to provide exemplary service and increase their productivity
despite record-setting increases in our workloads.
Equally important to our success is adequate and sustained
funding to carry out our vitally important program integrity
work. We have proven that when you invest in us we produce
results.
We appreciate your past support for our agency and our
programs and look forward to your continued support. I am happy
to answer any questions you have. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Commission Colvin.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Colvin follows:]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. O'Carroll, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE PATRICK P. O'CARROLL, JR., INSPECTOR
GENERAL, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. O'CARROLL. Good afternoon, Chairman Boustany, Chairman
Johnson, Ranking Member Lewis, Ranking Member Becerra and
members of both subcommittees. Thank you for the invitation to
testify today.
SSA administers about $60 billion in benefits to almost 60
million beneficiaries every month. Payment accuracy is of
paramount importance to the agency. SSA and agencies across
government have increased efforts to reduce improper payments,
particularly since Congress passed the Improper Payments
Elimination and Recovery Act, or IPERA.
With a history of identifying SSA's improper payments
through audits and investigations, my office was asked by the
IG community to assume a leadership role with OMB and the
Treasury Department on implementing IPERA and the President's
Executive Order.
For fiscal year 2009, SSA estimated improper payments
totaling $8 billion. The agency estimated overpayments of $2.6
billion for its Retirement, Survivors and Disability Insurance
program, and $600 million in underpayments. Its SSI program had
an estimated $4 billion in overpayments and $800 million in
underpayments.
SSA seeks to improve payment accuracy in both programs. The
agency set up plans to commit nearly $800 million towards
program integrity this year, with an emphasis on tools such as
continuing disability reviews, or CDRs, and SSI
redeterminations.
SSA considers overpayments unavoidable if the law requires
the payments to be made. In other words, the agency does not
consider improper any payments it makes to a beneficiary who
would have been ineligible if SSA had conducted a CDR when it
came due. However, we believe these payments should be part of
the discussion about SSA's payment accuracy, because these
payments should not have been made and cannot be recouped.
SSA projects a backlog of about 1.4 million medical CDRs at
the end of fiscal year 2011. Our audit work has found the
agency would have avoided paying hundreds of millions of
dollars to ineligible beneficiaries if CDRs and SSI
redeterminations were conducted when they were due. SSA must
utilize any and all tools that can prevent payment errors
before they occur.
My office for years has encouraged SSA to use data matching
to protect agency funds. To reduce SSI overpayments, OIG
recommended that SSA obtain a beneficiary's bank account
information and access other private databases rather than rely
on self-reporting. In recent years SSA implemented the Access
to Financial Institutions project which allows the agency to
check an applicant or recipient's bank account to verify
resources.
We have also made other data-matching recommendations to
SSA involving potential matches of beneficiary information to
marital status, workers compensation and vehicle ownership
records. We are also pursuing an exemption from the Computer
Matching and Privacy Protection Act to facilitate the OIG's
work in this area.
Our support for stewardship activities has never wavered.
IPERA allows an IG to use a percentage of money collected from
recovery of audits of the IG's agency. Unfortunately, SSA has
determined that benefit overpayments from its trust fund in the
SSI program are not covered under IPERA. The provision only
applies to audits of SSA's administrative budget, which
represents only 1 percent of the total budget. Therefore, we
continue to pursue the establishment of self-supporting fund
for integrity initiatives, such as our Cooperative Disability
Investigations program, and CDRs and redeterminations.
In conclusion, SSA has made strides to comply with the
request to report its improper payments, identify causes, and
allocate resources to prevent future errors. We encourage the
agency to commit to stewardship activities to prevent improper
and unnecessary payments.
My office will continue to work with your subcommittees and
SSA in these and future efforts to improve payment accuracy in
SSA's benefit programs. Thank you again for the invitation to
testify today and I will be happy to answer questions.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. O'Carroll.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Carroll follows:]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Bertoni, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF DAN BERTONI, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION, WORKFORCE, AND
INCOME SECURITY ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. BERTONI. Mr. Chairman, ranking members, Members of the
Subcommittees, good afternoon. I am pleased to discuss our work
on overpayments in SSA's disability insurance program, which
paid over $120 billion in benefits last year. The program has
grown substantially in recent years and is poised for further
growth as the baby-boom generation ages and places additional
strain on the DI Trust Fund. Thus it is important that SSA
maintain a robust process to detect and recover program
overpayments.
My testimony summarizes our ongoing work and focuses on the
extent to which SSA makes and ultimately recovers work-related
overpayments and program policies and vulnerabilities that may
contribute to overpayments.
In summary, DI program overpayment detections grew from
about $860 million in 2001 to about $1.4 million last year. Our
review and SSA's own estimates suggest that most overpayments
are due to unreported earnings that exceed program limits. If
beneficiaries return to work and do not notify SSA,
overpayments can accrue, and in 49 of 60 randomly selected
cases we reviewed there was no indication that beneficiaries
had reported work and earnings as required.
While SSA recovered over $800 million in overpayments last
year, repayment by beneficiaries can take decades, and total
outstanding debt carried on SSA's books currently exceeds $5
billion. Despite its policy to request full repayment within 36
months SSA lacked agency-wide performance goals for timely debt
recovery, and does not require supervisory review and approval
of repayment plans exceeding 3 years. Our case file review
shows that such plans frequently exceeded 20 years, with one
plan extending over 200 years to recover a $27,000 overpayment.
We also found that for repayment plans extending beyond
2049 SSA's tracking system does not reflect the total balance
due the agency, and as the years pass this underreporting will
likely become more significant.
Work continuing disability reviews, or work CDRs, are a
primary tool for SSA to identify work activity and earnings.
However, it relies on IRS earnings data that can be more than a
year old when received and matched against SSA's rolls,
allowing overpayments to accrue for extended periods. Managers
and staff at all four processing centers cited aged data as a
major obstacle to limiting the occurrence and size of
overpayments. Moreover, in the cases we reviewed, earnings data
was already between 6 and 26 months old when received by SSA.
In prior work we have recommended that SSA seek more timely
data sources, such as the National Directory of New Hires, or
NDNH, which includes quarterly wage information and is used by
several Federal programs to detect and prevent overpayments.
Despite acknowledging a potential positive return by using the
directory, SSA does not use it for large-scale data-matching
with its DI beneficiary rolls due to concerns about the
potential workloads it could generate.
Beyond earnings time limit issues, we found that work CDRs
are not initiated by SSA staff for many months after receiving
the initial IRS alert. In the 60 cases we reviewed the median
time they were pending development after the alert was received
was 7 months, with one case lingering more than 15 months. For
about a third of all cases, individuals were overpaid an
additional 18 months or more due to delays in starting the work
CDR.
SSA officials told us the staff shortages and competing
workloads, such as initial claims and medical CDRs, are among
the factors delaying work CDR processing. We also found that
SSA lacks formal performance goals for days work CDR cases on
pending development or days taken to process them, although it
has established similar goals for the medical CDR process. In
the absence of such goals, cases can go unworked for extended
periods, and we found considerable variation in processing
times at the four centers visited, ranging from 82 days to
nearly 1,000 days and resulting in combined overpayments of
over $1 million.
Within the last year SSA has begun to better track work CDR
completions, prioritize IRS alerts with a greater likelihood of
larger overpayments and improved processing center procedures
for initiating and completing CDRs. While these and other
initiatives represent positive steps, it is too early to assess
what impact it may ultimately have on overpayment detection and
recovery.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I am happy to
answer any questions that you or other Members of the
Committees may have.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Bertoni.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bertoni follows:]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Robert, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF ANN P. ROBERT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF
DISABILITY DETERMINATION SERVICES, ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN
SERVICES, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF DISABILITY
DETERMINATION DIRECTORS, SPRINGFIELD, ILLINOIS

Ms. ROBERT. Chairman Boustany, Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Lewis, Ranking Member Becerra, my name is Ann Robert and
I am pleased to be here today to testify about the role of the
DDSs relative to SSA's payment accuracy. I am here to testify
on behalf of the National Council of Disability Determination
Directors, which is a professional association consisting of
the managers and the directors of the Disability Determination
Services located in each State, also in the District of
Columbia and Puerto Rico.
The DDSs are State agencies that are 100 percent federally
funded by SSA. They employ 14,500 full-time State employees and
they process over 4.3 million disability claims under the
Social Security Act annually. The DDSs partner with Social
Security to provide public service to individuals applying for
disability. DDSs recognize the benefits of program integrity
and assist SSA with this program integrity by adjudicating the
continuing disability reviews. The purpose of the continuing
disability review is to determine whether or not an individual
continues to be eligible for benefits. This is a very complex
process, and in the DDS can be a multiphase process. SSA
estimates that every dollar spent will generate $10 in lifetime
savings. This is a cost-effective workload and certainly has a
significant return on investment.
Fiscal year to date, DDS has had accuracy of its workload
of 98 percent. But this workload cannot be done without
sufficient staff in the DDS. From the beginning of fiscal year
2011 to present, the DDSs nationally have an attrition rate of
12.8 percent in their disability examiners and an overall staff
attrition rate of 10.3 percent. SSA imposed a hiring freeze in
early fiscal year 2011. The attrition of trained examiners and
the inability to hire will severely limit the ability of the
DDSs to process initial cases, reconsideration cases, to work
additional CDRs, and will result in significant backlogs
nationally.
We thank you for the increased funding that you provided in
the past for the initial--for the escalated initial case
workload. Funding of the CDR work, however, was not sufficient
and the backlog continues to grow. Funding the various
workloads to provide a balance of program service and
stewardship is challenging at best, and more difficult in these
economic times. DDS staff are to be commended on their
dedication to public service and their hard work. These staff
remain flexible and committed to all workloads, working
diligently to meet all SSA workload targets.
One example was when SSA was funded by Congress in 1996 for
a 7-year plan to eliminate the CDR backlog. At that time SSA
authorized the DDSs to hire, and they did so. The 7-year plan
allowed for an incremental increase in the CDRs, so that plan
and the ability to hire allowed the DDSs to complete that
workload. SSA, with the assistance of the DDSs, successfully
completed that plan.
The CDR process begins with SSA. SSA determines the number
of CDR cases to be worked by the DDS each year. And those cases
that require a full medical review are sent to the DDS.
Although case adjudication is a complex task, the CDR review
requires a side-by-side analysis of the prior allowance with
the current medical evidence typically, in most DDSs, requiring
the expertise of a senior examiner. If medical improvement is
documented along with the beneficiary's ability to work, the
CDR will be ceased.
If the beneficiary appeals, that CDR will come back to the
DDS for a second review. If that case is not reversed, the CDR
can come back to the DDS a third time to a disability hearing
officer who will conduct a face-to-face hearing.
The increasing complexity of the disability program
criteria require approximately 12 to 18 months for an initial
examiner to become productive and independent. Attrition at the
DDS is critical in 11 DDSs experiencing more than 20 percent
attrition rate with their examiners since the beginning of
fiscal year 2011.
SSA and DDS need sufficient funding for hiring to balance
workloads, to provide public service and stewardship. Without
such funds the DDSs will be unable to maintain the current
level of accuracy and production for all workloads. Those most
vulnerable will suffer.
DDS has recognized Commissioner Astrue for his leadership
during these unprecedented times and commits to work with SSA
on a plan that can accomplish all those workloads.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present testimony,
and I would be happy to answer any questions.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Ms. Robert.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Robert follows:]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Dirago, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH DIRAGO, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
SOCIAL SECURITY MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIONS, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. DIRAGO. Chairmen Boustany and Johnson, Ranking Members
Lewis and Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittees, I am Joe
Dirago, the President of the National Council Social Security
Management Associations, NCSSMA, and the District Manager of
the Social Security office in Newburgh, New York. I appreciate
this opportunity to speak on behalf of 3,400 Social Security
managers in field offices and teleservice centers around the
country.
NCSSMA shares the concerns expressed about improving SSA's
payment accuracy. It is fitting that this hearing is held on
Flag Day, a symbol of our country's vigilance and perseverance.
Social Security has persevered as the safety net of America for
76 years. We ask that Congress be vigilant about ensuring that
this great program remain strong to address its stewardship
responsibilities and maintain service levels vital to millions
of Americans.
Appropriations for SSA are an excellent investment and
return on taxpayer dollars. With the additional funding
provided by Congress in recent years, significant progress was
made with program integrity initiatives which yield $7 to
$12.50 in savings for every dollar invested.
Despite workload increases, our 2011 appropriation was
below the 2010 level. This has resulted in a hiring freeze, a
drastic reduction of overtime hours, and postponements of
efficiency improvements. Public service repercussions are being
felt throughout offices as they experience tremendous pressure
to process growing workloads with diminished resources.
A California manager says: We handle close to 2,000
visitors a week. Recent retirement losses are affecting the
service we provide and we cannot interview the public fast
enough. As field office employees are responsible for
interviewing the public, answering the telephones, processing
claims, and working critical program integrity cases, service
is eroding.
An Alabama manager says: Waiting times and backlogs are
increasing and we do not have sufficient staff to reverse the
trend. Unless we can hire, the backlogs will continue to grow
and service to the public will deteriorate. Most of SSA has
been under a hiring freeze, and this will result in the loss of
over 3,500 employees in 2011. Because attrition is not even,
some offices are becoming severely understaffed.
A Kansas manager says: My office has lost seven employees
in the last 6 months, with no replacements. I have 16
individuals on staff eligible for retirement. The thought of a
2-year hiring freeze is terrifying and additional losses would
be devastating. We have a highly skilled but aging workforce,
with 23 percent of our employees eligible to retire today.
Because it takes about 2 years to train a new hire, significant
concerns exist about the loss of institutional knowledge.
Increased workloads, coupled with staffing reductions, are
not a formula for payment accuracy. Employees are forced to
work at an accelerated rate which compromises quality. There is
little time for training, mentoring, and quality reviews, which
translates to payment errors.
NCSSMA supports investments to ensure accurate payments,
but SSA's capacity is directly impacted by its funding levels.
Fewer SSI redeterminations and medical CDRs were completed from
2006 to 2008 due to inadequate funding. Increased
appropriations in 2009 and 2010 allowed us to process
substantially more program integrity workloads, yielding about
$6 billion in savings each year. Program integrity activities
included in the 2012 budget request would yield over $9 billion
in savings by completing 2.6 million SSI redeterminations and
592,000 medical CDRs.
We sincerely appreciate your interest in the vital services
Social Security provides, and we certainly recognize the
difficult budget environment. However, Social Security touches
the lives of nearly every American family and sufficient
resources are necessary. NCSSMA respectfully requests your
support of full funding of the President's 2012 SSA budget on
behalf of our agency and the American public that we serve.
We also request your support for dedicated funding to
improve payment accuracy. This will allow SSA to process its
core workloads, accomplish program integrity initiative, and
save taxpayer dollars.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify at this hearing
and for consideration of our recommendations.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Dirago.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dirago follows:]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Now we will proceed with questions, and
I will begin.
Mr. O'Carroll, in your testimony you said--this was in your
written testimony--Federal agencies reported $125 billion in
improper payments during fiscal year 2010 alone. And just to
put that number in perspective that is $4,000 every second,
nearly $15 million every hour. And the Office of Inspector
General has estimated that Social Security overpaid $8 billion
in fiscal year 2009. But this number does not include a host of
other overpayments.
Can you provide more detail on these other overpayments to
give us a better sense of the scale of this problem?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Chairman. What we are using is that SSA
has reported about a 3.2 percent overpayment rate. And that
includes overpayments that are avoidable and unavoidable.
What we are saying is SSA should consider both the
avoidable ones and the unavoidable. Unavoidable ones occur when
SSA doesn't conduct a CDR when scheduled, that amount of money
keeps building, as is the backlog on CDRs right now.
And we believe that if you start including that amount, it
will bring the rate up from 3.2 percent up to as high as 5.2
percent. When you have to make payments at a certain time, when
a check goes out, and then we find out or SSA finds out later
that the person was deceased and that amount of money went out,
we believe, whether it was by law that it went out or by
accident, it is still money that should be recouped.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank you. At the end of fiscal year
2010, Social Security was owed over $15 billion because of past
benefit overpayments. How does this relate to the agency's
reporting of $8 billion in improper payments, and how old is
most of that debt?
Mr. O'Carroll, do you want to start with that?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. SSA every year is either
unable to collect debt or writes it off, and that is a big
portion of the debt. That written-off debt happens every year,
and that is cumulative. And what we are saying is that when you
take the written-off debt, plus the debt from overpayments and
you add it together, that is where you are getting up into the
double digits in terms of overpayments.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Colvin, would you comment on that?
Ms. COLVIN. By law there are some situations where we do
not consider a payment and overpayment. For instance, if
someone appeals a decision, during the time that they are
waiting for that decision to be resolved, they may be
accumulating an overpayment if that appeal is found in our
favor versus the beneficiary's. So that amount of money that
will have accumulated would not be considered overpayment under
the law. However, we still would be notifying the individual of
the overpayment and we would make collection attempts.
There are also other situations where if we apply the
retirement earnings test and we anticipate that an individual
will be earning a certain amount of money and therefore their
benefit is based on that amount, and then at the end of the
year we find that the person made more money than we
anticipated, so part of that might have been overpayment,
again, by law, that is not considered to be an improper
payment, but we do attempt to make the collection.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Right, I understand what the law says.
What we are trying to get at is the magnitude of the problem,
given the situation with solvency issues going forward with
Social Security, and that is why I am directing the question
along those lines. Of the outstanding debt, how much does
Social Security write off each year?
Ms. COLVIN. The amount is about--I am sorry, just a minute.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. O'Carroll, do you want to comment?
Mr. O'CARROLL. I believe $980 million is the write-off
every year, just shy of $1 billion. Is that what your figures
were showing?
Ms. COLVIN. Yes. It is a small amount compared to the
amount that we collect. The amount that we write off is
generally a result of an individual not being able to make the
payment, and it is a very small percentage. I was trying to get
the exact dollar amount, and I will provide it to you a little
bit later.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank you. I will now yield to the
ranking member, Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me thank
each of the witnesses who testified.
Ms. Colvin, this seems like a very simple issue before us.
Let me make sure that I am not missing something. In 2008 and
2009, for every $1 we spent making sure that people receiving a
disability benefit are still disabled, we saved $12.50; is that
right?
Ms. COLVIN. Our data reflects that for every $1 that we
spend on CDRs we are returning $10 for every $1.
Mr. LEWIS. So I am in the neighborhood?
Ms. COLVIN. Yes. And for the redeterminations in the SSI
program, it is $7 for every $1 spent over a 10-year period.
But we also have a number of tools that we have been able
to develop that will allow us to address some of the improper
payments. The AFI system that I mentioned in my testimony that
would allow us to be able to verify financial accounts that
have been identified for SSI recipients or detect accounts that
have not been reported, we estimate that when that system is
fully rolled out in 2013 there will be a $20 return for every
$1 invested. So we believe that the investment in program
integrity work is a good investment and that it is very cost-
effective.
Mr. LEWIS. Now, if we cut the budget further, like the
Republicans plan to do, Social Security will do a full
disability review; is that right?
Ms. COLVIN. That is correct.
Mr. LEWIS. Can you explain what is right about that?
Ms. COLVIN. Well, the same people that do initial claims
and other responsible workloads, or workloads that we have
responsibility for, are the same people that do the CDRs and
the redeterminations. So whenever there is a reduction in the
funds that we receive, that means that we have got to balance
those workloads further.
So if you just look at the $1 billion cut that we have had
for 2011, we have had a freeze on for the entire funding
period. And when you have that freeze and you are losing senior
people--and as one of the speakers indicated it is the seasoned
examiners that do the redeterminations of the CDRs--as you are
losing them, then you are going to--and do not have the ability
to replace them, that is going to impact the number of CDRs
that we are going to be able to do.
We are budgeted for CDRs this year. We have in fact, if I
look at the numbers, we are looking at doing 329,000 medical
CDRs in 2011. With full funding in 2012, which would be what
the President's budget would provide, we would look to do
492,000 medical CDRs. So we will be able to do more with more
funding. Just as we did the 329,000 medical CDRs that we will
be doing in 2011, if we get less funds that means we will do
less than that amount. So the resources that we receive tie
directly into the number of CDRs that we guess that we are able
to do.
Mr. LEWIS. So if I understand this correctly, cutting the
budget will mean more payments will be made to people who
should not receive them; am I right?
Ms. COLVIN. That is correct.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, this all seems very simple to me. If you
do not want improper payments, do not cut the budget. Am I
missing something?
Ms. COLVIN. No, I don't think that you are. The most
effective tool that we have for addressing overpayments is our
CDRs. When we do CDRs we are able to identify incorrect
payments. As was mentioned before, the largest or the major
contributing factor to overpayments in CDRs are unreported
wages. And if we have not in fact joined the CDRs, then we are
in fact going to have individuals--I am sorry, our SGA, the
substantial gainful activity. If we are not doing those CDRs we
are not going to identify that people are in fact being paid
that are not entitled to the benefits; or if we do the medical
CDRs, if we don't do those we are not going to identify that
the people who now are able to return to work because their
disability would allow them to do substantial gainful activity.
So we are going to have people on the rolls who should not be
on the rolls.
It has been demonstrated that the more redets we do, the
higher our accuracy rate is. The more CDRs that we do, the
fewer improper payments we have.
Mr. LEWIS. Ms. Colvin, Republican budget cuts harm
beneficiaries. There are tens of millions of people who depend
on your agency and a million more waiting for benefits. Who are
these people? In your experience are they honest people? What
type of disability do these people have? Who are the programs
designed to help?
Ms. COLVIN. I think you know that our programs are very
complex. We find that these are people who may not have
reported their earnings because it is a very difficult program
to understand, and they may in fact not have reported it
timely. There are other situations where the timing----
Chairman BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time is up. If you could
wrap up your answer on this.
Ms. COLVIN. I would say that these are not fraudulent
cases, these are improper payments. And there is a difference
between fraud and improper payments.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. The chair now
recognizes the chairman of the Social Security Subcommittee,
Mr. Johnson.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. O'Carroll, I think cooperative disability investigation
units are the key to reducing fraud in the Social Security
program; would you agree?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. And it is better to catch potential
payments on the front end rather than paying them and trying to
chase bad payments afterwards.
Can you tell us how these units operate, the success your
office has had for the prosecution and fraud perpetration, and
how these units might be better used to prevent improper Social
Security payments?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We are very proud of our
CDI program. It is sort of a hybrid in that we have DDS
employees, we have State employees, we have SSA employees, we
have IG investigators and we have State investigators, and we
work in conjunction with DDSs so that when there is suspected
fraud at the applicant level, it is brought to our attention,
we review it, we use databases to determine whether or not the
person has resources, whether or not the person is showing any
work activity or other issues, and then we do surveillance.
And what we are finding with this initiative is we are able
to prevent the funds or the benefits from being awarded, so
there is no need to recapture lost money; it is just stopping
payments at the front end. It is also a very good deterrent. We
have CDI Units in a number of cities, some of which are
represented by the members of this committee. And at the
moment, we are at 23 CDI units in 21 States. And our return on
investment on them is anywhere from about $12 to $14 to $1. It
is rather inexpensive to set it up, but the deterrent factor is
dramatic.
And we have got the word out, because we have seen videos
on YouTube and other places saying, ``Don't commit fraud
against Social Security or one of the fraud investigative units
will catch you.'' So it is working quite well.
Chairman JOHNSON. Are we implementing technology as much as
we can? It seems to me we got too many people with their finger
in the pie.
Mr. O'CARROLL. I think the solution to the problems we are
talking about today is technology. What we are finding is that,
when you or I walk into a store, pretty much the vendor knows
everything about us when we are doing that transaction. We,
with our government recources, should have that same type of
information and we should be using that in our decisions,
whether somebody does show gainful activity, whether somebody
is working when they are not, and what their resources are.
We found, as an example, by using just regular databases to
verify property owned by people that are receiving SSI
benefits, that we are able to identify that they have
resources, they have property, et cetera.
And we found, by using just that database, there is about
an $8 to $1 return on investment there. So I am thinking in the
long range with SSA, there has got to be a lot more technology
put into place.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes, I agree. You have made a number of
recommendations that would help reduce the total amount of
overpayments over the past 5 years. The monetary impact of
those recommendations total over $9 billion.
Would you tell us what a few examples of those
recommendations are and why they haven't been implemented?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Our biggest job, Mr. Chairman, is make sure
SSA strikes a balance between service and stewardship. So a lot
of our audit work deals with the number of CDRs, whether the
CDR backlog is increasing, whether they are conducting the
right proportion of CDRs for 18 year olds, and adults. We are
constantly watching that balance, and we are identifying where
money could be saved.
On the other side of it with our investigations, we are
taking a look at those who are taking advantage of the
helpless, in terms of bad rep payees that are supposedly
watching out for the benefits of those in their care. We are
taking a look at those that are defrauding the programs and
claiming that they are disabled when they are not. So we have a
very good record there.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yeah, you do.
Ms. Colvin, how does the Social Security Administration
decide whether to implement one of the inspector general's
recommendations or not? Nine billion dollars is a lot of money
to be left on the table.
Ms. COLVIN. The overriding factor relative to whether or
not we implement a recommendation would be a resource issue.
However, we have implemented a number of major technology
systems which have been very effective in helping us to detect
and prevent improper payments. I mentioned the automated
financial--the financial system, the AFI, the access to
financial institutions.
Ms. COLVIN. We also have the SSI Wage Telephone Reporting
project, which allows individuals to call in and report their
wages. We have a number of different tools that have been
developed over the years, and we are continuing to look at ways
of automating even more of what we do. But clearly it is a
balance between the resources to do direct services----
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, you are listening to the IG when he
talks to you, right?
Ms. COLVIN. Oh, yes, I think that many of the
recommendations have been very valid recommendations.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the ranking member of the Social
Security Subcommittee Mr. Becerra.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
of you for your testimony.
It seems to me this is boiling down to an issue of
resources. Does anyone here claim that in your work or in your
investigations, employees at the Social Security Administration
who are conducting these redeterminations or these disability
reviews are lazy? Does anyone claim that they are--these
employees are incompetent? Would anybody here raise their hand
and say that they are overworked and have a massive caseload to
work with on these disability reviews? Okay.
So it is resources. So it is what you put in helps
determine what you get out. And, Mr. Chairman, I have a couple
of charts I am hoping that we can put up on the screens. One is
a budget for medical continuing disability reviews, and the
second will be one for SSI income reviews. If I could get those
up in a second, or right now, if we could put them up.
It seems to me that if we make the investments we need to
let these reviews go forward, we are not just doing right by
Americans who paid into the system so they could collect on
their benefits, but we are also saving the taxpayers money.
Commissioner Colvin, let me ask you this. My understanding
is that the chief actuary for Social Security has said that if
we make the modest investments in these review programs that
you have in place, these integrity review programs, that over
the course of 10 years, you could save the taxpayers somewhere
around $58 billion. Is that still accurate?
Ms. COLVIN. Well, clearly, from the data that we have
already provided, we have demonstrated that an investment in
program integrity activities returns significant dollars to the
taxpayers. The challenge for us is having adequate and
sustained funding, because the same people who do the CDRs and
the redets also do the initial claims.
Mr. BECERRA. So let me have you take a look at the chart,
that--I don't know if you could see the charts on the screen,
it might be difficult for you to see, but essentially what it
shows that in years when we budgeted money for medical
continuing disability reviews, the CDRs, your employees
performed at pretty high rates. And the moment you saw funding
for the review program drop, so did the number of reviews you
could do.
And so input in, output out. And if you don't have the
resources, folks who were already overworked are going to have
a hard time producing the results, which it is not just a
matter of producing the results on these reviews, it is not
saving the taxpayer money the way we know can if we do these
reviews. So we give people what they deserve, but no more than
what they deserve.
Let me ask another question. Mr. O'Carroll, I know that you
have mentioned that there is some $8 billion or so in
overpayments. If I were to say to you there are $300 billion in
overpayments in Social Security, I suspect that you would be
here every day telling us we have got to do something, right?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Correct.
Mr. BECERRA. I am going to ask for another chart to be put
up called--that I have labeled ``Social Security Overpayment
Rate Versus Major Weapons Systems Cost Overrun Rates.'' I don't
know if you can see this.
Mr. O'CARROLL. I am not the IG at Defense, Mr. Becerra.
Mr. BECERRA. Yes, I know you are not the IG of Defense, but
what we are being told is that some $300 billion in a Pentagon
budget of some $700 billion is being spent on cost overruns and
programs that have been over the years costing us far more than
we have had or than we thought we would have to spend.
Now, if you take a look to the far left of that chart, you
see the overpayments from the Social Security Administration,
their retirement survivor benefits portion and the Social
Security disability portion. And to the right you see Army,
Navy and Air Force and their cost overruns. Now, again, you are
not the IG for DOD, but I would think that if we are going to
spend this much time trying to help you figure out what we can
do to reduce the overpayments in Social Security, that we would
want to spend some time taking a look at DOD when we see the
massive amount in cost overruns that we see daily at Department
of Defense.
Mr. O'CARROLL. The best way to answer that, Mr. Becerra, is
that it's important to look at the overpayments across
government. When you are looking at Defense, you should also
look at all the other departments. Quite frankly, we do reach a
level at SSA that it is of concern, and that is why we are
paying so much attention to improper payments. I think
everybody is in agreement there.
Mr. BECERRA. And I think everyone agrees we should be doing
that. But I hope that what we do is go after the big fish and
not just after the little fish, because if we recall, most of
these programs that we are talking about under Social Security
are for folks who are elderly or are disabled.
Mr. Chairman, the final point I will make is this. We have
heard that if you invest a dollar in these program integrity
initiatives with SSA, you save $12.50. If I were to ask you how
much money would you have today if you invested a dollar today,
at the very beginning of Google's public offering how much
would you have, the answer would be $5.
So if you think Google is a good bet, so is investing in
SSA's program integrity initiatives.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Certainly we have no jurisdiction over defense spending,
but I hope the appropriate committee is doing vigorous
oversight as these subcommittees are doing. So I thank the
gentleman.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Buchanan for questions.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yes. I would like to thank the chairman for
convening these hearings, and I would like to thank all of our
witnesses for being here today. I represent one of the most
heavy senior districts. We have 300,000 seniors 55 and older
and 200,000 65 and older, so this is an extremely important
issue to my constituents, and I know that it is a big issue. We
want to do all we can to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse so
that we can focus on eliminating backlogs in the system.
This is a general question for the witnesses, anybody who
would like to respond. Is there a particular region in the
United States with unusual high rate of fraud and abuse, and if
there is, or if you have identified a certain region or two,
what are we doing about targeting fraud in that general region?
Ms. Colvin, do you have an answer?
Ms. COLVIN. I don't believe that I can answer that question
relative to a specific region. I would be happy to research
that and provide an answer for the record.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. O'Carroll.
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, sir. We have one of the largest fraud
or antifraud hotlines in government, and we receive about
150,000 calls a year in relation to fraud. We monitor it very
carefully. We look at trend analysis. We are constantly
watching what areas are reporting potential fraud. But it is
not an easy answer in terms of saying that, any one area is
worse than any other. It has a lot to do with the demographics
and also how the U.S. Attorney's Offices prioritize
prosecutions, et cetera.
But I think we have got a fairly good handle on where the
fraud is against SSA. We dedicate as many resources as we can
in the Office of Inspector General to be out in the field, and
we are constantly going to SSA's offices, meeting with them,
asking for trends in their area, and giving them advice on
antifraud initiatives.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Part of the reason I asked the question is
in--for example, in Florida, in Medicare, Miami and Dade
Counties, for example, seems to be much higher than the balance
of the State, it is my understanding, someone mentioned to me.
So, Mr. Bertoni, do you have any comments on that?
Mr. BERTONI. On an engagement-specific basis we may
identify areas that look to be areas where there is more fraud,
waste or abuse. But, again, it is not fraud until somebody
has--there has been a conviction. From time to time, depending
on the job we are doing, though, we may go down to certain
areas where there are hard concentrations of individuals in a
particular program.
We do spend a considerable amount of time in Florida, in
Texas, in New York, in California, but it is not specifically
because we are chasing fraud and abuse, but it is where much of
the use is.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Ms. Robert, do you have anything to add to
that, any thoughts on that, about certain parts of the country
is more challenging than others in terms of fraud and abuse?
Ms. ROBERT. No, we don't have any information on that. I
think Mr. O'Carroll mentioned earlier the CDI units, those are
located in 21 States, and certainly our efforts to try to
address fraud and abuse.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Ms. Colvin, let me ask you, it is my
understanding that the Social Security Administration has been
growing their on-line system for new retirees in terms of new
applications. Do you believe the on-line electronic system will
help us reduce fraud, or do you think it will open us up for
more fraud?
Ms. COLVIN. I believe that on-line services are important.
It is what the public expects. I don't believe that if we do it
correctly, that there would be any greater emphasis of fraud
than we would have without the on-line. In fact, I think that
probably at times it would demonstrate that we probably would
have less, but I don't enough data to be able to tell you the
answer to that.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. Dirago, one quick question. My district,
as I mentioned, is one of the oldest districts. As you can
imagine, I get a lot of seniors that come into our offices. We
have two offices in our region. And in terms of the help line,
the feedback that I got in preparing for this today, we still
have a lot of people that are confused. They feel like there is
a lot of misinformation. What are we doing to try to fix some
of these problems for seniors?
Mr. DIRAGO. You are referring to the national 800 number?
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yes.
Mr. DIRAGO. That really wouldn't be our area of expertise.
Perhaps Ms. Colvin could answer. I am representing managers and
TSC managers, and, you know, that is not an area of expertise
that I would have.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Ms. Colvin, generally it is--the help line
that seniors can call in terms of filing as a new senior for
Social Security, there seems to be a lot of confusion with
that. I didn't know if you were doing anything to improve the
system.
Ms. COLVIN. Well, we will certainly look at----
Mr. BUCHANAN. The help desk, I guess you would call it.
Ms. COLVIN. I will certainly look at the concern you have
raised. I am not aware that there are issues of misinformation,
et cetera. But we will certainly go back and take a look at
that and give you an answer for the record.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Okay. What I will do is I will get you the
feedback that we are getting to your office, and maybe you can
respond back. Thank you, and I thank the witnesses.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The chair now recognizes Mr. Smith for
questioning.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to our panel. Mr.
Bertoni, just for clarification you said that overpayments tend
to be increasing, they are on the rise; is that accurate?
Mr. BERTONI. In the work CDR area, yes.
Mr. SMITH. And that policies and procedures are kind of
contributing to that; is that accurate?
Mr. BERTONI. That is correct. Essentially our view is that
not only are there internal management and operational issues
that could be addressed with the agency, but certainly that the
feeds in, that the data that the agency is relying on to do
these work CDRs, the IRS wage management is coming in already,
could be up to 2 years old, so they are basically working with
overpayment situations that are fairly extended.
And to the extent that they are not working, the claims,
once they land in the agency, that additional time also is
factored into the overpayment period. At the end of the day,
individuals could get a letter indicating they will have a
$30,000 overpayment, which is unfair to them and certainly
unfair to the taxpayers should this debt ultimately be written
off.
Mr. SMITH. Right. And so, in a general view did you
estimate in terms of what might be innocent or, you know, an
innocent mistake and what may not be?
Mr. BERTONI. No, we really did not isolate that. We just
know that there are a substantial number of overpayments in
this program, that the outstanding debt is in excess of $5
billion, and that much of that debt is being written off, about
$460 million last year and over the last 10 years about 4
billion.
So we don't know specifically what the reasons are for
that, but oftentimes it is mistakes on the agency's part.
Individuals don't understand the reporting requirements and/or
employers are just simply not reporting timely. There is a
myriad of reasons.
Mr. SMITH. Mr. O'Carroll, could you elaborate perhaps on
that?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Mr. Smith. What we are finding with the
work CDRs in most cases is that it is identified that the
person is working. It has to be--the CDR has to be conducted to
determine whether or not their gainful activity exceeds what is
allowed. And what we found, which goes with the chart that was
shown, is that when there is a lot of attention given towards
doing CDRs, it reduces the backlog, and it will keep SSA
current, so you are not seeing the 1- and 2-year backlogs that
Mr. Bertoni is talking about.
So what we are saying is that right now SSA is doing a good
job on the work CDRs, but they are still not doing enough CDRs
to reduce the backlog. So the incoming number of work reports
are not being addressed on a regular basis. Although, as I
said, they are doing a much better job than they did in the
past, they have to do twice as many work CDRs now to start
cutting into the backlog, dropping the backlog down so that
type of debt can be whittled down.
Does that answer your question?
Mr. SMITH. Thank you.
Ms. Colvin.
Ms. COLVIN. I would just like to say that the whole area
around work and substantial gainful activity is very complex,
and many of the recipients do not understand those rules. The
cases are also very difficult to work.
We have a number of legislative proposals that are
contained in the President's 2012 budget which are designed to
address some of those problems. One is the Work Incentives
Simplification Pilot that I know the Commission has talked to a
number of you about, which would simplify the rules around
work, which we think would substantially reduce the number of
overpayments due to work.
There are also a number of proposals that relate to data
sharing, being able to share data with States and local
jurisdictions and private insurers who handle workmen's
compensation so that we can properly do the offsets that often
result in errors; as well as other data sharing around other
government pensions where we would have to do an offset.
So we think the program is just very complex, and that if
it were simplified, and so we do urge you to support those
proposals that are contained in the President's budget.
But as Mr. O'Carroll had said, the more we can do CDRs,
including work CDRs, the less overpayments we have, because we
catch them early, and we will then be able to address them.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We seem to have another example here of the difference
between the Democrats and the Republicans. As most of you know,
there are 43 million people living in poverty in this country.
And in the programs we are talking about here, Social Security
Disability, we have had 10.2 million people, and we have got
9.1--in Social Security.
These are people at the bottom of the economic ladder. They
are there because they don't have anything else. They have
either been disabled at work and they are getting something, or
they don't even qualify for Social Security and so they are
getting SSI. And it strikes me that what we have here is a
perfect example of what happened at Katrina.
Now, Democrats believe that the government is supposed to
solve a problem, and that you work to keep trying to make it
work better, and that ultimately, when a problem comes like
Katrina, you go out and you get in your FEMA and you drive down
and you fix it.
But the Republicans don't believe that the government's job
is to fix this kind of stuff. They don't believe in a social
safety net. They basically believe these people ought to get by
on their own or somehow go out and find themselves a job or
whatever. They have never met most of the kinds of folks who
are here. I have worked with these people in my professional
life before I came here. And when you get in the FEMA car run
by Republicans, you get what you got in New Orleans. This
country looked like a Third World country. It looked like about
2 inches above 80 in our response to that hurricane.
Now, this is exactly the same thing. When Clinton came in,
there was additional money put in and for more CDRs, and the
level of waste and fraud and abuse went down, and as soon as
Mr. Bush came in, they whacked off that additional money, and
the numbers started going up. That is exactly what the chart
that Mr. Becerra put before us showed.
And then Mr. Obama came in, and we put more money in, and
the numbers started going down. And now we have the Ryan ruin
budget, and the numbers are going to go up because they are
pulling money out of the CDRs.
You are dealing with 20 million people who are living under
the poverty level and are supposed to report monthly if their
income went up or down $25. And if they are up $5 over the
limit, they are ineligible for a payment. Now, these are
widows, these are the injured, severely disabled who can't go
to work.
Is there any way, Mr Dirago, you can see that we can fix
this without putting additional money in this budget into more
CDR coverage?
Mr. DIRAGO. Well, I really feel it is a resource issue in
terms of the amount of work we are able to accomplish, on
program integrity issues like the medical CDRs and the work
CDRs. It is a product of having the staff in the offices in
order to do it, and right now with the staffing losses, we are
seeing a potential loss of 3,500 people in the agency, so our
offices are extremely overextended, and there is little time to
address these workloads.
So we do the best we can with what we have, but when
addressing to payment accuracy, it does come down to resources.
People need to be trained properly. There needs to be mentors
for new hires that come into the offices so they can do the
work accurately. They need the time to do the work.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. How long does it train--how long does it
take for somebody to become truly competent in evaluating these
disability files that are 2 and 3 inches thick?
Mr. DIRAGO. Well, in terms of the field office level--and I
can't respond in terms of the DDS--but in terms of the field
offices and getting a claims representative to the point where
they are competent, they come in and go through an initial 4-
month training period where it is 40 hours a week just
dedicated to learning the job. There is no graduate course in
Social Security Administration. People have to be trained for
40 hours a week for 4 months. After that, they come out of the
training pool, they know the basics to handle simple, routine
applications, not complex things like program integrity
workloads. So they get mentored, there is a proficiency process
in the agency in terms of bringing them up to speed, and it
probably takes about 2 years for a claims representative to be
skilled and knowledgeable to handle these kinds of things.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. What is the program the President put in his
budget for the work incentive program that you are talking
about?
Ms. COLVIN. It will allow us to simplify the process so
that the reporting requirements will not be as rigid, and
individuals would not be automatically removed because they had
some earnings.
So we think that the simpler the program is, the easier it
will be for the beneficiaries to understand what they need to
do.
And I do want to emphasize that when we have money for
CDRs, accuracy rates--and particularly SSI redeterminations,
the accuracy rate goes up. There is a chart that the staff has
that shows that there is a direct correlation between the
number of redeterminations that are done and the accuracy rate.
And so as we have had to cut back on doing CDRs and
redeterminations because of our budget losses, our accuracy
rates are going to go down. And whenever we have a reduction in
our funds, we are looking at not only reducing direct services
with people walking in the front door, but we are also looking
at reducing program integrity work.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In recent newspaper articles, the Wall Street Journal, for
instance, has focused on some administrative courts that are
approving 95, 96, 97 percent of all disability applicants for
disability insurance, and there are some areas in Puerto Rico
that the recipients are a disproportionate percentage of those
that applied.
Do you find, Mr. O'Carroll--do you find any correlation
between areas where there is a very high rate of approval of
disputed cases and fraud follow-up?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Mr. Marchant, we are bedeviled by the recent
publicity that has come out on Puerto Rico. We have been
watching approval rates, and we have been watching the number
of people coming on in Puerto Rico for a while, but we really
didn't address it sufficiently.
So right now we are working very closely with SSA, and we
are taking a look at the quality of the claims in terms of the
people coming onto the rolls there. And what we are trying to
provide, which I think you are getting at--what we are trying
to do is send a message out there that you just don't apply to
SSA and get approved automatically, that you have to actually
be disabled to receive benefits.
So we are trying to provide more oversight of what is going
on in Puerto Rico. And then you have mentioned the situation in
West Virginia, where we are also taking a look. We are trying
to take a look to see if there is any really nexus in terms of
the high amount of people that are coming on, is that something
that just happened in that region? Is it very common that most
people are approved? We are looking very closely at that. We
are working very closely with SSA's disability adjudication and
review staff to take a look at that.
We are working very hard on it. We have a presence here. We
are conducting investigations in Puerto Rico and West Virginia.
We have got a lot of resources on it, but I don't have a real
answer for you yet. I can assure you that we are looking across
the country to see if there are spikes like that, though.
Mr. MARCHANT. Well, my constituents are regularly--when
they watch TV, they are regularly given the opportunity to call
the number of an attorney that can assist them in getting on
disability. As far as widows, it looks like it is not the
widows that are participating in fraud, it is the people that
are claiming to be disabled and that are not disabled. In fact,
it looks like the claims are 10 times the amount of fraud among
the group that are claiming to be disabled.
And my constituents are beginning to make the connection
between a dollar stolen from the Social Security Administration
is a dollar stolen from their future security of their pension,
and they are beginning to make these correlations. So the
public is behind you. I would urge you to keep up the good
work.
Is there a way, in a disability case, where you have an
attorney involved, and in many instances there are, you know,
$10,000. It is not uncommon for a case to have a cash award of
10- or 12- or $14,000, and many times there are 3-, 4-, $5,000
of that goes to the attorney. If you later find out that that
was a fraudulent case and you try to make a recovery, do you
have recourse against just the recipient and applicant, or do
you have resource against the attorney as well?
Mr. O'CARROLL. We have recourse against them in that we can
assess a civil monetary penalty. If you lie to Social Security,
and we can show that you lied, and it is not prosecuted, we can
pursue you civilly, usually for $5,000 per false statement. So
we have been using that.
I have to assure you that we want to make sure that the
right people get the right amount of money, and those that are
defrauding Social Security get caught. And what we are trying
to find is any systemic issue where, as an example, some
facilitator is trying to get claims approved by using false
evidence, or false information or boilerplate information. We
are looking into that. We have made arrests in the past, and we
will make more in the future, because what we are trying to do
is save that $1 of government money for everybody in the
future.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Paulsen, you are recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go back and focus a little bit of discussion or
attention regarding matching databases in order to determine
the accuracy of SSA's determinations of SSI's recipients' real
property resources. And, Ms. Colvin and Mr. O'Carroll, I think
you can comment on this. There are many factors that affect a
supplemental security income recipient's eligibility for the
program, including their ownership of real property. In one
study I know the inspector general estimated that about 300,000
recipients were paid more than $2.2 billion that they might not
have been entitled to because of unreported real property. Is
this information, real property ownership, is it not readily
available to Social Security, and if not, why not?
Ms. COLVIN. Information is available relative to real
estate or real property ownership, and we are right now in the
process of looking at what is necessary to begin to do that
data matching, and we believe that the return on investment
there would be positive.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. O'Carroll, can you follow up on that?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Mr. Paulson. As we found in that audit,
as you noticed, SSA does have in field offices access to
databases where they can verify resources such as real
property. The purpose of our report is to highlight that, so
that when a person is approved for benefits, the next step
should be to take a look to see if that person has resources
out there.
One of our current initiatives is an effort to obtain and
use more financial intelligence. We are using that ourselves
and are trying to identify fraud against Social Security. We
are going to different vendors on the market with different
types of information. For example, when people file a claim
with SSA, we could tell if the IP address that they are using
has been known for fraud in the past.
And we are going to try to use those best practices that we
are coming up with, and financial intelligence, to share that
with SSA so that they see if they are being defrauded by people
who have resources but aren't telling them about it.
Mr. PAULSEN. And those best practices, when you pass them
on, or you expect to pass them on, and you get that financial
intelligence, does that become a resource issue for the
Department, I mean, to undergo utilizing that information?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Well, what we are hoping to do is to see if
there are going to be cost savings. Something that I never
mentioned before is that the dollars that are saved through our
accounting efforts and under the Improper Payment Elimination
and Recovery Act, in some agencies those funds are going back
to the agency to be used towards other antifraud initiatives.
Unfortunately, with SSA, since most of the money is from the
trust fund, we are not seeing any access to recovered funds,
and that might be something that could be changed with the
Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act so that we could
get some of our audit savings money back to use for more
financial intelligence projects like this.
Mr. PAULSEN. Ms. Colvin, let me do a follow-up, too,
because I know there was another study that was done back just
a couple of years ago with the inspector general, but in order
to receive SSI payments, a recipient can't be out of the
country for more that than a certain number of days, right? It
is like 30 consecutive days. And one study, I think, found that
something like a quarter billion in benefits went overseas,
right, so the people were out longer than they were supposed
to. How does the agency track whether beneficiaries are
actually here in the United States or they have actually gone
abroad?
Ms. COLVIN. That is a very complex area that we are delving
into now to determine what type of special data sharing we
can--there are matching agreements we can enter into to be able
to address that issue. In most situations, they are supposed to
identify that every 30 days if they are out of the country,
they have to be back in the country. That is an area that
certainly has some risk, and so we will be constantly looking
at what data is out there that we can match to be able to
ensure where those individuals are. We have to be very careful
about targeting individuals just because they are out of the
country, but we think there are some ways to begin to look at
that and address it a little bit more.
Mr. PAULSEN. So, Ms. Colvin, do you feel that you are
working on that kind of data-sharing arrangement, for instance,
with Homeland Security, for instance, to actually make some
progress on this area right now? Is that something----
Ms. COLVIN. I don't know what we are doing with Homeland
Security specifically, but I will tell you that we have about
1,500 data-sharing agreements. We are always looking at
additional records that we might be able to match with.
You asked if that is a resource issue. To some degree it
is, but we think that the return on investment would be
sufficient that we would want to pursue those kinds of things
where we would see a value to the agency. So we are going to be
looking at additional reports that we--or additional data-
sharing agreements that we could enter into.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Brady, who has been waiting
patiently.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
thoughts.
Our district is in Hurricane Alley, both Hurricane Rita,
Hurricane Ike. It has been 2 years since Hurricane Ike
devastated our region, 2 years since Congress passed
legislation authorizing disaster recovery, and we are still
waiting to get the money for our communities. I would not be
holding any parades for the Obama administration on disaster
recovery, unfortunately.
Secondly, if we are talking about wasted money, the $820
billion wasted in the stimulus, spent, and today we have fewer
Americans working today than when the stimulus began. In fact,
all those shovel-ready projects, we actually have 70,000 fewer
construction workers today since we spent all that money. There
is plenty of waste and fraud and abuse throughout this whole
government system, and we shouldn't hesitate to go after every
dollar of this, which leads to another point.
I was interested in Mr. Becerra's chart, but I did note
2003 to 2008 there was zero dollars dedicated to continuing--
medical continuing disability reviews, yet during several of
those years, 3 of them, they performed more reviews than they
do today. It seems Social Security performs reviews when they
choose to, regardless of the dedicated funding. It really goes
back to the point that Mr. Bertoni and Inspector General
O'Carroll made, which is a lot of the key systems are not in
place to use these dollars well.
In fact, looking at the medical, the continuing disability
reviews, it is one thing that 64 percent of the wasted dollars
occurred because the beneficiaries didn't tell us about their
work activity, but more than a third came after they told us
they received income and Social Security did not act.
Mr. Bertoni made the point that there is a real key issue
with the utilization of current automation and the need for
better supervision. So, Ms. Colvin, I would ask you, in 2004,
GAO recommended you use the National Directory of New Hires,
which the agency uses for SSI cases, to alert the agency to
wages earned by those receiving benefits with an estimated
return of 40 percent on each dollar invested. So the question
is why have you not yet implemented that idea?
Ms. COLVIN. The information that I have is that we, in
fact, did do a study in 2010 relative to new hires. And as you
correctly indicate, we do use it for SSI, but we have found it
to be less effective for Title II. We find that the information
comes in quarterly; we need to have it monthly.
There has been an analysis done on that, and so we have not
found that utilization of the new hire data will provide the
type of return that you have. I would be happy to provide you
with what our review and analysis has determined.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
Just so I heard you right, 6 years after the GAO
recommended you use this national directory, rather than
implement it, you did a study last year and decided that
theoretically it might not work, but you have never implemented
it to see that it does?
Ms. COLVIN. We use the new hire data for SSI, we do not use
it for Title II.
Mr. BRADY. Right, even though that was recommended in 2004?
Ms. COLVIN. Well, I believe that the agency's analysis of
that differs from the analysis that was provided by the Office
of Inspector General.
Mr. BRADY. Six years after its recommendation was made and
no actual implementation occurred.
I would also ask you this. The amount of days it takes SSA
to process the earnings and overpayments is not acceptable by
anyone, particularly when the individual self-reports. They
have told us they get the money.
GAO contends that you have no agencywide performance goals,
and you lack a good supervisory control. So why should Congress
appropriate more funds for CDRs when you are lacking basic
management controls?
Ms. COLVIN. The money that Congress appropriates are for
the medical CDRs specifically, and we have always, to my
understanding, been able to do the number of CDRs for which we
are budgeted. As I mentioned before, work CDRs are very
complex. Normally we have had some challenges in that area, I
would be first to admit as the accountable official for
improper payments that is an area that I am looking at.
We very recently have given directions that we would like
to see that those work CDRs are done within 30 days of the time
that the individual reports that they are returning to work.
So this is an area that does need attention, and it is an
area that we are challenged. And so I agree it needs more----
Mr. BRADY. I do think it needs a great deal more work.
There is bipartisan support for this. This is a leaky bucket,
and before we pour more money into it, we probably need to fix
those holes and make sure we are actually getting the bang for
the buck and have the right management tools in place to use
these dollars.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
and for your testimony. Please be advised that Members may have
some written questions that they submit to you. Those questions
and answers would be part of this hearing record.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you for being here, and this
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:37 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]


