- TAX REFORM AND CONSUMPTION-BASED TAX SYSTEMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAX REFORM AND CONSUMPTION-BASED
TAX SYSTEMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 26, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-005                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page
Advisory of July 26, 2011, announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

PANEL (FairTax):

Mr. Mike Huckabee, Former Governor of Arkansas.................     6
Dr. Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Professor of Economics, Boston
University, Boston, MA; accompanied by Dr. David Tuerck,
Executive Director, The Beacon Hill Institute, Professor and
Chairman, Department of Economics, Suffolk University........    11
Mr. Bruce Bartlett, Columnist, Tax Notes, The Fiscal Times,
Contributor, The New York Times..............................    22

PANEL (Value Added Tax):

Mr. Michael J. Graetz, Columbia Alumni Professor of Tax Law,
Columbia University..........................................    66
Dr. Rosanne Altshuler, Professor and Chair, Economics
Department, Rutgers University...............................    89
Dr. Robert J. Carroll, Ernst & Young, LLP......................   103
Mr. Jim White, Director, Tax Issues, Government Accountability
Office.......................................................   121
Dr. Daniel J. Mitchell, Senior Fellow, Cato Institute..........   137
Dr. Simon Johnson, Ronald A. Kurtz Professor of
Entrepreneurship, Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, former Economic Counselor and
Director of the Research Department at the International
Monetary Fund................................................   151

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Steve King.........................................   167
The Honorable Rob Woodall........................................   170
The Honorable Jeff Miller........................................   172
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition....................   173
Americans for Fair Taxation......................................   184
Bay County Florida Executive Committee...........................   194
Bobby L. Austin..................................................   196
Bruce Burton.....................................................   203
Center for Fiscal Equity.........................................   204
Charlene Westgate................................................   212
Dan Horton.......................................................   214
David E. Miller..................................................   215
David H. Leake...................................................   215
Dr. Nanette Parratto-Wagner......................................   216
Dr. Roger Sdao...................................................   219
E. Ray McKee, Jr.................................................   220
Elizabeth Yingling...............................................   222
Garret Swayne....................................................   224
Hugh J. Campbell.................................................   227
James M. Bennett.................................................   230
John J. Riehecky.................................................   234
Linda M. Jolicoeur...............................................   236
Linda Scott Cummings.............................................   237
Lisa Chambers....................................................   238
Mark Curran......................................................   239
Mike Kelly.......................................................   242
Mike Warlick.....................................................   243
National Association of Small Business Investment Companies......   244
National Debt Awareness Center...................................   248
National Retail Federation.......................................   249
Orient American Ore Co., LLC.....................................   259
Paul D. Wheaton..................................................   262
Retail Industry Leaders Association..............................   273
Richard Giambruno................................................   276
Richard T. Ainsworth.............................................   278
Sal Tranchina, Jr................................................   287
Scott Lombardo...................................................   287
Shawn Murphy.....................................................   288
Steven M. Puma...................................................   289
Todd Sarmiento...................................................   292
VATinfo.org......................................................   294

MATERIAL SUIBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Questions and Responses for the Record:
The Honorable Tom Price....................................   299

TAX REFORM AND CONSUMPTION-BASED TAX SYSTEMS

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 26, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notiice, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave
Camp [chairman of the committee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Camp Announces Hearing on Tax Reform and Consumption-Based Tax Systems

Tuesday, July 26, 2011

Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on
alternative tax systems, with a focus on tax systems that are based on
taxing consumption rather than income. Specifically, the Committee will
consider the FairTax--a proposal to replace existing federal taxes with
a national retail sales tax--and the Value-Added Tax (VAT), a type of
consumption tax used by many other countries as a supplement to other
taxes, such as taxes on individual and corporate income. The hearing
will take place on Tuesday, July 26, 2011, in Room 1100 of the
Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND

For several consecutive Congresses, legislation to repeal existing
federal taxes on income, payroll, estates and gifts and replace them
with a single national retail sales tax has been introduced as the Fair
Tax Act. The bill would grant states the primary authority for the
collection of sales tax revenues and the remittance of such revenues to
the Treasury. It also would abolish the Internal Revenue Service after
fiscal year 2015, replacing it with a Sales Tax Bureau to administer
the FairTax and an Excise Tax Bureau to administer remaining excise
taxes formerly under the jurisdiction of the IRS. In the 112th
Congress, the Fair Tax Act has been introduced as H.R. 25.

Many countries have adopted a different kind of consumption tax--
the Value-Added Tax--in addition to their income and other taxes. Under
a VAT, a business pays tax on the value it adds during its stage in the
production, distribution, and sales processes. Generally, ``value
added'' is measured as the difference between the price for which a
business sells a good or service and the cost of the inputs the
business incurred to produce it. Economically, however, a VAT is
considered equivalent to a retail sales tax, in that the VAT paid at
each stage of the process is passed on to the ultimate consumer in the
form of a higher retail price.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``While the
Committee thus far has focused on reforming the income tax, tax
proposals that would move us away from an income base and instead adopt
consumption as the tax base have continued to generate interest as
well. Supporters of such approaches believe that taxing consumption
rather than income could have important economic benefits, and so as
part of our efforts to reform the Tax Code, the Committee needs to
examine those proposals. This hearing will allow the Committee to learn
more about two of the most-discussed consumption tax proposals, the
FairTax and the VAT.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will consider separately two different consumption tax
models. One panel will examine the advantages and disadvantages of a
VAT, whether as a supplement to or full replacement for existing taxes.
Another panel will discuss the policy arguments for and against
adopting the FairTax as a replacement for existing federal taxes. The
hearing will explore the economic impact of consumption tax systems, as
well as issues surrounding administration and compliance.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Tuesday, August
9, 2011. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail
policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries
to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman CAMP. Good morning. And thank you all for joining
us today.
Today is the ninth hearing that we have held on
comprehensive tax reform, not counting the roundtable
discussion held by the Joint Committee on Taxation, where we
were joined by key architects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
During our very first hearing of the year, which was also our
first hearing on tax reform, we discussed the need to transform
our Tax Code so that it would encourage, rather than inhibit
job creation.
Six months later, as we continue to struggle in an economy
where unemployment remains high, and growth is virtually
stagnant, the need to overhaul Americans' broken Tax Code has
never been greater. Clearly, the Tax Code is too complex, too
costly, and takes too much time to comply with. All this adds
more burdens on families and employers, making it more
difficult to create the jobs that 14 million men and women in
this country need.
Since the beginning of our discussions on comprehensive tax
reform, I have cited three things I am certain of, as we take
on this endeavor. First, I have no illusions that this will be
an easy task. But then, most things that are worth doing never
are. Second, I don't think this should be a partisan exercise.
And third, and most importantly, we will talk to the American
people: individuals, families, employers, both large and small,
who are actually affected by the laws we pass here in
Washington. They are the real experts, and that is why their
voices are critical, as we explore and develop tax reform
policy.
That brings us to why we are here today. Although our
current tax system does include some elements that are
consumption-based, such as excise taxes, for the most part our
Tax Code is thought of as being based on the taxation of
income. To this point, our hearings this year, including the
joint hearing we held with the Senate Finance Committee two
weeks ago, explore tax reform with an eye toward maintaining an
income-focused tax base. We have explored how the current tax
system works and, in many cases, doesn't work for employers and
families.
Today we are shifting gears just a bit to explore a
different basis for taxation: consumption. We will examine two
different consumption tax models that have emerged as potential
alternatives to our current income tax system: the fair tax,
and the value-added tax. Our first panel will discuss the
policy arguments for and against adopting the fair tax as a
replacement for existing federal taxes. Our second panel will
examine the advantages and disadvantages of a value-added tax,
or VAT, whether as a supplement to or a full replacement for
existing taxes.
We have some terrific witnesses on our panels, and I would
like to thank them for being here today. We are anxious to hear
from them, and look forward to engaging in discussion. And with
that, I will yield to Ranking Member Levin for the purposes of
his opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much. First, I would like to join
in welcoming this panel. You are very active and distinguished
people. If I might, I would like to say a special hello to Mr.
Huckabee, the Honorable Huckabee. It says H-o-n in front of
your name, and we are glad to see you.
This hearing may take on a number of sparks, in view of the
crisis that we face today, but I don't want anyone to feel that
we anything but welcome all of you here today.
Yesterday the Speaker put forward what he calls a two-step
approach, and I quote, ``to hold President Obama accountable.''
Under that proposal, the Speaker states that there will be, and
I quote, ``no tax hikes.'' But what would the proposals before
us today mean for millions of working American families? A tax
hike.
At the same time, the Speaker's proposal establishes a
commission that cannot recommend reducing the deficit by ending
tax breaks for people making over $1 million a year, or ending
tax loopholes that encourage companies to shift jobs overseas,
or shutting down tax havens. This prohibition on a commission
even considering revenues, along with the spending caps in the
Speaker's proposal would mean major cuts in vital programs like
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid.
So, today, while our nation is facing a severe crisis, the
majority is holding this hearing on proposals that do not
address this immediate crisis, and would raise taxes for
millions of middle and low-income families. And at the same
time, they are insisting on a deficit package that protects tax
breaks for very wealthy households.
What we must focus on right now, and I emphasize this, is
avoiding a default that would risk another financial crisis and
millions of jobs. It could delay the Social Security checks
that millions of seniors depend on. It could permanently call
into question the full faith and credit of the U.S., and make
it even more difficult to reduce the deficit.
Our President has called again and again for a balanced
approach to getting a handle on our nation's debt. This
committee has jurisdiction over many of the elements of such an
approach. It is the committee in the House with jurisdiction
over legislation on the debt ceiling. We on this committee have
a solemn obligation, a solemn obligation, to step up to the
plate and address the matter at hand; avoiding a default, and
finding a balanced approach to deficit reduction.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you, Mr. Levin. Today we will
hear from two distinguished panels of witnesses. Our witnesses
bring a wealth of knowledge with combined experience in
government, academia, and the private sector.
Our first panel includes four experts on the fair tax
embodied in this Congress in H.R. 25, as introduced by
Representative Rob Woodall. Our second panel will include six
experts on value-added taxes. We begin with our fair tax
experts.
First, I would like to welcome the Honorable Mike Huckabee.
From 1996 until 2007, Governor Huckabee served as the 44th
governor of Arkansas. He ran for the Republican nomination for
President in 2008, and currently is the host of the television
show, ``Huckabee,'' and the radio program, ``The Huckabee
Report.'' Governor, we extend a warm welcome to you, and look
forward to your testimony.
Next we will hear from Laurence Kotlikoff. Mr. Kotlikoff is
a professor of economics at Boston University. He has authored
or co-authored 14 different books, and from 1981 to 1982,
served as a senior economist on the President's Council of
Economic Advisors.
Mr. Kotlikoff is accompanied this morning by Mr. David
Tuerck. Mr. Tuerck is a professor, and chairman of the
department of economics at Suffolk University in Boston,
Massachusetts. He is also the chairman of the Beacon Hill
Institute, a research center that develops and performs
economic and statistical analysis of current and emerging
public policy issues.
And finally, we welcome Mr. Bruce Bartlett. Mr. Bartlett
has served as the staff director of the Joint Economic
Committee, as a senior policy advisor for President Reagan, and
as the deputy assistant secretary for economic policy at the
U.S. Treasury Department. Mr. Bartlett is currently a columnist
for Tax Notes, and The Fiscal Times, and also contributes to
the New York Times economics blog.
Thank you all, again, for being with us today. The
committee has received each of your written statements, and
they will be made part of the formal hearing record. Each of
you will be recognized for 5 minutes for your oral remarks.
And, Governor Huckabee, we will begin with you. Welcome,
again, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MIKE HUCKABEE, FORMER GOVERNOR OF ARKANSAS, HOPE,
ARKANSAS

Mr. HUCKABEE. Chairman Camp and Ranking Member Levin,
Members of the Committee, it is an honor and privilege to be
able to be with you today to talk about the fair tax.
Let me just begin with a personal observation. Having
raised three children, all of whom are now adults--and when
they moved out my wife and I ended up with three dogs--my kids
think we replaced them with the dogs, they also think we treat
the dogs better than we ever treated them. I tell them it's
because the dogs behave better than the kids ever did.
But I learned something about behavior, both from raising
children and training dogs. And the basic premise is this. If
you want a certain behavior, you reward it, and you will get
more of it. And if you want to stop a certain behavior, you
consequence it and you get less of it. It's a principle of life
that we all understand. The fair tax is based on the simple
idea that we ought to reward good economic behavior, and we
should not reward irresponsible and reckless economic behavior.
The sort of behaviors that will create a stronger economy,
grow jobs, make it possible for people to be independent, is
that we reward them for their work, we reward them for their
investments, their risk-taking. We reward them for saving
something, because that puts something aside for those
unexpected moments in life, so that they won't be dependent
upon somebody else's charity, they will be dependent upon their
own thoughtfulness in preparing for the unforseen circumstances
that, frankly, all of us have experienced.
The fair tax doesn't punish people for their productivity,
and it does not reward them for their irresponsibility, and
that is the essence of it.
I must be honest with you. I didn't know what the fair tax
was when I was campaigning four years ago. People would come up
to me and say, ``Do you believe in the fair tax?'' I said,
``Well, of course I believe that taxes ought to be fair.'' They
said, ``No, the fair tax.'' And I had no idea what they were
talking about.
Somebody finally handed me a book and the bill, the fair
tax bill. I read it. Made too much sense. So I read it again.
And then I met with a group of economists to ask them, and to
spend several hours peppering them with questions about how it
would functionally work. And I came away as a strong proponent.
And I wish I could take credit for some of the creation, but I
am not the chemist that designed it, I'm just the pharmacist
that is trying to dispense it.
And so, today I come with a sense of recognizing that the
fair tax is, in fact, a transformational approach to the
government getting revenue. It is revenue-neutral, as it is
designed. It is not intended to raise taxes or lower taxes. It
is, I believe, an approach that could be equally embraced by
Democrats and Republicans, because it accomplishes something
both want to do. It helps people at the bottom end of the
economic spectrum, because of a unique feature that is often
overlooked or misunderstood, called the prebate. And it is
fundamental to its effectiveness. But it also makes it possible
to bring manufacturing jobs and other types of economic models
back to the United States from its offshore infusion, because
of the fact that people are not going to be punished for
actually producing.
There are so many things that I would like to present, and
I hope you will have an opportunity to look at some of the
written testimony. But the fair tax, in many ways, I want to
contend, works because of its fundamental idea that it is flat,
it's based on the consumption of things purchased at the retail
level. It is fair, because it does not adjust itself to any
particular demographic group. It is finite, because it's a
fixed rate with total transparency, which is one of the things
that I find most appealing about it. There is an absolute
transparency about what people would pay. And it's family
friendly, and it doesn't penalize marriage or raising children,
as sometimes the Tax Code does.
I think it's clear to say that there are very few people,
if anyone, in the entire country who understands the 67,000
pages of the Tax Code. It is extraordinarily convoluted. It is
so convoluted that, for the most part, the reason that there
are 35,000 lobbyists in this city are to influence the Tax
Code, so that there can be winners and losers. What I would
like to suggest is that the fair tax means that every American,
in essence, becomes his or her own lobbyist, because there is
no need to always be manipulating the Tax Code to create
special favors for one against another.
All of us who watch sporting events know this one thing,
that the guys in the striped shirts are not there to determine
the outcome of the game, they are just there to make sure that
the game is played fairly. When the guys in the striped shirts
start determining the outcome of the game, we no longer respect
them. The purpose, I believe, of the tax system is not to
determine the outcome of the game, but to make sure that there
is a fair and absolutely objective playing field. And that is
what the fair tax does.
And I come today with over 75,000 online signatures of
people who, just in the past 3 or 4 days, have urged me to
appeal to you to give consideration to it, notwithstanding any
political or partisan consideration.
And I thank you very much for the opportunity to be here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huckabee follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much, Governor.
Mr. Kotlikoff and Mr. Tuerck, you each have, together, 5
minutes. And you are recognized now. Thank you. Your written
statements are part of the record.

STATEMENT OF LAURENCE J. KOTLIKOFF, PROFESSOR OF ECONOMICS,
BOSTON UNIVERSITY, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS; ACCOMPANIED BY DAVID
TUERCK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE BEACON HILL INSTITUTE,
PROFESSOR AND CHAIRMAN, DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS, SUFFOLK
UNIVERSITY, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Thank you, Chairman Camp and Ranking Member
Levin, and Members of the Committee. We are honored by this
invitation to testify today about the fair tax. This is one of
several different ways we could implement consumption taxation.
We think the fair tax has a number of reasons to recommend
it over the other alternatives. I want to talk to you about
that. I, myself, have an alternative to the fair tax, which is
called the purple tax, which I put forth recently. But today I
am here to talk about the fair tax, together with my co-author,
David Tuerck.
So, the fair tax would replace the personal income tax, the
federal personal income tax, and the federal corporate income
tax, and the estate and gift tax with a federal retail sales
tax that would tax all consumption goods and services, with the
exception of imputed rent on existing houses at a 23 percent
effective rate, a 30 percent nominal rate. And it would have--
as Governor Huckabee indicated, there would be a demigrant to
make that tax progressive.
But I want to point out that, as an economist, my
profession doesn't believe that a consumption tax is
regressive. I know that a number of you folks do believe that a
consumption tax is regressive, even without a--for--leaving
aside the issue of the rebate or the prebate, a number of you
believe that a consumption tax is regressive. We economists
don't believe you're right. We think you are looking at it the
wrong way, we think you are measuring progressivity the wrong
way. We think, when you look at it correctly, and measure
progressivity against lifetime resources, lifetime--think about
lifetime tax burdens as a share of lifetime resources--you will
see that a consumption tax is actually more progressive than
you think.
Now, what is a consumption, tax, actually? I think there is
a lot of misunderstanding, not just about the progressivity,
but what actually it is taxing. A consumption tax is really
taxing what is used to pay for consumption. And what is used to
pay for consumption are two things: wealth and wages, not just
your current wages, but also your future wages.
So, your consumption over your lifetime is being financed,
being paid for, by your taxes on your wealth--well, by your
wealth and your wages. So if you taxed your consumption,
you're, in effect, taxing what is used to pay for your
consumption.
So, economists believe--and this is just mathematically the
case; it's not really a belief, it's just a mathematical
proposition--that a tax on wealth plus a tax on wages is
equivalent to a tax on consumption. So if you're an advocating
of taxing wealth, and using the proceeds from taxing wealth to
lower the tax rate on workers--and I think a lot of Democrats
would say, ``That sounds very progressive to me, taxing wealth,
using the revenues to lower the tax rate on wages''--then you
have to be, logically speaking, a proponent of consumption tax,
because that is what a consumption tax does, it taxes wealth,
and it uses the revenues to lower the tax on workers--on wages.
Now, a fair tax, consumption tax, also, compared to an
existing income tax, is much more favorable toward saving,
insofar as it doesn't prejudice you towards consuming in the
present, relative to the future. That is what an income tax
does.
If you look at this chart in our testimony--my testimony,
joint with David--you will see that the national saving rate
last year was exactly zero, except for a decimal place. It was
0.1 percent last year, that's our national saving rate last
year. Our domestic investment rate was 4.4 percent. So we're
not saving, as a nation. We are saving nothing as a nation. We
are investing next to nothing. We need to have a tax system
that gives people incentives to save, and also puts the burden
on people fairly, so that we get equity, as well as the right
incentives.
So, that is a couple points, of what exactly the fair tax
taxes and its incentives. The other thing is it's--that we have
in this testimony is a table on the--we're going to have two
tables, one on effective tax rates, which show that the
effective tax rates, marginal effective tax rates, are much
lower under the fair tax than under the existing tax structure,
and that the--there is also a table showing you lifetime
progressivity. And we show in this table that the fair tax on
lifetime tax basis is actually more progressive than the
existing tax system, basically because it does do this thing
that I mentioned, which is tax wealth and use the proceeds to
lower the tax on wages.
Let me now turn the time over to David that I took away
from him. Sorry.
Chairman CAMP. Well, I will make an exception, Mr. Tuerck.
I will give you a minute to sum up.
Mr. TUERCK. Well, thank you. All economics professors are
long-winded, and I am no exception.
I think that Larry covered the main points about the issue
of regressivity versus progressivity. He is right. No modern
economist believes any longer that consumption taxes are
regressive--something for the analysts in Washington to start
thinking about.
I am simply going to draw attention to one of the tables in
our combined testimony that relates to the effect of the fair
tax on investment. Economic theory tells us that consumption
taxes untax net investment. That should be intuitively obvious,
because of the fact that the corporate income tax goes away.
So, lots of us have done estimates on this. I will tell you
something about our estimates.
We show that in the first year of implementation, real GDP
would go up by about eight percent. Domestic investment would
go up by a whopping 75 percent, employment by 12 percent, real
wages by 10 percent, and eventually consumption would go up,
too, by about 6 percent. These are numbers on which there is
widespread agreement by people who have modeled this issue. And
it should be no surprise. You untax investment, you get more
investment; you get more investment, you get more growth.
Thank you. And I thank the committee, too, for inviting me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kotlikoff and Mr. Tuerck
follows:]

Chairman CAMP. All right, thank you. Thank you both. Mr.
Bartlett, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRUCE BARTLETT, COLUMNIST, ``TAX NOTES,'' AND
``THE FISCAL TIMES''

Mr. BARTLETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I
would like to say that I do support, in principle, the concept
of a consumption-based tax system. But I think that many
economists--perhaps including those to my right--gloss over the
critical administrative aspects of consumption taxes, and they
want to take all of the benefits that you would get from any
consumption-based tax system, and attribute them exclusively to
the fair tax, which I think is wrong.
My main objection to the FairTax has always been one simple
thing: it simply won't work. It is a ridiculously pie-in-the-
sky proposal. Let me point to a couple of things.
It would abolish the Internal Revenue Service and all of
the collection machinery that has been built up over the last
100 years for collecting taxes, and force the states to collect
the Federal Government's revenues for it. Now, this strikes me
as unconstitutional, but I don't want to argue that point. The
main thing is that it won't work. We tried this during the
Articles of Confederation, and we ended up with the
Constitution.
Secondly, the tax would apply to all governments. State and
local governments would have to pay the tax to the Federal
Government, as well as collecting the tax for the Federal
Government. This makes no sense. The Federal Government would
have to pay the tax to itself. The cost of every single thing
the Federal Government buys will be 30 percent higher. But the
proponents somehow or other assume that federal spending is
fixed in nominal terms. So you get a huge cut in spending that
helps finance this whole operation.
Third, housing. If you buy a new house, you are going to
have to pay 30 percent more. But if you buy a used house, you
don't have to pay anything. This strikes me as administratively
impossible, whatever its virtues may be.
The problem of evasion is always glossed over. The reason
why--I mean we all know we have a very serious evasion problem
right now, when we have a huge amount of taxes withheld from
people's paychecks and so on. But under the fair tax, you would
eliminate all that machinery, you would collect taxes at
exactly one point in the entire economic system: at the retail
outlet. There is too much incentive for people to go to the
wholesale level and buy out of the factory door. The retail
store owner has just as much incentive to evade the tax as the
buyer, they just do their sales off the books.
The idea of having a national retail sales tax has been
studied by other countries. They always rejected it, because
there would be too high a degree of evasion. Instead, they have
all favored the value-added tax, which is a form of consumption
tax that will work. We know it works because every other
country except us has one. It was designed to deal with all of
the administrative and evasion problems that are inherent in
the nature of a retail sales tax.
Finally, I want to mention something about the rebate,
which the FairTax supporters say is necessary to offset the
regressivity of the tax. But, as the George W. Bush
administration's tax reform report pointed out, this would
involve the creation of the largest entitlement program in the
history of the United States. They estimated that its cost
would be $800 billion per year in 2005 dollars. And these
checks would go out to people with Social Security numbers on a
monthly basis.
Now, as this committee knows perfectly well, we have a huge
problem of people with fake Social Security numbers now. Can
you imagine what it will be like if, by getting a fake Social
Security number, you can get monthly checks from the
government? Large checks, too. This is just a license for abuse
waiting to happen.
A couple of technical points. Getting rid of the corporate
income tax may sound very good to the corporate community, but
what's going to happen to all their unused depreciation the day
the corporate income tax disappears? They have nothing to
deduct it against. And if you think this isn't a problem, it
is.
When Professor Kotlikoff talks about taxing wealth, you
have to understand that the people whose wealth would
essentially be taxed by this proposal are the elderly. They
saved all during their lifetimes when there was no broad-based
consumption tax, and in retirement they had this anticipation
that they would be able to withdraw that saving, tax free. But,
in fact, they will have to pay a 30 percent tax on everything
at that point.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bartlett follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you all very much. Governor
Huckabee, as you know, our nation's unemployment is
unacceptably high. And how would the fair tax, if we adopted
that, how would that bring about more jobs in this country?
Mr. HUCKABEE. Well, Congressman, one of the ways that it
will happen, manufacturing has moved offshore in large measure
because corporations are having a difficult time, and job
creators have a difficult time when they are competing with
countries with a lower tax rate. If our tax rate is zero, and
there is no tax assessed at the production level, then it is
obvious that we then become more competitive.
If we have a zero capital gains tax, capital not only that
has been parked offshore--and it has been estimated that there
is as much as $14 trillion of U.S. money--that's as much as the
debt--$14 trillion parked offshore to protect it from the Tax
Code, legally and legitimately. But what would happen if that
money came back to the United States because there was no
penalty for parking it here? That would certainly be a far
better situation.
Let me--if I could, very quickly--give this anecdotal
mention, because it was one of the things that sold me on the
fair tax. I was in New Hampshire four years ago, and visiting
with a gentleman who was working at a machine shop, working two
shifts because he wanted to help his daughter through grad
school at Cornell. And he said that was costing $53,000 a year,
which caused me to gasp.
But he said--this is a guy with a high school education,
working two shifts--he said when he took on the second shift he
thought he would make twice as much money. But, as it turned
out, it put him in a different tax bracket, and a lot of what
he was making in the second shift was going to taxes, not to
his daughter. He said, ``I don't understand this.'' And the
honest answer is neither do I. Why should you punish a person
who is working twice as hard?
Truth is, if he quit both jobs, then his daughter would
qualify for some assistance that he and her would not qualify
for under the current Tax Code. I think, for most of us,
regardless of our political persuasion, that seems insane.
Chairman CAMP. I have a question for both you and Mr.
Kotlikoff. Different states have different laws and rules. For
example, in Michigan, my home state, there is a sales tax, but
the sales tax doesn't apply to groceries, for example. Under
the fair tax, groceries are not exempt. How would that impact
stores in Michigan?
And if they don't currently collect sales taxes, would they
now be required to do that? And would there be any transition
rules or similar relief available to help sort of ease the
administrative burden on those businesses and employers?
And either one of you can answer. If, Mr. Kotlikoff, you
want to go first----
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes, they would be required to collect the
tax at the store. Whether there was some transition relief
would be up to you folks to provide, if you felt it was
necessary.
But let's think about the people coming into the store to
actually buy these consumption goods: the food, the bread,
eggs. Well, they are going to get--if they are working, they
are going to get a paycheck that has no income tax withheld
from it. And there is also going to be no FICA tax withheld. So
they are going to have more wherewithal. And they are also
going to get a monthly rebate check.
We are sending out lots of checks to lots of people, older
retirees, through Social Security, Bruce, and we do have some
fraud, I'm sure. But I don't think it's a reason to eliminate
Social Security, for example.
So, just to answer--back to your question, I think it's not
going to be--you know, all the prices of all the goods and
services are going to uniformly go up because of this. People
are still going to need to buy groceries, and I think that
store will still be able to function.
Chairman CAMP. But you envision the collection point being
at the grocery story?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. At the store, yes. We're going to go from
about--with the fair tax, one would go from about 120 million
tax-paying entities to about 700,000. So that's really relevant
to the issue of enforcement and evasion. If you have an entire
IRS--I'm not particularly so keen on abolishing the IRS. I
think we have a lot of people there that could be used to
enforce the fair tax, if that's what you folks implement.
So, if you go to 700,000, rather than 120 million tax
returns, you have a lot more ability to enforce that--the tax
collection, because you have fewer tax payers.
Chairman CAMP. Okay, Governor.
Mr. HUCKABEE. Congressman, if I could address the
administrative issue, as a governor for 10\1/2\ years, I mean
we certainly understand how to collect taxes. But the reality
is that every business owner who is collecting taxes has that
set up electronically, and it is programmed in. And the idea
that this is going to be a monstrous task is simply not the
case. This is not Mom and Pop jotting down on a pad, this is a
computer program that easily can be programmed, and the states
and localities would be getting basis points for their
collections.
So they're going to get, in essence, a cash windfall as a
result of their part of the collection process. And that will
make it more attractive to them, because they are not doing it
without some compensation for their administrative efforts.
Chairman CAMP. All right, thank you. Mr. Levin is
recognized.
Mr. LEVIN. Well, this is called a fair tax. By the way,
people worked for their Social Security. It's not a hand-out
from the government.
But I want to get to one of the basic issues here relating
to the so-called fair tax. And, Mr. Bartlett, I read from your
special report dated December 24, 2007 on why the fair tax
won't work. And I just want to get to this issue of
regressivity. So I'm just reading from this tax report of
yours.
But what if a worker is currently paying less than 23
percent of his income in federal taxes? In this case, he is
clearly worse off under the so-called FairTax. The prices of
the things he buys will rise by more than his income rises,
from the elimination of elimination and payroll taxes.
Conversely, if one is wealthy and in a tax bracket above 23
percent, that person would be much better off. His income and
payroll taxes would fall by much more than the prices of goods
and services he consumes would rise.
I want to ask you about this, because here we are in this
battle over raising the debt ceiling. And the majority position
in the House is no taxes, that you can't touch the tax rates
for people who are making over $1 million. This is annual
income of $150,000. Most of that is income over $1 million.
So, just reading this analysis of yours, it seems to me
that it is clear that for people who already are doing very,
very well, in most cases this helps them, while for middle-
income taxpayers who would not receive a check in most cases,
from the government, this would mean an increase in their
taxes. I don't see how you escape this.
And, therefore, I think it is absolutely (what should I
say?)--inappropriate, to be charitable, to call this a fair
taxation proposal. Could you comment on that?
Mr. BARTLETT. Let me make a point that is very seldom
discussed by FairTax supporters, although Professor Kotlikoff
alluded to it.
If you impose a sales tax, the Federal Reserve accommodates
this tax--then the price level is going to rise by the amount
of the tax. If it's a 23 percent or 30 percent sales tax, the
price of every single consumption good is going to rise by 30
percent. So, while it's true you will have more cash income
because you will no longer have to pay income and payroll
taxes, the cost of everything you buy is going to cost more.
That's where the burden of the tax comes from.
Now, alternatively, if you assume that the Federal Reserve
will not accommodate this one-time inflation rate that would be
the highest in our history, then real wages have to fall,
because they always make the argument that the prices of goods
will fall by enough to compensate for the tax. They basically
make two simultaneous and contrary arguments: the prices will
fall, but then they will rise. But if you assume a fixed price
level, then wages have to fall. Otherwise, the producers will
not be able to reduce their prices. Their costs have to be
lower.
Mr. LEVIN. So who bears the burden of this? From your
analysis, the very wealthy more or less, in most cases, are
helped, while many, many mostly middle-income tax brackets are
hurt. Isn't that correct?
Mr. BARTLETT. The burden is borne by consumption. And so,
it depends on what your consumption is relative to your income.
People with low incomes consume virtually all of their income.
People in the middle bracket save some. That would not be
taxed. People in the upper brackets save almost all of their
income. So it would be proportional to your consumption.
Mr. LEVIN. Yes, so I think this is an unfair tax proposal.
Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Governor,
welcome.
Governor, as you well know, there has been a lot of debate
when it comes to the real fair tax rate. And Mr. Bartlett
argues the true rate is not really 23 percent but 30 percent.
How would you answer that charge on a true rate?
Mr. HUCKABEE. Well, I think the economists are probably
better equipped to get into the specifics. They are trained for
that.
But I would say that one of the things that is being missed
is that there is an embedded tax in everything that we purchase
that is hidden. It is estimated to be approximately 22 percent
of everything that we buy, because if we buy a loaf of bread,
the taxes that were built in to the people who planted the
wheat, harvested the wheat, manufactured the process, delivered
it, all the taxes that go into the process are hidden. And the
consumer doesn't know that that tax is embedded.
When that tax is taken out of the process, and it is paid
at the consumption level, you already have a dramatically
different situation, in terms of the price of the goods that
will likely go down. Plus, when the consumer goes to purchase
that item, the consumer is going with his or her entire
paycheck. Most Americans have never gone to the marketplace
with their entire paycheck. Their paycheck has all the
extractions from the Federal Government, and they never see
what their paycheck is.
But the other thing, it provides a more stable funding for
Social Security, because it is based on the consumption that
all of us make, not just the wages that wage-earners are
making, which is, I think, another good reason for the fair tax
to be a strong consideration.
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas. Mr. Bartlett, you care to respond?
Mr. BARTLETT. Well, it is very confusing. So if you just
eliminated all existing federal taxation and it just
disappeared forever, then clearly, all prices and wages would
eventually fall by the amount of the tax, and you would be
better off. But if you then put the tax back on in a different
form, then the prices go back up again.
So, at times, the FairTax people make it sound like it's
all a wash. Okay? You take out the income taxes, prices fall by
23 percent. You put a 23 percent tax on. Then everything is
exactly is the way it is right now. No change in the price
level.
But if that is true, there is no need for the rebate,
because there is no regressivity to offset. Everything has been
a wash. You get more take-home pay, you pay a little bit more
at the checkout of exactly the amount that is now being
withheld for the goods and services you buy. You are no worse
off. So there is no need for the rebate because there is no
regressivity. And the truth is that, obviously, there is
regressivity. You can't have a consumption-based tax system
without it.
And whether having some kind of monthly check that goes to
every person in the United States is the way to deal with that
is a debatable point.
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas. Well, you stated in your testimony
that, given that tax revenues have averaged around 18 percent
of GDP since World War II, what, in your view, would the fair
tax have to be to generate that level of revenue?
Mr. BARTLETT. I honestly don't know, for this reason. For
as long as I have heard of the FairTax, which is more than 20
years, they have always said that arate of 23 percent would
equal current revenues, and not increase them and not reduce
them. But during that time period, revenues have been as high
as 20.6 percent of GDP in the year 2000. And right now they are
about 14.8 percent of GDP.
So, if it would equal revenues in 2000 at 23 percent, then
it would have to be a massive tax increase today. Either that,
or it never would come anywhere close to have equaled the
revenues that we had in the year 2000. If they were honest, the
rate would vary, depending on taxes as a share of GDP. But they
always say, year after year, it is always 23 percent.
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas. Governor and Professor, would you
care to comment?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes, I would. First of all, let me say I am
not, you know, the fair tax guys that Bruce is alluding to.
Well, I'm not one of them. I am a professional economist, okay?
And I am here to talk to you folks as a professional economist,
not as ``the fair tax guy,'' all right? Let's just start there.
Now, a lot of----
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas. So you don't want to pay a fair tax.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. What? Well, I want to tell you what I know,
as an economist, okay?
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas. Okay.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. And a lot of the statements that have just
been made would not get through my course--that Bruce just
made, and even a couple that Governor Huckabee made were not
really appropriate about the fair tax, because we don't really
think that the current tax system is embedded in prices. We
don't think the current prices embed the current taxes.
We do think that if you put on a fair tax, prices will go
up. If the Fed accommodates--we think the Federal Reserve
determines the price level. It does.
Chairman CAMP. I'm going to have to stop you here, because
the 5 minutes has expired. Mr. Rangel is recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
experts, for sharing your views with us. But I just want to
take this opportunity to thank Governor Huckabee. He was kind
enough to invite me to his very popular TV show, and was more
than fair to me in the differences that we had politically.
And I really thought I had you when I gave you the scenario
of a debate between how you protect the vulnerable. And I put
on one side the naked and the thirsty and the hungry and those
who were jobless, and wanted to protect these people. They were
unemployed and they were poor. And then I put on the other side
that we can kind of protect them a little better if we made an
appeal to the very rich, and kind of said, ``Could you help us
out a little bit to protect the vulnerable?'' And I really
thought I had you.
But you went to Divinity School, and you came up with some
verses that I never heard of, where the rich were entitled to
empower the whatever, humanity, and that the poor was here to
stay. Could you restate that? Because most of that was done
when I was asked to leave the show.
[Laughter.]
Mr. HUCKABEE. Congressman, it is a pleasure to see you
again. I hope you will come back to the show.
But in the meantime, let me just say that what I believe
you are referencing is--my understanding of the scripture is
that--do we have an obligation to the poor? Absolutely. Should
we reach out and help people and lift them up? Absolutely. One
of my reasons for the advocacy for the fair tax is because I
believe that, ultimately, it does more to give people the
opportunity to rise above where they have come from.
I did not grow up with a silver spoon. I grew up dirt poor,
paid my own way through college, paid my way through graduate
school. First male in my entire family lineage to graduate high
school, much less go to college. I have lived the American
Dream, and I didn't live it by having all of the aspects of
attempting to get to the next rung on the ladder pushed back by
a tax system that punished me for trying to get to the next
rung on the ladder.
I feel a great sense of personal responsibility to help
those who struggle, and continue to feel strongly.
Mr. RANGEL. But?
Mr. HUCKABEE. If I did not feel the tax system could be
improved, I wouldn't be here today. I believe this approach
does, in fact, empower the people at the lowest part of----
Mr. RANGEL. Well, thank you----
Mr. HUCKABEE [continuing]. the spectrum.
Mr. RANGEL [continuing]. Governor Huckabee. I am going to
have to go back to the scriptures. Because if the tax burden is
what I am talking about with the sick, the poor, and the lesser
among us----
Mr. HUCKABEE. No, I don't----
Mr. RANGEL [continuing]. I got a learning to do. Mr.--let
me ask the fair tax people, quickly.
This rebate this, does the rich get a rebate, as well as
the poor?
Mr. TUERCK. Everybody gets the rebate, depending on the----
Mr. RANGEL. Very--okay.
Mr. TUERCK [continuing]. composition of their family.
Mr. RANGEL. That's good enough for me. How much--would the
rebate be called an entitlement program, or what name would you
have? Just ``rebate''?
Mr. TUERCK. I think ``rebate'' does just fine. It's no more
an entitlement than the existing----
Mr. RANGEL. No, okay, that's good. And that would mean
that--would the governors operate the rebate, or the Federal
Government?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Federal Government.
Mr. RANGEL. And who would pay the people to operate this
massive trillion-dollar rebate to everybody, including the
rich? Who would pay that?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I would leave the IRS in place until we got
everything working.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. Now, how about those who would eliminate
the IRS completely?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, I think----
Mr. RANGEL. Because that goes over big in every community.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I think we've got to--you know, if you start
picking on every little detail of----
Mr. RANGEL. No, no, that's not a--IRS is more than a detail
in my community.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes, I agree. And I agree, and I think
it's--all right, it's more than a detail. I think abolishing
the IRS is not a clever idea, and not something I support----
Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Tuerck, do you agree that we have to keep
the IRS?
Mr. TUERCK. No, I don't agree that we have to keep it. But
somebody has to send out the checks.
Mr. RANGEL. Good. I just want to make certain I'm not the
only guy out here. So, with you, we will have the IRS plus this
massive program to give back money and not collect it. Right?
Right. That's okay.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I would have the IRS hand out--yes, the
rebate, exactly.
Mr. RANGEL. Oh, I see. They would be the giver and the
taker.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. The way they are now.
Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Bartlett, one question I want to ask you.
Because when I saw your background, you worked for every
Republican that I have ever served under, including my friend
Jack Kemp, and Reagan, and Bush. And they gave tax cuts, and
they said that these tax cuts paid for themselves, and went
beyond that, and created jobs.
And yet, when you look at the ledger, it seems as though
the tax cuts that were given by President Bush and Reagan
actually were part of the deficit, and not the job creation.
What were your observations?
Chairman CAMP. And if you could, just answer briefly
because time has expired.
Mr. BARTLETT. Well, I think the Reagan tax cut in 1981,
which I had some personal involvement with, was exactly the
right thing to do under those economic circumstances. But I
think it's wrong to assume that just doing the same thing over
and over again, you're going to get the same results.
I think current economic circumstances, you would not get
any economic benefits from any tax cut that I am aware of,
because our fundamental problem is a lack of aggregate demand,
and tax cuts are essentially passive.
Chairman CAMP. All right, thank you. Mr. Tiberi is
recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing today on the fair tax.
Professor, kind of expanding upon Mr. Rangel's questioning,
can you envision--or how do you envision the Federal Government
being involved--giving you a little bit of time to respond to
this--in the manner of either sending out these rebates, or
some enforcement mechanism? Is it the IRS, or is it something
different? Either one of you, or both.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I mean I envision the states doing--the
Federal Government working with the states to collect the tax,
and the Federal Government, whether it's through the IRS or
some other agency, mailing the rebate checks or distributing
those to all Americans. So Bill Gates is going to get the same-
sized check as somebody with his size family.
But the check is going to be big enough so that poor people
won't have to pay any sales tax on net. That is very important.
This is going to produce a zero net tax liability for poor
people. That is one of the reasons why this is a progressive
tax structure.
There is a table two in this testimony that we have that
shows very clearly that Congressman Levin's statements about
progressivity are not correct. It shows a very clear table of
progressivity. It shows that Mr. Bartlett's statements are not
correct, either, about the progressivity of the system.
Let me just say one thing about this which may get your
attention. Suppose you have Warren Buffet here, and he has $30
billion. Suppose that Mr. Rangel were sitting here in front of
Mr. Buffett. Mr. Buffett has $30 billion. And you ask Mr.
Buffett and Mr. Rangel, ``Gee, Mr. Buffett, if you were to
spend your $30 billion today on 30 billion steaks, maybe you
could buy them at $1 a steak. How many steaks would you get?''
Mr. Buffett would say, ``Thirty billion steaks.''
Now, Mr. Buffett, what if you had to face a 30 percent
retail sales tax? How many steaks would you get? Well, you do
the calculation, find out he had--got 23 percent fewer steaks.
In effect, the sales tax taxes Mr. Buffett's wealth. That's why
I keep saying that the sale tax is a tax partly on wealth and
partly on wages.
So, are we taxing wealth right now under the current
system? No. Mr. Buffett's wealth is not taxed. We don't tax
principal. We tax the income from it. If Mr. Buffett actually
realizes his capital gains, which he probably doesn't--he
probably borrows against it to do consumption. So do a lot of
other rich people.
So, you have to realize that the rich aren't paying a lot
of taxes in the system--you know that as well as I, Mr. Rangel.
But if you have a way to tax their wealth--and even if they
don't spend their wealth today, whenever he does spend it he is
going to be facing this tax. And present value, he is going to
be out 23 percent of his wages. That's why the effective tax
rate is 23 percent. That's the rate we need to use to compare
the current income tax with the fair tax, because it's an
apples-to-apples comparison.
That's why you want to look at the effective tax rate, not
the nominal tax rate.
Mr. TIBERI. Let me try to take this back. The governor
mentioned about the IRS, and mentioned about the--or mentioned
the Tax Code, and how lengthy it was. This obviously is very
much simpler than our current system. Would you need the
current bureaucracy that we have in place? Wouldn't you just
need something much smaller? Professor?
Mr. TUERCK. We have done some estimates of the impact on
administration of the system. And it is vastly more expensive
to have the existing income tax system, when you count all the
compliance costs that taxpayers have to bear, compared to the
fair tax.
The only reason the fair tax architects want the states to
collect the money is because almost all states have a sales
tax, and it would be a simple extension of that mechanism to
collecting the fair tax and passing it on to the government.
But on the other hand, it would be perfectly okay too if
the Federal Government could do it more efficiently. So I'm
with Larry on that. Why not let them--whoever can do it more
efficiently, they should collect the tax.
And I have to say one thing about Mr. Bartlett's comments.
His analysis is a welter of confusion in mathematical error.
There is no new burden on state and local governments. There is
no burden on the Federal Government. There is no basis for the
rebate in whatever happens to prices. The rebate is there to
make--take this from a proportional tax to a progressive tax.
In fact, there is so much that we could begin with here as
a baseline to--that would eliminate this confused thinking,
that would take us much further along toward getting to a good
answer to this problem. And I would hope that there would be a
future hearing some time where your economists would look at
the discussion that has gone back and forth between Mr.
Bartlett and me and Larry on this, and start from a baseline
where we have at least the basic algebra correct. Thank you.
Mr. TIBERI. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. I guess I have my credentials. Somebody down
there said they were poor; I was, too. As a youngster--I never
slept alone until I was married. And that defines how the Stark
family got along in the deep depression.
The value-added tax, or fair tax, as you call it, I would
just like to talk a little bit about why I would oppose it.
One, I would no longer be able to go to Europe and meet
with American CPAs as they studied the value-added tax and
complained about the complexities that it imposed on American
companies. Those are nice trips, and they are interesting. But
I would like to just talk about some of the issues that would
affect the Uniform Commercial Code.
A transfer of title. Where do you pay the tax then, when
the title transfers, or when you collect? How every lawyer who
provides a service to a client would owe the tax, at the time
he provided the service or she provided the service, not at the
time when they collected the money. So, you would suddenly find
an awful lot of our professionals--lawyers, dentists, others--
who may not collect in cash on the spot suddenly owing tax
immediately, yet not having collected the revenue to pay for
it.
So, in dealing with the Uniform Commercial Code that we are
used to in this country, bankers would have a problem getting
title to goods to lend against. All of these things would have
to be restructured for the value-added tax to work. And that is
one of the problems that I see in providing this.
I wanted to ask the chairman if--is this a provision that
might be in your suggestions for tax reform?
Chairman CAMP. We are----
Mr. STARK. You don't know yet, but----
Chairman CAMP. We are holding a number of hearings on tax
reform, and this is one of them.
Mr. STARK. So this is just one of the things you are----
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. STARK. Okay. So, I don't know. I would ask Mr.
Bartlett. What would you have to do to accommodate all of the
changes in the way we conduct business in this country, if you
had a fair tax or value-added tax?
Mr. BARTLETT. Well, it would be extremely difficult, but I
presume we could get some guidance from other countries as to
how they operate. And I believe that Mr. White from the GAO may
be able to talk about that.
But let me make a point, a more general point, which is
that one of the reasons why the FairTax is administratively
difficult is because it will tax all services. Now, no state
makes any effort to tax more than a tiny fraction of services
because there is no tangible exchange. There is no good
involved. So it is ridiculously simple to go to somebody who is
doing some work for you, whether it is a lawyer or a doctor or
somebody who is doing landscaping for you, and say, ``Let's
just do this off the books. I will pay you cash,'' and there
will be nothing for Uncle Sam, because there will be no
records.
Mr. STARK. Well, it's also--in Europe, where they have it,
they talk about tax collection. In other words, if the tax
collector doesn't find you, you don't pay. So the European tax
collectors have to run around from door to door, see if you
bought a new car, remodeled your house, and then levy a tax and
extract it from you. Here we still, for the most part, have a
voluntary tax system. And I think, under a fair tax or a VAT,
that would disappear and no longer--did--were--how many of you
on the panel here have been paid for your research in the area
of fair tax or value-added tax? Just two of you? Okay.
Governor Huckabee, you didn't collect anything for all the
good work you are doing?
Mr. HUCKABEE. I have received not a penny from anyone
associated with the fair tax. It is simply a position I have
taken out of my wonderful charity for the United States of
America, and my consideration for the fine Members of Congress.
Mr. STARK. Well, I want to thank you particularly for your
kind words about me some weeks ago. I hope they don't come back
to haunt you. And thank the witnesses for participating today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It was interesting,
hearing the scripture tossed around here earlier. Different
people try to fit these perceptions into their sense of world
view. The thing I would remind everybody is we are told not to
add to or take away from the Word.
And it reminds me of something the chairman likes to say:
``The Tax Code is 10 times bigger than the bible with no good
news.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. DAVIS. Which brings me to a question when we relate to
this issue of process, the huge cost of tax compliance. And
compliance in any tax system is going to be an issue, because
there are those who are going to attempt to comply with the
plan in the most advantageous way to themselves, and then there
are those who will simply try to skirt the system.
And I guess the question I would like to start with,
Professor Kotlikoff, is because all systems have a certain
amount of non-compliance, first, who is going to enforce the
fair tax? And is this a job for--that current IRS employees
might handle?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, I have nothing against the current IRS
employees. I think they are pretty efficient. They come on the
phone these days.
I mean, look. Lots of the--the vast majority of the sales
are going to be in places like Wal-Marts, where there is not
going to be much issue of compliance. So then the question is--
and you are reducing dramatically the number of taxpayers, from
120 million down to 700,000.
So then the question is how do you go after--deal with
compliance where somebody comes up to mow your lawn. And that
kind of issue arises under the income tax. These people that
are selling services aren't reporting their--for cash--aren't
reporting their income under the income tax. So the question is
whether the evasion will be worse, and whether the compliance--
the cost of getting people to comply will be higher.
We think the cost will be smaller. We think the evasion
should be smaller, because we are going to have more people to
dedicate to a smaller number of taxpayers to work on that
problem.
But there is also some new ways you can think about dealing
with evasion. I mean suppose you tell the home owner who is
getting his lawn mowed: ``When you get your lawn mowed, you are
supposed to get a receipt with a bar code and the amount that
you paid for the lawn.''
You are supposed to put that into the mail box, and also
the person who mowed your lawn is supposed to put it in the
mail box, so the IRS or whatever agency can then compare.
Mr. DAVIS. Just as an aside, would that not give us
something similar to what we had to un-do with the 1099
situation earlier?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I do not know about the 1099 situation you
are referring to.
Mr. DAVIS. I am referring to buried in the health care bill
was that all business transactions over $600 would require the
filing of 1099s, which would have inundated the very retail
outlets that we are talking about.
I am not sharp shooting you with the question, but coming
down to a deeper process issue, any time we reduce complexity,
we reduce cost of compliance, because the overhead component is
reduced, and in that case, money in the economy.
I am just trying to understand how we would have a
legitimate enforcement mechanism from a process standpoint--I
am an engineer, not a politician.
I am interested in how the flow would work in order to cut
that cost and----
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. The stores, the retail outlets, would be
responsible for collecting the taxes and mailing it in.
Again, most of the sales collection or tax collection would
be done by big outlets like Wal-Mart.
It is likely to be an easier collection process than we now
have with millions and millions of taxpayers having to decide
really what income they want to report under income taxes. It
is pretty much a voluntary tax the way it is set up.
Nobody is checking my expenses or income very carefully
from one year to the next. The Government is relying on me to
be honest, basically, which I am.
Mr. DAVIS. Governor Huckabee.
Mr. HUCKABEE. What I would like to point out is there is an
extraordinary amount of underground economy that is currently
not taxed.
I doubt that many gamblers, prostitutes, pimps, and drug
dealers are filling out 1040 forms and sending in their due
tax.
When you base taxation on retail consumption, people who
purchase things in the marketplace, even if they are drug
dealers, prostitutes, pimps and others, are going to be paying
the tax like the rest of us who honestly pay our taxes.
Dishonest people are still going to be dishonest. We have a
greater level or mechanism of collecting tax, and the
compliance issue is a huge one.
It has been estimated that as much as $500 billion a year
is spent just complying with the Tax Code in this country. That
is money that does not produce a thing except paperwork.
That is why I think FairTax brings simplicity to a system
that is overwhelmingly complicated.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you all very much. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Lewis is recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. I appreciate any opportunity we have to discuss
comprehensive tax reform.
However, I must express my disappointment that we are not
gathered here to discuss the most pressing issue of the day,
the ongoing debt ceiling negotiation.
What worries me even more is that House Republicans seem to
be making a habit of this.
Last week, the House Republicans allowed FAA authorization
to expire, freezing airport projects nationwide, sending
hundreds and thousands of hard working Americans home
indefinitely.
We are just days away from August 2, yet we are here
talking about everything but the debt limit. There seems to be
no sense of urgency to help get Americans back to work.
Mr. Bartlett, you have been around for a while, in two
Administrations. You are a very smart, gifted man.
Could you tell us about the dangers of not raising the debt
ceiling, what it will really mean for workers and their
families if we do not raise the debt ceiling?
Mr. BARTLETT. The worst case scenario, quite frankly, is
that the financial markets will completely seize up the way
they did when Lehman Brothers collapsed, except it would be far
worse.
The market for U.S. Treasury securities is essentially the
foundation upon which the entire world financial system rests.
It is the one asset that everybody has always believed has zero
risk of default.
You introduce into that system the tiniest little risk of
default, and all of a sudden you have enormous problems.
The rating agencies have repeatedly said our debt may be
downgraded, and this sets in motion a number of forces, because
there are certain banks that are only allowed to hold AAA rated
debt. If it goes down to BB, they have to get rid of some
things.
There are many securities that use U.S. Treasuries as their
backing. If the Treasury security falls in price, they have
problems. It becomes a ripple effect that we may not know the
full consequences of unless it happens.
Everybody thought the fall of Lehman--certainly the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve--was not that big a deal,
otherwise they would have bailed them out. They said let it go.
We know what happened. Financial markets seized up.
I think we could see something potentially worse if we
allow a default to occur.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much.
Professor, do you care to respond?
Mr. TUERCK. Yes. I envision a meeting with the President
and the Majority Leader of the Senate and the Speaker of the
House in which they say we have come up with a way to raise
more revenue, to increase the fairness of the tax system, and
have spending cuts, too.
If you want to come up with that plan, adopt the FairTax.
If you impose the FairTax rate at the statutory rate we have
today, the Government would bring in about $200 billion more
than it is currently bringing in. That would be the new
revenue.
We would create jobs, ten percent growth in jobs. Spur
investment. Then we would have the revenue increases that the
President wants, and we could get the spending cuts that the
Speaker of the House wants.
That is the way to solve this problem. We could end this
whole discussion right now, and I suggest that is the way we do
it.
Mr. LEWIS. Let me ask your friend here who is assisting
you.
Mr. TUERCK. I think I am assisting him, actually.
Mr. LEWIS. If a family of four at the poverty level lost
the benefit of the EITC and child credit, had to pay 23 percent
more for everything they purchased, would they really be better
off?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. That is addressed in table two, Congressman
Lewis. Let me say my sensibilities about the poor are identical
to yours. I think if you spent time with me, you would
understand that I have the same views.
Mr. LEWIS. There are some numbers that came out today or
maybe late last night that the gap has widened. The rich are
getting richer and the poor are getting poorer.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I am concerned about that. I have cited this
carefully. It is included in a framework where the EITC, the
child tax credit, all the provisions of the Federal income tax
are incorporated. I have done my homework on this.
In Table 2, if we look at the table, if we look at a
married couple earning $30,000--not Table 2--sorry, it is Table
2.
A family that is now middle aged, $30,000. Their lifetime
average tax rate under the current system is 15.3 percent. That
incorporates the EITC and the child tax credit.
Under the FairTax, it is 3.4 percent. I did not know the
answer before I did the calculation, just so you know. I did
get paid for the research, but I did not know the answer, and
the research is what the research shows.
I said let's take this framework, which is a lifetime life
cycle framework. Let's look at the taxes that this couple is
going to pay every year for the rest of their lives.
Let's figure out as a share of the present value of the
remaining lifetime resources the labor income and their initial
wealth, what is their tax rate, the average tax rate under the
current tax system, and then let's do it again under the
FairTax.
It turns out to be lower under the FairTax. If you look at
the results in Table 2 of the testimony, you will see that this
is actually a highly progressive tax, and it does lower the
taxes on working people because it is coming up with another
source of revenue, which is Warren Buffett's steak dinners.
That is what I am trying to get across here. This is
embedding a wealth tax. If I came to you and said you Democrats
here on this panel, how would you feel about having a 23
percent effective tax on wealth and use the proceeds, a tax on
all the wealthy people in this country, use the proceeds to
lower the taxes on workers?
You would say that is fantastic, it will never get through.
No Republican would ever propose it.
That is what Republicans are proposing in the FairTax. That
is mathematical. You take any first rate economist from any top
department, ask them that question, and he will say that is the
answer.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Reichert is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor, I do agree with you. Mr. Chairman, thank you for
holding this.
This debt ceiling discussion is certainly centered around
as we watch taxes and spending, and I think everyone recognizes
there needs to be tax reform. We would like a simpler Tax Code
and tax process.
I think more than anything, Americans across this country
recognize that we have a spending problem. We are spending
money we do not have.
As we look at tax reform as a part of our economic
solution, financial solution, I was listening to Mr. Bartlett
who mentioned used houses were not taxed and new homes are
taxed.
I want to ask the Professor and Mr. Bartlett what would be
the impact to new construction of homes under this plan if used
homes are not taxed and new construction is taxed?
Home buyers would be obviously directed toward buying used
homes. Is that not correct? What would be the impact to new
construction in the home buying industry?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. The price of new homes would go up in the
marketplace relative to--I mean old homes would go up in the
marketplace, so it would lead to a capital gain on old homes.
That is why under the purple tax plan I have put forward, I
tax housing uniformly, no matter whether it is new or old, by
taxing the imputed rent, the consumption services from the
housing.
Whether it is new housing or old housing, under the purple
tax, which is a modification of the FairTax proposal, this
problem that I see with the FairTax gets corrected, and we have
a bigger tax base, and also tax imputed rent on yachts, private
airplanes.
I think all consumption should be taxed. That is what is
part of the purple tax.
I also deal with one of Bruce's concerns in the purple tax,
if I might just take a second to mention it. He is concerned
and I think there is a concern about evasion, because the tax
rate under the FairTax is 30 percent, relatively high.
What I propose in the purple tax is to have a FairTax at
17.5 percent nominal rate, 15 percent effective rate, and then
take the FICA tax and make that progressive. Get rid of the
ceiling on the FICA tax and exempt the first $40,000 of the
employee part of the FICA tax from taxation. Get rid of the
first $40,000 employee based taxes or the first $40,000 of
earnings.
Now you have a progressive FICA tax, a lower rated FairTax,
two progressive elements, and also a 15 percent inheritance
tax. That is what the purple tax plan is.
I think we need to think broadly about consumption
taxation. We can implement it in a lot of different ways. We
should not say just because somebody is trying to talk about
the merits and demerits of the FairTax, you are the FairTax
guy, therefore, you are the enemy.
Let's try to understand what we really care about. We care
about incentives. We care about fair treatment between
generations. We want to make sure we can get our fiscal policy
in order.
Mr. REICHERT. Professor, under a clean FairTax, this old
versus new language would apply to homes, it would apply to
boats, it would apply to yachts. Would it apply to commercial
construction? Would your purple tax cover commercial
construction?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. No. Construction for buildings that are used
in production of goods and services, that is not taxed. It is
just consumption of goods and services by households and
purchases of consumption items by governments and non-profits.
All of consumption, what the national income accounts record as
consumption. That would be the tax base.
I am saying take the FairTax, if you like the FairTax,
think about maybe modifying it so that all of housing
consumption services are subject to taxation, so that all the
services from private jets and yachts are subject to taxation.
Mr. REICHERT. Used cars, new cars?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I have an excise tax I have to pay every
year to my local town in Massachusetts; yes.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bartlett, one of the arguments our Republican friends
have made here over decades is that tax cuts pay for
themselves.
I noted in the blog you recently wrote that indeed, you
suggest that tax cuts do not pay for themselves.
As a Treasury official who served with President Reagan,
can you explain to the committee why you do not believe that
tax cuts pay for themselves?
Mr. BARTLETT. First of all, nobody in the Reagan
Administration said that the Reagan tax cut would pay for
itself. The documents that the administration sent to Capitol
Hill in February of 1981 all showed standard revenue losses
based on Joint Committee/Treasury methodology that has been
around forever.
In fact, if you check Congressional Budget Office documents
from that time period and keep in mind the CBO was then headed
by Mrs. Rivlin, I believe, it showed revenue losses almost
identical to those projected by the administration.
The argument that we were making when I was working for
Jack Kemp was that you would not lose as much as the static
revenue loss because if you got some growth in the economy,
that would enlarge the tax base and you would get back some of
that money.
Eventually, Larry Lindsey, an economist who is probably
known to this committee, wrote a book and he concluded you got
back maybe a third. You lose two-thirds. I think that is pretty
standard public finance theory.
The only tax cut that I have ever heard anybody credibly
assert pays for itself is occasionally you can cut the capital
gains tax. But that is because capital gains involves gains
that may have taken place over a long period of time, and if
you realize them all at once, then you can get an unlocking
effect and possibly pay for itself.
In general, tax cuts lose revenue. I do not know anyone who
really argues that point.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you. Governor Huckabee, the Treasury
Department and the Joint Committee on Taxation have concluded
that a rate significantly higher than 23 percent would be
necessary for FairTax to be fiscally neutral.
I cite the examples of Joint Tax and Treasury because they
tend to be made up of Democrats and Republicans who in the next
life want to be known for their honesty, as they secure a
position in the private sector.
They have suggested that--by the way, they are not paid for
their advocacy, as you know, other than by the taxpayer--rate
would actually have to be closer to 50 percent to make up for
lost revenue.
I have listened to Dick Armey and others over many years
talk about transition costs, and they are substantial.
Mr. HUCKABEE. I have never heard the 50 percent figure, and
I think that would be frankly one of the issues that one of the
economists could better address.
I do know that politically speaking, the simplification of
the Tax Code would be much preferable to a Tax Code that is
beyond anyone's comprehension.
What I believe is without the ability to refute is that the
complications of our current Tax Code make it so that business
owners no longer are making business decisions. They are making
tax decisions.
Mr. NEAL. Even Dick Armey, as the Majority Leader, stated
as he offered his sales tax proposal at the time, which is a
bit different than what we are discussing here--Dick Armey used
to say not only would there be a substantial transition cost
that was slightly enormous, but he also stated we had to be in
the vicinity of 28 to 30 percent.
Mr. TUERCK. Congressman.
Mr. NEAL. Yes, just a moment for me to question Professor
Kotlikoff, but go ahead.
Mr. TUERCK. I would make this simple. Our research is on
line. It is simply a matter of going to the National Income and
Product accounts and going through the statute and figuring out
what the base is, and then figuring out what the rate is.
We could all sit down over a spreadsheet and resolve this
question in a few minutes. To be more realistic, in a few days.
We came up with a rate of 23.82 percent for a hypothetical
2007 tax year. We re-did the calculation and in 2010, we think
a lower rate would work.
It is not rocket science. It is simply getting the base
correct, which we think we have done. I would like to see the
other calculations that lead to a different rate.
Mr. NEAL. Professor Kotlikoff, I appreciate your testimony.
You mentioned the phrase ``transitional cost.'' That is a fair
statement. There is a transitional cost, and that has been part
of the discussion we have had for a long period of time.
You mentioned lawn care as an example. Are you satisfied in
Wellesley, Sudbury, Gloucester, Haverhill, Springfield and
Worcester, these people there cutting lawns during the Summer,
they are all currently complying with IRS regulations?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. No, I am sure they are not. I am saying we
have to think out of the box. Technology is available now, I
think, to help us to enforce even their paying taxes.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired. Thank you. Dr. Boustany is
recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad we are
having this hearing. I am finding it helpful given that I am
certainly getting a lot of calls from constituents back home in
Louisiana about the FairTax. I am finding this very helpful to
flesh out some of the issues.
I want to explore the issue of small business compliance
and potential burdens on small businesses if we go to this type
of tax system.
Right now, we are very concerned about jobs and job
creation, especially with small businesses, as we look at our
economy.
Mr. Bartlett, as I understand it, small businesses across
the U.S. would be responsible for collecting this FairTax. In
addition, small businesses would have to maintain certain
segregated accounts for the payment of taxes, and larger
sellers would actually have to provide a security deposit equal
to or greater than $100,000 or 1.5 times the seller's average
monthly tax liability during the previous six calendar months.
Given all that, if we went to this type of system, talk to
me a little bit about the compliance burden on small businesses
and the impact this might have on jobs.
Mr. BARTLETT. It is hard to say what the impact on jobs
would be. There is no question there will be a vast increase in
the compliance burden on small businesses. Basically, to reduce
the compliance burden on individuals, you have to increase it
on businesses.
They are the ones who are going to be responsible for being
the IRS' tax collectors. They are going to have to collect the
revenue and transmit it to the Treasury.
As we know, we already have enormous problems in that area,
in the small business area, where they are having great
difficulty complying with the taxes. It is very well known.
They have to collect already Social Security and payroll
taxes and transmit them. And often times, small businesses need
that cash flow and they use it to cover other expenses, and
they end up being in trouble with the IRS.
There is no question there will be an increased burden on
small businesses. No question.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you. Professor Kotlikoff?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Under the FairTax proposal, you are getting
rid of the FICA tax, so they will not have to comply with that.
I presume they would be able to get software that would
help them deal with segregation of the accounts.
I do not see this as a huge thing. I go to a lot of small
stores. They are in operation, even though they are paying the
Massachusetts' sales tax when I buy something.
This is just going to be an extra sales tax that is
collected. It is going to be the software's job to get this
right. It is not going to be the actual owner, that he is
actually going to have to do calculations. It will all be
automated, I believe.
The Federal Government can certainly assist small
businesses with that technology if need be.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Governor Huckabee, you have traveled around
the country a great bit and spoken to many, many people across
this great country of ours. Have you heard those concerns in
the context of FairTax among small business owners?
Mr. HUCKABEE. Congressman, small business owners love the
FairTax because of the simplicity of it. Right now, they are
eaten up with complying with an incredibly impossible to
understand Tax Code that requires them to hire lawyers and
accountants at a good deal of their profit.
The FairTax means anyone can figure out 23 percent. It does
not take a lawyer and accountant to come up with figuring that.
This idea that it is complicated, I would contest that. I
think it is quite the opposite. It is the simplicity of it that
causes small business owners, with whom I have spoken all over
the country, to embrace this, because they would rather put
their money into putting products on the shelves and employees
on their floors as opposed to sending checks to accountants and
lawyers in order to help be a part of this half a trillion
dollar compliance cost that we currently have with the 67,000
page complex Tax Code.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you. Professor Kotlikoff, the goal of
the FairTax is to remove the taxes embedded within prices and
replace them with a clear simple tax of 23 percent.
Give me a little breakdown again on the price/wage issue.
It came up earlier.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. The notion that prices in the current
system, tax system, embed the current tax system, is not
correct. Supporters of FairTax have come up with that
proposition. It is not based on economics. It is just not
right.
The basic story is this, there is a price level, a price
for let's say a chicken, and the retail price level is set by
the Federal Reserve by how much money it has in the economy,
and what is going to happen is if we went to FairTax, workers
would receive more pay in their checks because they would not
have to pay the FICA tax or the income tax. They would also get
the prebate check.
Then they are going to go the store, and the prices will be
30 percent higher, as Bruce indicated, that is correct, and
then the question is are they worse off or better off.
The answer is if you look at Table 2 and other
calculations, you find out that working people, poor people,
are better off. They pay less taxes over their lifetime,
measure of present value lifetime tax rate, under this FairTax
system, than they do under the current system. They also have
lower marginal effective tax rates.
The marginal effective tax rate on saving becomes zero
under the FairTax. Our national savings rate is zero this
year--last year. It was 15 percent in 1965. We have driven it
down to zero.
That is why we are importing so much capital from abroad,
from China and other places. That is why we are running the
current account deficits we are, because our national saving
rate is so low.
You have better incentives and more prospects for growth
from this system.
As David was indicating, having no corporate income tax,
and as the Governor was indicating, is going to be a great
boom.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Time has expired. Mr. Becerra is
recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
your testimony. It is a great conversation to have, and we will
need to have a conversation like this if we ever hope to be
able to reform the Tax Code, although I am not sure how fair
this so-called ``FairTax proposal'' is. It is converging more
on the fairy tale side of fair than real fairness.
My understanding is there is no country, no state, that has
ever implemented anything along the lines of this so-called
``FairTax proposal,'' probably because it is unworkable for the
reasons that have been discussed, and that I think Mr. Neal
pointed out.
How do you get compliance up to a point where you really
have everyone paying truly their fair share.
Mr. Bartlett, I know you have done a number of studies on
this. I know you worked in the administration and Government
and outside of it in the past.
Are you familiar with any country or any place in the world
ever where a proposal like the so-called ``FairTax proposal''
has been put in place?
Mr. BARTLETT. No country to my knowledge has anything
remotely like this. They have studied the idea of something
like a FairTax, and in every case they concluded that a value
added tax makes more sense if that is the route you want to go.
Mr. BECERRA. That is because it is a lot easier to try to
get compliance.
Mr. BARTLETT. I do not want to jump on what they will be
talking about on the next panel, but the VAT is easier to
administer and much harder to evade because it is embedded in
the prices.
Let me make another point, which is----
Mr. BECERRA. Very quickly.
Mr. BARTLETT. There are no two states that have exactly the
same sales tax base, and no state has a sales tax base that is
anywhere near as comprehensive as the FairTax.
Mr. BECERRA. Take a state like mine, California, which has
a fairly high sales tax rate, but it is still under ten
percent. To buy a house in California, you are looking at
$200,000 to $500,000, depending on what part of the state you
live in, to have to pay a 30 percent tax on top of the price of
that home, or whether it is just to buy a computer or car, all
of a sudden, you are calculating 30 percent more on a tax.
If you go to a state like Virginia that has a far lower
sales tax than my state of California, I think it is around
five or six percent, you go to 30 percent, all of a sudden,
somebody making $50,000 is looking at how you purchase that
house or that new dishwasher or clothes washer, it makes it a
little bit more difficult.
As interesting a conversation this is, it is still
academic. We are a week away from something that is not
academic, and that is this whole discussion of whether or not
the country will pay its debts.
I am hoping I can get you all to concentrate a bit more on
the revenue aspect of this crisis that has been manufactured,
because the reality is we have always found a way to get past
this issue of paying our bills, yet this time, it seems like we
have hit an intractable resolution to this.
Mr. Bartlett, you wrote an interesting article recently,
where you talked about what happens when you deal with the Tax
Code, tinker with the Tax Code, and make it sound like it is
going to do one thing and have it do something totally
different.
Back in the early 2000s, we were running budget surpluses.
President Bush at that point told us we could actually reduce
the size of those surpluses by returning money to the American
people for the taxes they had paid because we had these massive
surpluses, $5.6 trillion in surpluses over the coming ten
years. These tax cuts were passed.
You wrote this article that points out that not only as a
result have we drained the Treasury of trillions of dollars of
revenue, which now makes these deficits far larger, but at the
same time, we did not see the commensurate growth in the
economy that would help produce jobs that would help produce
more revenue by people paying more taxes.
Can you comment a bit on what you found?
Mr. BARTLETT. Yes. There is an article in the New York
Times this morning on exactly that point. I note that according
to the CBO, the Bush tax cuts reduced Federal revenues by about
$3 trillion below what they would have otherwise been, and you
got about another $3 trillion loss of revenues due to slower
than expected economic growth. And then you have about $6
trillion of additional spending for unpaid wars and various
things of that sort.
You went from a $6 trillion surplus to a $6 trillion
deficit, which is a turnaround of $12 trillion.
I think the argument is very commonly made that we cannot
raise taxes because it will destroy the economy. That same
identical argument was made in 1982 when Ronald Reagan put
forward the largest peacetime tax increase in American history.
We had massive growth thereafter.
The same argument was made in 1993 when President Clinton
raised taxes. We had a very strong economy.
The argument for the Bush tax cuts, at least one of them,
was we would have faster growth. We had the worse ten years,
economic years, since the Great Depression.
It seems at least superficially the relationship is the
opposite. Higher taxes actually raised economic growth and tax
cuts caused the economy to collapse.
I am just saying you can make that argument based on
history.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you. I want to thank the panelists as
well. This has been an exciting conversation to have. I want to
commend the chairman for holding this hearing because I think
it is important to talk about solutions, and I believe this is
one of those types of programs that could truly be a solution
for our country.
The current tax system, as so many have said, is incredibly
broke and it is remarkably complex. The costs of compliance are
massive. It has the Government picking winners and losers,
which all of us say we do not want, which makes the FairTax, I
think, the national retail sales tax, remarkably attractive.
It is simpler. The cost of compliance is less. It certainly
is much more fair.
As the Governor pointed out in his comments, we say we want
success. We say we want hard work. We say we want vision. We
say we want entrepreneurship. We say we want savings. We say we
want job creation.
Yet, in our tax system, we punish every single one of them.
Every single one of them. Again, I think that makes the FairTax
something that we all ought to take a very serious look at.
It rewards savings. It rewards hard work. It rewards
entrepreneurship. It rewards job creation.
In addition, it does a couple of things that I think are
important to point out. One is that it captures all the
underground economy that we currently are not capturing right
now. That is estimated to be a third of our economy by some
folks.
It would decrease the cost of doing business by 23 percent,
virtually overnight. I beg to differ with Mr. Bartlett. I will
touch on that in a moment.
It is a less regressive system. It is more fair to
individuals at the bottom end of the economic spectrum.
I am excited by having this conversation. I am concerned
that some to be imprisoned by their past deeds and comments. I
an enthused and excited by folks actually gaining a greater
understanding of what I believe to be, as Mr. Tuerck said, a
solution to the challenges that we have right now.
Mr. Bartlett mentioned that the proponents of this say that
it decreases the cost of services or goods by 23 percent, adds
in 23 percent, so the consumer sees basically a wash, which I
think is accurate.
Why on earth would you need the rebate if that is so? The
fact of the matter is we believe the rebate is appropriate
because the current system is unfair. The current system is
remarkably regressive and punishing those individuals at the
lower end of the economic spectrum.
That is the reason the rebate is needed, and then those
individuals actually have a much more fair system.
Mr. Tuerck, I want to touch on Table 2, because I think it
is incredibly important.
Mr. TUERCK. Which table? I am sorry.
Mr. PRICE. Table 2. This is the one that talks about
lifetime tax rates. This is for young adults, middle aged,
seniors, married, individuals, single households.
For every single line that you have here, whether it is
$10,000, $50,000, $100,000, $250,000, et cetera, for every
single line compared to the current system and their lifetime
tax rates compared to the FairTax, every single one of them has
individuals paying less under the FairTax system. Every single
one. How can that be?
Mr. TUERCK. First of all, that is Larry's table, so I am
going to ask him to comment on that.
We did our own calculation and we broke individuals down by
spending deciles, which is in a way mirroring Larry's own
approach, and what we find is that the people in the lowest
spending deciles would all gain, and more so over time as the
economy expanded, and the people who would lose were the ones
in the top spending deciles.
That reflects current economic thinking about the way to
address the progressivity/regressivity issue.
I would only add to that I wonder what this committee would
say if somebody walked into this room and said I have a plan
for broadening the base, cutting the rate, and by every
economic standard imaginable drilling the economy, what do you
think about that?
That is what the FairTax does. It has a broader base, and
therefore, it has a lower rate, and if you read any economics
textbook, I do not know whether you believe them or not, but if
you read them, moving toward a consumption tax un-taxes net
investment and expands the economy.
Mr. PRICE. I could not agree more. Mr. Kotlikoff, everybody
here wins. How is that possible?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. There is a tax on wealth associated. This is
really a tax, on what happens to workers, what happens to their
lifetime tax payments as a share of their lifetime labor
income.
It assumes some wealth holdings, but the super wealthy in
this country, a lot of them do not pay any taxes, and they
would pay taxes under the FairTax.
Whenever they buy their yachts or their jets, homes, cars,
villa's, they would pay taxes on what I am proposing on the
imputed rent from those services, from those durables. When
they bought expensive restaurant meals, they would pay tax.
This is a Democrat's fantasy, this proposal.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Time has expired. Mr. Thompson is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a couple of
questions on the particulars of the FairTax, that maybe one of
the professors could answer.
Internet purchases would be taxed?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes, if it is consumption.
Mr. THOMPSON. Would churches be taxed?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Consumption, non-profits; yes.
Mr. TUERCK. Church payments to their employees would not,
as I recall. I can get that answer to you. I may be wrong on
that.
Mr. THOMPSON. Churches would or would not be taxed?
Mr. TUERCK. To that extent. As I recall, I will have to
check, payments to their employees would not be taxed.
Mr. THOMPSON. The taxes to their employees would not be,
but any of their purchases would be?
Mr. TUERCK. That is correct. That is what I recall.
Mr. THOMPSON. Corporations, how are they handled? They are
taxed?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. There is no corporate income tax.
Corporations are not buying consumption.
Mr. THOMPSON. No corporate tax. What if I worked for a
corporation and the corporation buys me my car. Is that
purchase taxed?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I think the way the FairTax would handle
that is it would assess taxes and the corporation would have to
affirmatively show that this was used for business purposes.
I think they would take the money at the dealership, the
tax would be charged.
Mr. THOMPSON. From who? Who would they take the money from?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. From the corporation that buys the car. They
would send the corporation excise tax for the car, and then the
corporation would have to show this was actually used for
business purposes.
Mr. THOMPSON. If I am not working for a corporation and
went down and bought a car, I would be taxed?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Again, I am proposing the taxes on durables,
on homes, cars, be done like an excise tax, computed rent, tax
on what we call the imputed services from these durables, like
the car, you would be paying each year. You pay a tax on it.
Mr. THOMPSON. I just am having a hard time understanding
how this is at all progressive if I as a regular person buy a
car and I am taxed but the corporations avoid that.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Corporations----
Mr THOMPSON. Let me finish my question so you know how to
answer.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes, sir.
Mr. THOMPSON. If I worked for a corporation, somebody else,
I guess nobody pays the tax, and people who get meals,
computers or cars from their employer, which would probably be
wealthier people, getting back to what Mr. Lewis was talking
about, that division between the rich and the poor, they would
be----
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I see your concern. I think the way to
handle that would be to basically tax the purchases. If the
corporation pays to give lunch to its employees, that should be
subject to tax.
Mr. THOMPSON. It sounds pretty confusing.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. If it buys lunch for its employees, it
should be subject to taxation.
Mr. THOMPSON. It does not look very progressive nor very
fair to me. Everyone gets the same rebate and everybody pays
the same tax rate, unless of course, somebody else is buying
your stuff for you, then you get a break.
Mr. Bartlett, you had talked about the problems associated
with default or the threat of default and what this would do to
our economic system.
Would higher interest rates be part of this?
Mr. BARTLETT. People on Wall Street, and there is a report
out from J.P. Morgan that has been widely cited, have said that
interest rates would probably rise by about 60 basis points.
That is .6 percentage points in the event of a default.
I really think that focusing on interest rates may
understate what really may happen. My great fear is a complete
nuclear-type meltdown.
Mr. THOMPSON. I do not want to understate. I just want to
point out that if it is a little bit or a lot, that means car
loans, the price of a car loan goes up, the price of a home
loan goes up, the price of a small business loan goes up.
This all impacts regular people working, trying to make a
living. It would be an incredible increase on them personally,
on their finances.
The article that you referenced, I was trying to read
through it. You talked about what is commonly called the ``Bush
tax cuts,'' and you mentioned that they did not pay for
themselves.
Did they bring us a higher rate of economic growth?
Mr. BARTLETT. No, they did not.
Mr. THOMPSON. They did not pay for themselves, and we did
not see any economic growth as a result of those Bush tax cuts?
Mr. BARTLETT. That is correct.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and thank you all for being here. I find this very
helpful, and I am sure the American people do, too.
As our committee continues to hold hearings on fundamental
tax reform, one motivation we have behind our efforts is to
stimulate economic growth through lower taxes and to lessen the
burden on the taxpayers, and to reduce complexity.
FairTax advocates have claimed that after implementation of
the FairTax, the economy would grow at 10.5 percent. Exports
would grow by 26 percent, and investment by 41 percent, and
employment would be nine percent higher, and that real pre-tax
wages would increase by 11.5 percent.
I would just like each of the panel members to maybe
comment for us about the claims and why they believe that we
might see increased exports, increased employment, and growth
in GDP and investment in the economy.
If the Governor would like to go first.
Mr. HUCKABEE. There has been a lot of talk about this
system would be complex. The reality is it is not complex, not
compared to what we have now.
Are there some complications? Of course, there are. Always
when I say if we compare the complications to the complications
of the current Tax Code, I cannot imagine how anyone would
defend the current Tax Code against the proposals of FairTax,
which is in its worse description much simpler.
The reason that some of these numbers that the economists
have come up with--again, as I said at the beginning, I do not
pretend to be the chemist, just the pharmacist, I cannot tell
you how they arrived at some of the numbers, but I trust their
numbers are carefully researched.
It makes perfect sense to me that if you simplify anything,
it is going to be less expensive.
The reason so much of what you see in the FairTax is
effective is because it does simplify things for the
individual, who now stays up until midnight rushing down to the
post office on April 15 trying to get the tax form in the mail,
or generally goes to a tax preparer, and hopes they get it
right, and often CPAs are trying to figure out every year all
the changes in the Tax Code that may come from this city.
Would it not be much simpler if in fact there was a pretty
straightforward approach, here is the percentage of tax on the
things you purchase.
It is the transparency of it that makes it more effective.
When I hear people say things will cost more, we cannot even
say that unless you equally say people show up at the
marketplace with their entire paychecks, something they have
never done before.
It is not going to change dramatically except for the
people at the lowest end of the economic spectrum, as has been
pointed out. They are going to come out better off.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Congresswoman, the calculations for the
growth of the economy are based on simulating a large scale
life cycle model that takes into account people's incentives,
but also what we economists call ``income effects.''
We have to realize that this decline in the national saving
rate that has occurred over five or six decades now, has
corresponded to a major increase in the absolute and relative
consumption of the elderly.
There has been a huge transfer from young savers to old
spenders, systematically, through time, through the retirement
programs we have been running.
If you really want to understand why consumption has gone
up, why national saving has gone down, why investment has gone
down, it has to do with this redistribution from the young
savers to old spenders.
Why are people who are older spenders? They are closer to
the end of their lives.
When you have the FairTax and you go to a consumption tax,
the older people hold disproportionate amounts of the wealth,
they are going to be hit with a relatively higher tax burden,
so their consumption is going to be reduced relative to that of
younger people.
Part of the advantage of FairTax is it un-does some of the
redistribution away from the young towards the old that we have
been engaged in in this economy, and it gets the older people
to consume less, and consequently, the total economy consumes
less, saves more, and there is more investment. More funds to
be invested.
In addition, there are better incentives to save because
you move away from an income tax which discourages saving to
one that is neutral with respect to consuming today versus
tomorrow.
The third thing is that you eliminate the corporate income
tax, so that companies, international companies, are thinking
about whether to invest here or there, gee, if we invest in the
U.S., there is no corporate income tax any more.
These three elements are the main reason why you see in
these simulations some very significant effects through time.
It is not supply side magic. It is not that at all. There is no
supply slide gobbledy-gook here. I am not a supply side nut.
I think a lot of those folks have done a lot of disservice
to economics. This is just old fashioned economics that
delivers the goods if you actually look at what has gone on in
terms of who gets what under this system.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. I also want to thank Governor
Huckabee for being here before I recognize Mr. Pascrell. I
understand you have a plane to catch.
I would just say some members may wish to submit questions
in writing to you that have not had an opportunity to question
you, if you could be kind enough to respond in writing, and
they will be part of the formal hearing record.
Mr. HUCKABEE. Mr. Chairman, I would be delighted to. I want
to thank all of the members for the opportunity to be here. I
wish I could stay. Unfortunately, the airlines will not hold
the plane for me. Maybe for you, but not for me.
Chairman CAMP. No, that is not the case at all.
Mr. HUCKABEE. I appreciate very much the opportunity to be
here, and thank you for your kind attention.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very, very much, Governor. Mr.
Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, I have heard a lot mentioned
today of the current tax system. I certainly hope that the two
of you remain. Of course, you are not speaking for the poor.
We have had a lot of people come in front of us that want
to make life a lot better for the poor. We have seen it over
decades.
I do not have to bring to your attention the figures that
came out this morning, and the gap has grown greater, and this
foolish proposal that is before us makes the matter hideous in
my eyes.
The poor and the middle class do not make the Tax Code Moby
Dick.
Two thousand of the 2,300 pages are there because folks who
have want to keep what they have. They have every right under
the law to do that.
The Tax Code. A lot of folks have to hire lawyers to keep
what they have. It is a shame they have to hire all those
lawyers.
You are saying that if we put this into effect in this
nation, we will not go through that.
The tax cuts of 2001 and 2003 did not increase employment
in the United States of America. Did not increase productivity
in the United States of America, the trickle down that was
promised then is promised now and has never worked.
Why in God's name do we continue on that path which does
not make any sense? Further more, it was not until 2005 that we
even increase the revenue. Right, Mr. Bartlett? Is that
correct?
Mr. BARTLETT. I believe that was the first year that
revenues, nominal revenues, were higher than they had been in
2000.
Mr. PASCRELL. Then we saw what happened after that.
Mr. BARTLETT. We had a crash.
Mr. PASCRELL. Let's be clear. A national sales tax would be
nothing more, in my perception, than an enormous windfall for
the very wealthy of this country. Plain and simple, the wealthy
do not spend as much as lower income families and the middle
class. They just do not, as a percentage of their income.
Mr. Bartlett, how much more would the national sales tax
have to be in order to be revenue neutral? How much more would
it have to increase?
Mr. BARTLETT. Actually, you have a panelist on the next
panel who can answer that better than me, Rosanne Altshuler,
who was a chief economist for the Bush administration's Tax
Reform Panel. They did calculations on exactly this subject
that showed you----
Mr. PASCRELL. What did they conclude?
Mr. BARTLETT. It depends on how much evasion you think you
would get if it was about the same as the median state, 39
percent or 47 percent.
Mr. PASCRELL. My next question is this, what would be the
effect on the debt? Someone asked you about this very briefly
before. If we were to create the largest entitlement program,
and it would become the largest entitlement program, it would
supersede Social Security and Medicare, if we had this prebate
program they are talking about in FairTax, what would happen to
the debt of this nation?
Mr. BARTLETT. The prebate is in the base. They have
calculated that cost. It is not over and above.
Mr. PASCRELL. What does it do to the debt?
Mr. BARTLETT. It would increase Government spending is what
it would do.
Mr. PASCRELL. What would it increase the debt exactly?
Mr. BARTLETT. The estimates of the cost of the rebate that
the Bush Tax Reform Panel made were there would be upwards of
$800 billion a year.
Mr. PASCRELL. What did President Bush say about this plan,
by the way? Back in the mid-2000s.
Mr. BARTLETT. About the FairTax?
Mr. PASCRELL. Yes.
Mr. BARTLETT. I do not know that he ever said anything
about it. I could be mistaken. He certainly did not endorse it.
He did not endorse his own tax reform.
Mr. PASCRELL. As a former Reagan Treasury official, how
many times did Mr. Reagan raise the debt ceiling?
Mr. BARTLETT. It was either 17 or 18 times, I believe.
Mr. PASCRELL. Can you briefly explain how the value of a
Treasury note affects the life of every day Americans?
Mr. BARTLETT. As I said before, it is the foundation upon
which much of the financial system rests.
If you go to the market to sell corporate bonds, for
example, they are historically priced off the equivalent
Treasury. It is absolutely essential to have some asset for
which there is no default risk in order to establish prices for
a great many other financial products.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Bartlett.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Paulsen is recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
panelists taking the time to talk about consumption tax. We
have had a multitude of hearings in the Tax Committee laying
the foundation for tax reform.
This is the first chance we have really had to engage in
some of the consumption tax ideas, and FairTax being one.
I like some of the concepts that were brought forward about
the transparency, about driving investment. We are all, I
think, in favor of promoting job creation, which is so
desperately needed when we have 18,000 jobs coming out a month.
I do have some concerns. Tell me how this would work. The
impact of tax reform for those who are already retired is
something we are paying attention to, and how do you encourage
retirement savings in the long run.
If the FairTax gets implemented, how do you transition or
move forward for the folks that have already essentially worked
all their lives and paid income tax. They move into a new
system where now they are going to pay under consumption, and
they only have their retirement savings.
How do you kind of make that work for them? Mr. Kotlikoff,
first.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. It is a good challenge. You have people with
401(k) accounts who have not paid taxes yet on those balances.
I think you would have to tax those during the transition so we
would get the right amount of revenue from them, a fair amount
of revenue from them, and not just give them carte blanche or
scott free.
You have to have that occur. Capital gains that have not
been realized, I think they would have to be realized and
subject to taxation.
You are immediately taxing consumption. Again, I think it
should be all consumption, including imputed rent on housing
and other durables.
Is this going to absolutely help everybody? It is not going
to be a free lunch; no. I am saying the people who are really
going to get hurt differentially are the rich.
If I came here and told Mr. Pascrell that I was advocating
a tax on wealth, using the tax revenues to lower the tax on
wages, you would think I am a pretty far left person,
economist. You might. Some other people might.
I am saying please let's talk after the hearing and
converse, and let me try to persuade you what economics has to
say. There are lots of things said about the FairTax that is
not about economics. Lots of statements that are not being made
by economists.
It is a really progressive tax structure. I think it is
more progressive than the current system.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Tuerck, do you have any follow up on that,
just in terms of retirement savings or promoting retirement
savings as a part of the Tax Code?
Mr. TUERCK. I am currently drawing down some of my pension,
which I did not pay taxes when it was being accumulated. Now
the IRS is taking a chunk of that as I draw it down. In my
case, it would be a wash.
Either I am going to let the IRS grab a chunk of it and I
might end up paying more for consumption goods because the
price has gone up. It seems to me it is neutral in that
respect.
Larry makes a persuasive argument and he does it better
than anybody else that this is a tax on the wealthy. I think
there would be people who have saved over their lifetime who
would find this is a burden, and that is part of his argument,
as I understand it.
Mr. PAULSEN. I know you have characterized it as being a
tax on the wealthy. Governor Huckabee had to leave. I think
there is an exemption for educational services as part of the
proposal.
How do you avoid having a situation where folks come
forward and say, we would like to exempt this? How do you avoid
that in the long term?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. What I propose, no exemptions of any kind. I
am an educator and I am urging that we tax educational
expenditures. I think a good chunk of what people pay for in
college is consumption, not education, from what I can tell.
The rebate is there to deal with concerns about proclivity.
If somebody says look, let's exempt bread and eggs. Well, the
rebate is here to make sure that poor people, anybody living at
the poverty line or lower, is going to have enough money from
the rebate to cover all their FairTax payments at the store.
So that would be the way that you can try and avoid having
the tax undone. And the whole idea of the FairTax is to have
one tax break that everybody can look at and say everybody is
paying this tax rate, so that if we spend more money on
anything or anybody, that tax rate has to go up.
Under the current system, nobody knows when we spend more
money down here in congress who's paying the bill. The whole
connection, the whole value of having a single tax rate has to
do with trying to connect our spending to our revenue source in
a very concrete manner.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. Mr. Larson is
recognized.
Mr. LARSON. Thank you, Chairman Camp, and thank the
panelists for being here this morning. Let me start, first of
all, with Mr. Bartlett; and I know others have gone down this
line of questioning. But defaulting on the federal debt I
believe you said would be analogous to what transpired when
Lehmans went down, except on--perhaps Lehmans on steroids. In
the Reagan Administration you took a balanced approach, both in
terms of dealing with debt ceilings but also making cuts, but
also balancing them off of revenues. Is that pretty much how
this current situation should be approached?
Mr. BARTLETT. Well I personally would favor a balanced
approach. I think one of the biggest problems we have right now
is that revenues are too low. They are less than 15 percent of
GDP and have been for the last three years. So if there is any
truth to the idea that low taxes spur growth, we should be
growing like crazy, and obviously we are not. We have other
problems.
One point I would like to make that hasn't really quite
come out here is when Professor Kotlikoff talks about the
importance of national savings, he is of course correct, but
the deficit is negative saving. Therefore, if we raise revenues
in such a way as to reduce the deficit, that will add to
national savings; and, that was what happened, frankly, during
the Clinton Administration. That is why we had budget surpluses
and the added saving is what created a lot of the economic
growth that I wish we still had.
Mr. LARSON. Another question that comes up often, and I'm
glad that we have two economists here, et cetera. And let me
say I think the current system that we operate under is flawed.
Mr. Neal has been trying to simplify this system for some
time now in a number of his proposals, but there's a debate
that rages on here with respect to the very fragile recovery
that we're in in terms of both cuts and taxes. Now, people will
say, and I don't disagree with them, that raising taxes at this
time in a frail economy is not a wise thing, because of the
fragility.
Is cuts a wise thing, or do cuts result in hurting a
fragile economy. Do cuts that result in layoffs and people on
unemployment and furthering what has to come out of the federal
proceeds, how would you categorize those as the difference
between the two?
Mr. TUERCK. You mean cuts in spending or cuts in taxes?
Mr. LARSON. Cuts in general; taxes, you know, being raised
or cuts to programs that lay off people.
Mr. TUERCK. I'm sure that all spending cuts hurt people,
and in many cases people that we don't want to hurt. But the
problem is that we're having the wrong conversation. I
personally don't have a clue as to whether canceling some of
the Bush tax cuts would affect the economy one way or another,
but I do know that we have a hopelessly convoluted tax system
where we can't get the base straight, when what we ought to do
is we ought to change the base into a consumption base, so that
then we know that we're on taxing and growing the economy.
Mr. LARSON. Let's say that could be if we would be willing
to look at a hybrid. Or how long of a transition period do you
think that that would take?
Mr. TUERCK. I think that the transition would require a lot
of adjustments.
Mr. LARSON. How long would you say that might take?
Mr. TUERCK. I think we could transition to a FairTax within
a year or two.
Mr. LARSON. Within a year?
Mr. TUERCK. Yes.
Mr. LARSON. And during that time, what would you do with
the existing tax system?
Mr. TUERCK. Well the existing tax system would go away and
we would then impose the tax on consumption to replace those
revenues; and the date we impose it, if the statutory 23----
Mr. LARSON. So I'm trying to figure this out. Just so
within a year's time we would move out of the Internal Revenue
system and go to a collection of consumption taxes; and how
would that end up in a neutral situation. Don't you think you
ought to give yourself a little more time than that?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. I give it as much time as needed.
Mr. LARSON. Well then let me ask you this, because that's
where I was leading. I would think that you would need more
time. Would you be willing to put in your consumption tax and
have that consumption tax be dedicated only to reducing the
deficit as you try to figure out just in fact what its
implications will be and have an economic model that's out
there?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, as I've indicated, I have this
proposal called the Purple Tax, which retains the FICA tax,
makes it progressive, very progressive, as a FairTax that
basically half the level, at a 15 percent effective rate, and
has an inheritance tax of 15 percent.
So 15 percent solution is a very simple tax structure. I
think it is more progressive than the current system. I think
it will generate at least two percent more of GDP than the
current system. We need more revenue. So why don't you folks
pass that today?
Mr. LARSON. But as you are working the modeling out with
that specific tax, would you let that money all go while you
are running almost tandem systems to reduce the national debt?
Chairman CAMP. All right. Time has expired. Mr. Marchant is
recognized.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the
fact that the chairman is having these hearings with the goal
of a simpler Tax Code, a lower tax rate, and as a result of
that having increased revenues to the government. I think that
that is something this panel should discuss at length and I
appreciate the fact we are doing that.
I would like to talk about an average family in my district
and how this FairTax proposal would affect that family. Let's
say it is a man and wife. They are both working. One is a
school teacher. One is a fireman. They have two kids. They have
a gross income of about $8,000 a month. Will they have any FICA
tax withheld?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. No FICA tax.
Mr. MARCHANT. Will their employer have FICA tax?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. No FICA tax.
Mr. MARCHANT. So their income would go up about 7\1/2\
percent. Their take home would be about 7\1/2\ percent higher.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, it would be 15.3, because the employer
portion is also going to be available to be handed out to the
employee.
Mr. MARCHANT. Is that in the proposal?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well economists think the employers aren't
paying our taxes for us out of the goodness of their hearts. We
think workers pay both the employee's share and the employer's
share. And then when you eliminate the FICA tax, all 15.3
percent is going to end up in the hands of the employee.
Mr. MARCHANT. Okay. And so then whatever tax rate they had,
let's say 20 percent.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Right.
Mr. MARCHANT. Will they lose their mortgage deductions?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well there won't be any mortgage deductions,
because there won't be any income tax against which you can
adjust it.
Mr. MARCHANT. There shall be no income taxes so perhaps
they'll get 25 percent. Maybe they will get $20,000 of income
tax they won't pay.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yeah. And this Table 2 in this testimony
dealt with all the issues of mortgage deductibility and the
earning of tax credit and the child tax credit.
Mr. MARCHANT. Well a lot of the people that are going to be
watching this hearing in my district are not going to have the
ability to have those tables. So would their take-home pay be
as high as $20,000 more a year?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, you know, it is a hypothetical. I
don't want to be imprecise and give you the wrong answer to
that specific question. But if we looked at the table that I
have here, which was--what was the income of the family?
Mr. MARCHANT. Around 4,000 each a month.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. So we are talking about 8,000. So we are
talking about----
Mr. MARCHANT. About $96,000.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. A hundred thousand a year, so let's look at
a married couple who's 45 with a couple kids and a house, a
moderate size house, mortgage deduction. They are currently
paying 24 percent of their lifetime resources to the Federal
Government in FICA and income taxes under the current system.
Under the FairTax, it would be 14.7 percent.
Mr. MARCHANT. I am trying to talk about their month to
month.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yeah. Their month to month take home pay
would go up.
Mr. MARCHANT. So will this family qualify for a prebate?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Everybody gets a prebate. Yes, they would.
Mr. MARCHANT. So what number of checks would the Federal
Government be cutting a month?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. One month to that family based on their
household size.
Mr. MARCHANT. Okay. So how many is that? Would that be a
hundred million rebate checks a month?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, yeah. It might be 130 million checks.
Every American household will get a check.
Mr. MARCHANT. So adding to the in the last----
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. You could send electronically, by the way.
Mr. MARCHANT. Right. I understand. And then when they go to
the grocery store they are going to pay 23 percent more.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, they pay 30. The nominal rate is 30
percent. In effect every dollar that you spend, 23 cents out of
that dollar is going to go to taxes. So that's what it cost.
Mr. MARCHANT. How about utilities?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yeah. That's also consumption.
Mr. MARCHANT. Rent.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Rent, yes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Gasoline.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes.
Mr. MARCHANT. So everything that they consume then they
will pay the extra 23 to 30 percent on.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Yes.
Mr. MARCHANT. And the theory being that this family,
together with the amount of money that they keep, that they
were paying plus the prebate are going to come out.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Better off.
Mr. MARCHANT. Better off or hold?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Better off. And I didn't know the answer to
the question until I did the calculations. And this is my best
judgment based on pretty careful, serious. You know. It wasn't
a two-day study, either.
Mr. MARCHANT. Well, I have a tremendous number of people in
my district that support the FairTax. I've read every book that
I can available on the FairTax, and the prebate is my single
largest mechanical problem that I haven't been able to work
through, but this will help me in answering the questions that
I get on that.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. Time is expired. Ms.
Black is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back to
the prebate, rebate, whatever the acronym is for that, but I am
not sure that I understand exactly know the information gets to
the government to identify what their income is. If you don't
have an income tax, how does the information get from the
employer to the government to know what that salary is and how
to figure that?
Mr. TUERCK. It doesn't have anything to do with the salary.
It has to do with the composition of the family, whether it is
a married couple, how many kids they have. And then that is a
mechanical formula. And once that is determined, then that
determines the size of the prebate, the philosophy being that
if that family were at the poverty level they would pay no
taxes under the FairTax.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. So the prebate doesn't depend on your
income. If you have a family of four, you get one size
demograph. That is the word that Pat Moynihan used to use, I
believe, when he advocated the negative income tax, he quoted a
demograph, a monthly payment. So if you have got a family of
four, you get one size. If you have got a family of three, it
would be a smaller check, but it wouldn't depend on your
income.
Mrs. BLACK. So then how does that help those who are at the
lower income?
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Because for people that are low income, it
is going to be a much bigger deal than for Bill Gates as a
proportion. So progressivity is always tax is a proportion of
resources, and so that's why this would be progressive as
conventionally defined in terms of what progressivity means.
Mrs. BLACK. All right. That makes sense. That clears that
piece up. This may or may not be a question that you as an
economist can answer, but I am curious. In all of the
information that I have here I can't find anything that
indicates what percentage of those are not paying any tax
whatsoever at this point in time. We keep hearing there is
about 47 to 50 percent of the people who pay nothing. Is that
something that you can help with?
Mr. TUERCK. Close to 50 percent of individual taxpayers pay
no personal income tax. That is correct, close to that.
Mr. BARTLETT. Yes, that is correct. But I want to make a
point here that is relevant to your point, which is that if you
are right now at a poverty level income, you have a negative
tax because of the earned income tax credit. You get a check
from the government and pay zero. Okay? And for most people in
the bottom quintile, that rebate or the EITC is more than
enough to compensate for your payroll taxes as well. So that
you are literally paying zero, but you may still be getting
more on top of that.
But just keep in mind that if you are under the FairTax, if
you are now at the poverty level income, the rebate compensates
you for your consumption, but you are going from negative to
zero, which is a tax increase, you see. You are not getting the
EITC anymore. And keep in mind also, there is a lot of
confusion about the difference between consumption and income.
If you look at the Consumer Expenditure Survey, you will
see that people in the bottom quintile spend about twice as
much as their income. So the tax base that applies to
consumption for people with low income is going to be higher,
precisely because a lot of those people are the elderly who are
drawing down saving.
That's the point Professor Kotlikoff keeps getting at when
he talks about taxing wealth. That's basically where the
incidence of that wealth tax comes from.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Let me respond, if I could.
Mrs. BLACK. Yes, thank you.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. We have I think some segment of very poor
people who might, because the EITC might end up with a somewhat
higher tax rate, but at the table incorporated the EITC. And
there is not a whole lot of selves here where the average tax
rate actually goes up under the FairTax. It basically goes
down. There is a lot of very poor people that don't get the ITC
because they don't have kids or they're not working.
We have to also think about in terms of the tax burden on
older people, poor older people, the older people are going to
get this rebate, just like everybody else; and their social
security benefits are also going to be CPI indexed. So they're
going to get an extra bonus here, because when the price level
goes up, their Social Security benefits are going to rise by 30
percent, and then they are also going to get the rebate.
So this is actually going to redistribute toward the poorer
elderly away from the rich and middle class elderly, and get a
bigger burden, tax burden on the rich and middle class elderly;
and, therefore lower the burden on younger people. We have had
a mass of redistribution away from younger people towards older
people. That is a large part of this deeper conversation we
need to have about how to fix the fiscal system of the country.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. Mr. Reed is
recognized.
Mr. REED. No questions.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Berg is recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two questions: one
question is on stability.
I mean what we want is a revenue source that is stable.
That is how we need to plan, and I guess my question is how
would you compare the stability of, again, just one of the new
consumption tax versus our current revenue.
Mr. TUERCK. Well consumption taxes are going to be more
stable than the current tax system, because consumption is more
stable of the economic cycle than income is. I don't have--
maybe Larry's done some estimates of the difference it makes;
but, we found for example, that if you have the 23 percent
FairTax in effect in 2010, which is obviously a period of
depressed economic circumstances, then we would have brought in
more revenue than needed in order to pay the government's
bills; and that's just largely because consumption was better
than the rest of the economy.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well, I concur with that. The consumption is
more stable than income. It is more stable than investment, so
it is a more stable tax base and more reliable.
Mr. BERG. Then my follow-up question really relates to the
transactions that would be conducted by local and state
government. I understand the individual, but as we go into
local and state government, and they're paying an additional 23
percent tax, how does that filter through the formula.
It seems to me that they're not paying income now; they
would pay this. And so many of them are exempted now, but that
would have an increased cost in local services or state
services.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Well in our calculations for revenue
neutrality, we incorporate paying back, compensating the
governments state and federal for the extra taxes that they're
going to incur. So that the idea is to keep this revenue
neutral and not to force governments to have a bigger burden
through the back door.
Mr. TUERCK. It is a little tricky. The tax base at the
state and local level would go down, slightly, and that would
represent a temporary boon to state and local taxpayers. But
the states and local governments could compensate for that by
adjusting their Tax Codes. They would have to do that, but an
easy fix, for example, would be for the state to impose its own
sales tax on top of the FairTax rate.
That would adjust for that part of the problem, and then
they might have to also make some adjustments in their income
tax rates. At the end of the day after everything was worked
out everybody would be whole. Everybody would be where they
started out.
Mr. KOTLIKOFF. Let me just say we spent with several other
economists at Suffolk University, we spent a good part of the
year very carefully trying to figure out what tax rate would be
relatively neutral. And we didn't know the answer before we sat
down, and whatever the answer was going to come out, we were
going to report it. And so when other people testify about the
sales tax, let's make sure that the methodology was the same.
I mean we use the same methodology as Bill Gale, who is a
major critic of the sales tax. He reviewed our study. He said
it is the same methodology. There are some different
assumptions here and there, but I think this is a very careful
study. It is on line, available to anybody to look at.
Mr. BERG. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you, and I want to thank our
first panel for their testimony today. It has been very
helpful, and I hope we will be able to engage with you as we
continue this discussion on fundamental tax reform.
Members may wish to submit additional questions to you in
writing for inclusion in the formal record, and I would just
ask that you be prompt in responding to those questions if you
do receive them. Again, let me thank you again for being here
today, and I would now invite our second panel to come to the
witness table.
We are pleased to welcome our second panel, which features
six individuals who are highly regarded as experts in value
added taxes. First I would like to welcome and introduce Mr.
Michael Graetz. Mr. Graetz is the Columbia alumni professor of
tax law at Columbia Law School, and is a professor emeritus of
law at the Yale Law School. In addition to his teaching career,
Mr. Graetz served at the Treasury Department from 1990 to 1992.
And, second, we will hear from Rosanne Altshuler. Ms.
Altshuler is a professor in the economics department at Rutgers
University. She has previously served as the director of the
Urban Brookings Tax Policy Center as a Senior economist to the
President's Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform in 2005, and
as a special advisor to the Joint Committee on Taxation.
And, third, we welcome back Robert Carroll, a principal
with Ernst & Young's quantitative economics and statistics
group in the National Tax Department. Before joining Ernst &
Young, Mr. Carroll served as the deputy assistant secretary for
tax analysis at the Treasury Department.
And, fourth, we will hear from Jim White, the director of
tax issues for the U.S. Government Accountability Office. As a
Director of Tax issues, Mr. White is responsible for work on
IRS, tax administration and tax policy. He has been with GAO
since 1990.
And, fifth, we welcome Dan Mitchell, a senior fellow at the
Cato Institute. Prior to joining Cato, Mr. Mitchell was a
senior fellow with the Heritage Foundation and previously
served as an economist for the Senate Finance Committee. And,
finally, we welcome back Simon Johnson, the Ronald A. Kurtz
professor of entrepreneurship at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. He is also a senior fellow at the Peterson
Institute for International Economics in Washington, D.C., and
from March 2007 to August 2008 Mr. Johnson was the economic
counselor and director of the research department at the
International Monetary Fund.
Thank you all for your time today. The committee has
received each of your written statements, and they will be made
part of the formal hearing record. Each of you will be
recognized for 5 minutes for your oral remarks. There will be a
yellow light one minute out in which you can sum-up before the
red light comes on.
Again, I look forward to hearing from all of you. Mr.
Graetz, we'll begin with you. You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. GRAETZ, COLUMBIA ALUMNI PROFESSOR OF
TAX LAW, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY

Mr. GRAETZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Levin
and Members of the Committee for inviting me to testify on this
important subject.
We know our tax system is broken. Nobody argues with that.
The question is what should we do about it. Until World War II
we had a consumption tax on most Americans, and an income tax
only on high income individuals. And it was only the revenue
needs of the Second World War that extended the income tax to
the masses. Today, the U.S. is a low tax country, but we are
not a low income tax country. So we have sacrificed our
advantage from our low taxes by having income taxes that are
comparable to those of other nations in the OECD.
The biggest difference between the U.S. and everybody else
in the world is that we have no national level consumption tax,
which 156 nations, at last count, do have. We know the problems
with the income tax. The congress uses the income tax the way
my mother used to use chicken soup--as a solution to every ill
facing the country. We know that we haven't solved the nation's
health problems. We haven't solved the nation's education
problems. We haven't solved the nation's energy problems,
despite the many billions of dollars a year in tax deductions
and credits that go in those directions. The Tax Reform Act of
1986 was a great success; it gave the income tax a good
cleansing, but it has not proved stable. We can cleanse it
again, as many people have proposed, and as most of the
conversation around this committee has suggested over the last
couple of years. But we know that the Tax Code is going to get
dirty rather quickly again.
The other thing that has happened since the 1986 Act is
that we are now a world economy. Given the internationalization
of the world economy, in my view, we need to have a low income
tax, particularly a low corporate tax rate in order to attract
jobs to the United States, to attract investment to the United
States, and to allow American workers and businesses to compete
worldwide.
I have advanced a tax reform plan in my book, One Hundred
Million Unnecessary Returns: A Simple, Fair and Competitive Tax
System for the United States. I am certainly happy to get a
copy for any member or staff person that would like to read it.
I know some of you have. Let me just review the pieces of my
proposal.
First, add a value added tax, which is basically a retail
sales tax with withholding. The idea that you would not have
withholding on an income tax strikes me as foolish. We are the
only OECD country that does not have a value added tax.
Sometimes it is called a goods and services tax.
Second, use the revenues from that tax to finance an income
tax exemption of $100,000 and to lower substantially the rates
above that amount. Third, lower the corporate income tax rate
to 15 percent; and, fourth, replace the earned income tax
credit and provide low and middle income families with tax
relief from the VAT burden through payroll tax offsets and
through debit cards that allow them to avoid VAT on their
purchases.
This plan has many advantages over existing law. It would
be more favorable to savings and investment, and economic
growth in America. It would take advantage of our status as a
low tax country: a 15 percent tax on corporate income would be
among the lowest in the world. It would solve the problems of
transfer pricing, and other tax planning that goes on in the
international community.
Third, it would eliminate more than a hundred million of
the 140 million tax returns the IRS gets every year. 150
million Americans would never have to face the income tax.
Fourth, there would be less temptation under such a small
income tax for Congress to view tax exclusions, deductions and
credits as if they were solutions to America's problems. We
know they're not.
Fifth, a value added tax would be border adjustable under
WTO international trade rules, which means that it could tax
imports and exempt exports, which an income tax cannot. Given
the size of our trade imbalances, we would likely produce
hundreds of billions of dollars in additional revenue from
taxes on imports alone over the next 10 years.
Sixth, it would avoid most of the difficult issues of
transition that virtually all of the other tax reform proposals
have. And, finally, by using taxes that are common throughout
the world, it would fit well with international standards.
The Tax Policy Center, pursuant to a contract with the Pew
Charitable Trust, has estimated the plan. They've determined
some preliminary numbers. They have given me permission to
share them with the committee today. Basically, they estimate
that for the year 2015, my plan is revenue neutral with a value
added tax of under 12\1/2\ percent, a 15 percent corporate
income tax rate, a 16 percent tax on married couples between
$100,000 and $200,000 of income, and a 25 or 26 percent rate on
families above $200,000. This shows that you could dramatically
reduce income tax rates.
My proposal is also distributionally neutral; that is,
unlike the so-called FairTax, it does not shift the burden of
taxes down the income scale. Given its widespread application
around the world, it is clear that the U.S. can readily
administer a value-added tax. I have been working over the last
two years with a number of VAT managers, accounting firms, and
law firms around the world in an effort to design a model value
added tax for the United States. And I would be happy to share
some of that learning with the committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Graetz follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you. I am afraid we are going to have
to keep the hearing moving, and your time has expired. So we
will move on to Ms. Altshuler.
You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROSANNE ALTSHULER, PROFESSOR AND CHAIR, ECONOMIC
DEPARTMENT, RUTGERS UNIVERSITY

Ms. ALTSHULER. Thank you, Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin and Members of the Committee, it's an honor to appear
before you today.
CBO analysis shows that the government began this year with
the projected budget deficit of almost 10 percent of GDP, and
its future growth is driven by rising healthcare costs, an
aging population, and the interest payments on an ever
increasing public debt. Reducing the deficit to an economically
sustainable level will require both the scaling back of
expenditure programs and an increase in tax revenues.
In work I've done with economists at the Tax Policy Center,
we find that raising significantly more revenue from our
current tax system, however, would be politically difficult,
and likely damaging to economic growth. The substantial near
and long term fiscal pressures facing the Federal Government
require that we both reform our income tax system and consider
new revenue sources, including federal taxes on consumption.
That is a type of consumption tax that is similar to a
retail sales tax, but it is collected in smaller increments
throughout the production process. That is part of the tax
systems of nearly 150 countries around the world, including all
OECD member countries except the United States. Adding a VAT to
the U.S. federal tax system could help address the medium and
long term revenue shortfalls forecast for the United States.
That is particularly effective in raising substantial amounts
of revenue in a relatively efficient manner, and has proven to
be an administrable tax.
If we were to adopt a VAT, we could rely on the experience
and best practices of other countries in setting up and
administering the tax. In addition to these attributes, the VAT
has a number of other advantages. First, a portion of the
revenues from a VAT could be used to finance reductions in
statutory income tax rates, as Michael Graetz has just told us.
Two, tax systems: a VAT, and an income tax, with low tax
rates, may be superior from an efficiency and administration
perspective to an income tax system with higher statutory
rates. Second, given the size of projected future budget
deficits, adding a VAT to our current system to generate
revenues for deficit reduction alone would likely have positive
effects on economic growth.
Third, a preannounced and phased-in VAT might stimulate the
economy by encouraging consumption in anticipation of the
imposition of the tax. Finally, while the states are likely to
protest, a properly designed VAT may actually help force them
to redesign or improve their retail sales taxes.
There are a number of issues that need to be addressed in
designing and implementing a VAT, and I will hit on a few of
these issues in my remaining time--distributional issues. The
VAT is equivalent to a retail sales tax, but it is collected at
different stages of the production process. Since higher income
households save more than those with lower or moderate incomes,
the burden of the tax increases with current income, reducing
the overall progressivity of the tax system.
The additional VAT burden, however, can be relieved for low
and middle income households through refundable credits. This
approach to relieving the VAT burden is more effective than
exempting food and other necessities from taxation or applying
preferential rates, since it can be targeted to lower and
middle income households rather than all households.
TPC has recently released a report that illustrates the
impact of a five percent VAT in the distribution of income.
While regressive in the absence of a rebate, the authors show
that the impact on low and middle income households could be
offset by allowing a rebate in the form of a refundable credit
claimed on income tax returns. With the rebate, the VAT is
progressive throughout almost the entire income distribution.
The TPC study shows that one should not look at the
distributional impact of the VAT in isolation. The
progressiveness of the complete federal tax system with that
rebate, for example, must be taken into account. What about
revenue? Well, policy analysts point out that given the fixed
administrative costs of the VAT, if the U.S. adopts a VAT, it
should be at a fairly substantial rate. Work again out of the
Tax Policy Center suggests that with a ten percent rate, a VAT
with a broad base and a rebate to offset the regressivity of
the tax could raise about two percent of GDP.
It is important to think about how any tax instrument we
use to raise additional revenue will affect economic growth.
Recent work from economists at the OECD suggested the VAT is
more pro-growth than personal and corporate income taxes.
Revenues from the VAT could be used to buy down the deficit
and/or reduce individual and corporate statutory tax rates.
Large and persistent deficits can have negative affects on
economic growth by reducing national savings, driving up
interest rates, and increasing our reliance on foreign
investors. A single rate VAT on a broad base at a rate of ten
percent could go a long way towards reducing the economic
burden of our large and growing debt.
Using some VAT revenues to buy down statutory income tax
rates would also have positive effects on growth. Lower
marginal income tax rates on individuals and businesses would
strengthen the incentive to save, invest, work and innovate,
while making our tax system more efficient. The fiscal
challenges ahead are daunting. The VAT on its own cannot solve
the country's fiscal problems, and introducing a VAT has its
own problems.
If we adopted the VAT, we would have to institute some form
of rebate to offset its regressivity and make every effort to
adopt the broadest possible base. We would need to increase IRS
resources for administration, and be attentive to a range of
compliance issues. But, we must recognize that near and long-
term fiscal pressures require that we raise more revenue from
our tax system. The VAT is an efficient revenue raiser that is
likely to be significantly less damaging to economic growth
than increasing personal and corporate statutory rates.
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Altshuler follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Ms. Altshuler.
Mr. Carroll, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT CARROLL, ERNST & YOUNG

Mr. CARROLL. Thank you. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin, distinguished Members of the Committee, I thank you for
the opportunity to testify today regarding considerations for
value added tax in the United States.
The U.S. faces serious fiscal challenges over the next
several decades as the federal deficit and debt are projected
to rise to unsustainable levels. At the same time, many view
the existing tax system as overly complex, and an obstacle to
economic growth. These issues have led to some discussion of a
value added tax.
Some view a VAT as a possible source of additional revenue
to help reduce the deficit and stabilize the debt. Others view
a VAT as a means to help improve the competitiveness of the
U.S. by providing revenue to permit a reduction in the
corporate income tax rate, or a reduction in the scope of the
income tax system.
VATs are the norm in most of the countries. More than 150
countries rely on VATs, and in these countries VATs account for
nearly one-fifth of total government revenue. Consideration of
a VAT in the United States is not a new issue. VATs have been
discussed and considered in the U.S. for more than four
decades. A VAT was considered by a task force appointed by
President Nixon in 1970 and an advisory panel appointed by
President Bush in 2005.
A VAT in the U.S. would raise a number of issues, and they
can have very different economic effects depending on a number
of key considerations. For example, would the VAT be a
replacement tax or an add-on tax? Which features of the income
tax would be replaced by a replacement VAT? How would the
revenue from an add-on VAT be used? Would it be used to reduce
the deficit, reform the existing tax system, or fund additional
spending?
Would the VAT apply broadly to consumption, or would a
large portion of household consumption be excluded from the VAT
base? Answers to these questions would have a significant
impact on the economic effects of a VAT. A broad-based VAT that
replaces the worst features of the income tax has the potential
to provide significant economic benefits. A VAT is
fundamentally a tax on consumption, and does not tax the return
to saving and investment, thereby reducing the cost of capital
and increasing investment.
Greater investment means more capital formation, and
ultimately higher labor productivity and living standards than
otherwise would be the case. Estimates suggest that the
economic gains from replacing all or a portion of the income
tax with a consumption type tax, such as a VAT, could be
significant. One study found that complete replacement of the
individual and corporate income taxes could increase the size
of the economy in the long run by six to ten percent.
The December 2007 Treasury Department study on approaches
to make the U.S. more competitive found that replacement of the
corporate income tax with a VAT could increase long run output
by two percent to two point five percent. But it is important
to emphasize that these potential, economic benefits arise from
a VAT that is replacing all or the worst features of the income
tax.
A deficient reducing, add-on VAT could have significantly
different economic effects, using the revenue from an add-on
VAT to reduce the deficit would put downward pressure on long-
term interest rates, as deficit financed government spending is
replaced with VAT financed government spending. And deficits
that would otherwise crowd out private savings are reduced.
Lower long-term interest rates would reduce borrowing costs
for both households and businesses, and eventually boost
output; however, the rise in prices that would accompany an
add-on VAT would also likely lower consumer spending. And there
is evidence that consumer spending and employment would be
permanently reduced.
Another key consideration is how broad a VAT base would
actually be in practice. The VATs in most other countries and
the state sales taxes in the U.S. are generally not broad-based
and exclude significant amounts of consumption from the tax
base through exemptions and preferential rates. They might be
better termed partial VATs. A more narrow base requires a
higher tax rate to raise a given amount of revenue, and can
lead to differential taxation of consumption. Both can reduce
the economic benefits of a VAT, and adversely affect the
sectors of the economy that are taxed.
Additionally, an add-on VAT, while possibly addressing the
nation's long-term fiscal imbalance, would represent a new tax
with additional compliance costs. Businesses would have to
collect the VAT on behalf of the government, keep and maintain
records of their VAT payments and collection, and prepare VAT
returns. The extent of these costs would depend on factors such
as the number of transactions involved, the complexity of the
VAT base, rate structure, definitions and administrative
enforcement regimes.
VATs can also impose extra, non-recoverable costs on
businesses. Under a VAT, businesses act as tax collectors. A
business is liable for VAT on its gross sales, but receives
credits for a VAT previously paid on its purchases. There may
be circumstances, in which VAT crediting may be incomplete,
thereby imposing a direct tax cost on businesses. Because the
gross flows are so large, imperfections in the VAT system can
be greatly amplified.
Finally, the transition as a VAT is introduced would be
crucial. Introduction of a VAT involves a lump sum tax on
existing assets, plus there could be large, near-term economic
effects as the economy adjusts to a large, new revenue source.
In summary, the specific design of a VAT is critical to its
economic effects. All VATs are not equal, and they could have
very different economic effects depending on key design
elements.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and look
forward to responding to any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carroll follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Carroll.
Mr. White, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES R. WHITE, DIRECTOR, TAX ISSUES, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. WHITE. Thank you. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin
and Members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here to
discuss value added taxes. Others will discuss the economics of
a VAT.
I would note in passing, though, that a VAT and a retail
sales tax are both consumption taxes. The economics are
essentially the same. The administration is different. I will
focus on how a VAT is administered. Specifically, five
countries' experiences with a VAT: New Zealand, Australia,
Canada, France and the United Kingdom. They represent a range
of VAT designs from relatively simple to complex, including
some with both national and provincial taxes and some that
recently enacted a VAT.
I will discuss, one, how VAT designed choices such as the
number of tax rates and exemptions affect compliance,
administrative costs and taxpayers compliance burdens; how
Canada combined a national VAT with provincial consumption
taxes; how countries transition to a VAT, and some possible
lessons for the U.S. My main point is that VATs, like income
taxes and sales taxes, require a robust administrative
presence. I illustrate a simple VAT on page 3 of my statement.
Each business in the chain that produces and sells
furniture to a consumer owes a VAT of ten percent on its sales,
but gets a credit for VAT paid on its purchases of inputs. The
figure shows how the tax is paid by each company in the chain
add up to a VAT of ten percent on the price the consumer pays,
exactly equivalent to a sales tax of the same rate.
In my example, each business is taxed at the same rate.
There are no exemptions. However, even such a simple VAT has
compliance risks, which I show on page 5. Unscrupulous
businesses may not collect VAT owed or may not remit it to the
government, by for example, not reporting cash sales or falsely
reporting imports. Or, they may over claim credit for tax paid
on inputs.
Some of these compliance risks, such as under reporting
cash, are also problems with an income tax. Others, such as
fraudulent refunds are probably more of an issue with a VAT,
because unlike our current income tax, most of these VAT
credits are refundable.
Under a VAT, large numbers of businesses such as start-ups
are legitimately entitled to refunds making it a challenge to
detect refund fraud. In fact, some VAT fraud schemes are common
enough to have earned names. One is called ``carousel fraud,''
because goods move in a circle between countries with tax
cheats collecting VAT but not remitting it to the government.
Not surprisingly, adding complexity to a VAT through tax
preferences increases the challenges of tax administration and
loses revenue.
France and the United Kingdom built so many exemptions,
special rates and other preferences into their VATs that it is
estimated they collect less than half the revenue they could
have with a very simple VAT. While all taxes require an
administration system, there is some evidence from our study
countries that VATs are easier to administer than an income
tax.
The U.K. found its VAT cheaper to administer, measured as a
percent of revenue collected, than the U.K. income tax. New
Zealand with a relatively simple VAT found many fewer errors on
VAT returns than on income tax returns. As with other taxes,
the VAT compliance burden on taxpayers is mostly driven by
recordkeeping requirements, the number of times a year returns
must be filed, and the time needed to deal with audits.
Studies in the U.K., Canada, and New Zealand show VAT
compliance cost as a percent of sales are greatest for small
businesses and much lower for large businesses. For this
reason, some countries exempt small businesses from VAT.
Interestingly, however, many small businesses in Australia and
Canada volunteer to be subject to VAT. Some want credit for
taxes paid on their inputs. Some fear being outside the system
will cost them customers. Large businesses don't like the extra
recordkeeping required when dealing with exempt businesses.
Canada shows how a VAT can work in a federal system. Some
provinces adopted a provincial VAT and harmonized it with the
federal VAT. Others adopted VATs but with different exemptions
and other preferences. Still others kept their provincial sales
taxes. Canada shows those different options are workable, but
the amount of burden on businesses to comply vary depending on
the amount of harmonization.
Australia, Canada and New Zealand all introduced their VATs
since 1986. All three had the advantage that their VATs replace
preexisting national consumption taxes. Nevertheless,
implementation took up to two years, required significant
resources for outreach, and the country still had difficulty
getting businesses to register for the VAT system before the
implementation date.
In summary, one lesson about VAT design is that like our
income tax, tax preferences reduce revenue and add complexity,
compliance risks and compliance burden. Having said that, tax
design is influenced by criteria in addition to
administerability, such as revenue needs, the effect on the
economy and distributional concerns.
That concludes my statement. I'd be happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. White follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. White.
Mr. Mitchell, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL J. MITCHELL, SENIOR FELLOW, CATO INSTITUTE

Mr. MITCHELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, and
Members of the Committee.
In my summation of my testimony I want to focus on what I
would call the real world versus the theory. I agree with the
theory that a value added tax, compared to our current income
tax, is a less destructive way of raising revenue. It doesn't
do as much damage per dollar raised. And so, in theory, if you
replaced or got rid of other taxes, or if you somehow paid down
deficits or debt with the value added tax, you might get some
benefits.
But if you look at the experience in Europe and other
countries, you find that this is not what happens. The question
that I always pose is, why on earth would we want to copy the
fiscal policy of Greece, Portugal and other countries that are
now teetering on the edge of financial collapse? Because what
you find in those countries--and I'll walk through some of the
data--is that they did not reduce other taxes. They did not
reduce deficits and debt. Instead, the VAT became, as it is
sometimes referred to, a money machine or for larger
government.
Now, to touch on the theory for just a little bit, the
shortcut way of understanding a VAT is that it is a system that
doesn't allow for the deductibility of wages at the business
level. You can get into the details on credit, invoice,
subtraction method; but, if you think about a tax system that
doesn't allow deductibility of wages, that is really what a VAT
is all about, and it is important to realize what that means.
It means that, in effect, you have an entirely additional
system for taxing income. If you don't allow businesses to
deduct the wages and salaries they pay their workers, their
employees, you have a withholding tax that is in addition to
the income tax that they already pay. Now, in the language of
public finance economists, the VAT is a consumption tax, but
this term requires some elaboration.
A consumption, or consumption based tax does not mean,
necessarily, that the tax is actually paid by consumers. It
simply means that it's a tax system where there is no double
taxation of income that is saved and invested. The Social
Security payroll tax is a consumption based tax, since it is
not imposed on dividends, interest and capital gains.
Likewise, the flat tax, popularized by a former house
majority leader, Dick Armey, is a consumption tax, since
dividends, interest, capital gains are not subject to a second
layer of tax. In short, a consumption tax is a system where
income is taxed only once. It might be taxed only one time when
the income is earned. It might be taxed only one time when the
income is spent. And this is in contrast to our current system,
the Haig-Simons or comprehensive income tax system, which does
have pervasive double and triple taxation of income that is
saved and invested.
Now, because a VAT does not have all this double taxation,
it often gets favorable reviews from economists, but that is
only if you assume that you are getting rid of other taxes.
That's not what anybody is talking about. A VAT is always being
discussed as an add-on tax. And what would it mean?
Well, if you look at the experience from Europe, you will
see that an add-on value-added tax basically leads to two
things. It leads to higher, overall tax burdens, and it leads
to a higher burden of government spending. If you look at the
OECD data, you will see that government spending in Europe back
in the mid-60s before a VAT became pervasive was not that
different than government spending in the U.S., when measured
as a share of GDP.
But, ever since the VAT was adopted government spending in
Europe has increased dramatically. Of course they've had higher
payroll taxes, energy taxes and things like that. So it is not
always a one to one relationship, but the correlation still
exists. The other thing that you find in Europe since the
adoption of a value-added tax is that we do not see any
improvements in fiscal balance.
If anything, deficits and debt have gotten much higher in
Europe since the adoption of the value-added tax. In some
sense, they are confirming what Milton Friedman said back in
the 1990s, that governments will spend everything that the
revenue system will generate, plus as much as they can get away
with.
Another one of the big assertions about a value added tax
is that you can use it to reduce or lower other taxes. Well,
let's look at what happened in Europe. Let's look at what
happened to taxes on income and profits as a share of GDP in
Europe. Ever since the VAT was adopted, the tax on income and
profits in Europe as a share of GDP has gone up, not down.
If we look just at the tax on corporate income as a share
of GDP in Europe, you will see that it has gone up, not down.
By contrast, in the United States, which doesn't have a value
added tax, the overall tax burden on income and profits has
stayed relatively flat over the last 40 or 50 years, and our
tax burden on corporations as a share of GDP has actually
fallen. So, the assertion that a value added tax can somehow
lead us to a better tax system certainly hasn't applied in any
countries in the world right now, although I will say that in
some of the more recent countries, like Australia, Japan, that
have adopted a VAT or goods and services tax, you don't find
the same problems.
But, I am out of time, and so I will stop there. Thank you
very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mitchell follows:]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Mitchell.
Mr. Johnson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SIMON JOHNSON, RONALD A. KURTZ PROFESSOR OF
ENTREPRENEURSHIP, SLOAN SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT, MASSACHUSETTS
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to make three points that have not come out in
the discussion so far. First of all, while I support the VAT on
efficiency grounds in terms of the ability to raise revenue as
the previous panelists have indicated--and I broadly would
agree with the numbers they put forward--I think we should
stress that the VAT is an inherently regressive tax.
Income distribution in this country has become much more
skewed since the tax reform of 1986. These are striking and
dramatic numbers, and this is a very hard trend to reverse in
many ways. It is certainly possible, as some of the previous
panelists said, to address the regressivity of VAT through
various forms, some sort of refundable tax credit, and also
addressing, perhaps, Social Security payments.
But I would point everyone to the report made by President
Bush's advisory panel when they looked carefully at this issue.
Even when trying to address this issue, they present numbers
that show you the amount of tax being paid at the top of income
distribution goes down dramatically. And the amount of tax
being paid in the middle of the income distribution goes up. So
I think this is a very serious issue that has to be taken fully
on board.
The second point is, and I don't think this has been
mentioned so far, is the way that financial services are
treated in a VAT system has to be viewed carefully. The one
problem with the European VAT system is that it has typically--
because it is a relatively old system and this problem wasn't
especially thought through--it is under taxed financial
services.
The IMF proposed in light of the financial crisis at the
behest of the G20 a new form of taxation, which is called,
rather memorably, the FAT financial activities tax. So we have
the VAT and the FAT. I didn't pick the name. It was after I
left the IMF. But the point of the fact is to redress this
balance, and the latest thinking, although this has not been
done fully and properly in any country so far, but it is
doable, is to have a version of FAT that would fully integrate
with VAT and would result in a fair, equitable taxation on the
same basis of financial services.
Now, in this context and completely consistent with that
FAT, I would stress that we should also be addressing the
excess leverage in the financial system in this country, and I
would commend to you a speech made recently by the President of
the Minneapolis Fed, Mr. Cocha Lakota, who goes through in
detail why the Tax Code is encouraging excessive leverage for
the corporate sector, particularly for the financial sector.
This can be addressed at the same time as moving to a VAT, plus
FAT, system.
The third point I would like to make or the question I
think I would like to raise is when exactly is the fiscal
crisis that we need to address with tax reform? And, of course,
there are several possibilities. One is the crisis next week,
which I certainly hope we will avert. I don't think that is
going to happen. We'll see.
Another is a crisis over the next 10 years, and that, of
course, is part of the discussion around the CBO's forecast
window, but the numbers there are quite string. If the CBO is
correct, and they certainly are the projections that we all
use, the United States under reasonable assumptions will have a
small, primary surplus at the end of the 10 years. This is not
a dramatic budget crisis by any means.
There is a budget problem, which has already been
mentioned, which is in the longer term spending. And the IMF
also has very good, comparative numbers; but, this is mostly
about increase in medical cost, medical spending over a 30-year
period. On this scale we stand out relative to other countries.
So I think the good news part of this is that we have time for
proper tax reform.
At the same time as we are thinking about tax reform and
thinking about the appropriate level and extent of a
consumption tax, or a VAT plus financial activities tax, I
would stress we need to think about the changing nature of our
society over these 30 years. The society is aging in a way that
needs the robust provision of public goods, for example, for
education and health, for children and for lower income people.
And we also live in a very dangerous world in which having a
robust income base for military spending is absolutely
important.
One very important feature of these consumption taxes--this
is actually mentioned also in the last panel, at least in
passing, is that consumption goes down less than does income
when you have a major crisis. Now to the extent that we don't
reduce the risks in our financial system, I am very worried
about future crises that will damage the receipts from income
tax and cause a big increase in debt.
The reason why debt has surged over the past four years is
primarily due to the effect of banks, big banks in particular,
blowing themselves up at great cost to the American taxpayer.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
We expect a series of votes in about 15 minutes that will
last about an hour. So, as a result, Mr. Levin and I have
yielded back our time and we are going to go to a three-minute
questioning period.
So at this point, Mr. Rangel, you are recognized for 3
minutes.
Mr. RANGEL. I just want to ask Mr. Johnson. All the time
during his testimony I was thinking of a possible crises, if
the congress and the President can't get together.
Now, Mr. Johnson, I think some people believe that if we do
have a default that we'll have a smaller government; and I
think I read somewhere that you had indicated that a default
would increase the size of government. Is that correct?
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes, Mr. Rangel, that is my opinion, because
government debt as a triple A rated securities, the basis of
our credit system, so much of the private sector depends on
credit one way or another. If you have any kind of government
default, and that could be next week--it could be at any
point--you'll destroy the credit system. You make the private
sector smaller. And the government, whatever you think about
it, has an ability to operate. You saw this in the great
depression, even as the private sector crumbles around it.
So, ironically, one effect, and tragically, I could say,
because I certainly don't want to default, and I would argue
very strongly against anything that would take you down the
road. But one ironic effect would be to make the private sector
much, much smaller. Therefore, government as a share of GDP
will become bigger while GDP was getting smaller.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Rangel.
Mr. Davis, you are recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to ask a
hypothetical question, open it up to the panel. If the VAT were
imposed, how wide ranging should this be if you were to do
something like this in the United States? I have heard a range
of different opinions here.
I mean should some products and services be excluded as
they are in the current retail economy from sales tax or
professional services? You know. How are you concerned that
implementation of VAT will be no different than our current Tax
Code in terms of complexity and compliance issues that exempt
certain income and taxes others. I'd just like to throw it open
to the group there.
Mr. WHITE. That's a very good question; and, as I
mentioned, the European VATs are quite complex. They've got a
lot of exemptions, special rates, other tax preferences or tax
expenditures built in, so many that they lose roughly half the
revenue that they could have collected from a simpler version.
So that the overall point is that just like an income tax, you
can add a lot of complexity with exemptions, deductions,
special rates, those kinds of----
Mr. DAVIS. So hypothetically you could have a simpler VAT
with a lower rate and actually make more money.
Mr. WHITE. New Zealand is an example of a country that's
got a much simpler VAT; many fewer exemptions, fewer special
rates.
Mr. DAVIS. Anybody else?
Mr. GRAETZ. Mr. Davis.
Mr. DAVIS. I will come back to you, Mr. Johnson. We will
get Mr. Graetz and come back to you briefly.
Mr. GRAETZ. We have been looking at this very carefully,
and the VATs to use as your models are Singapore, South Africa,
New Zealand, Australia and Canada.
Talking about Europe is non-sensical, because Europe's VATs
are ancient and because of the European treaties. They can't
change them without agreement throughout Europe, so Europe is
really not the right comparison. These are all modern value
added taxes. They are very broad-based. They are very simple.
Their compliance costs are relatively low.
Singapore has a very large exemption for small businesses.
If I were recommending an exemption for small businesses, I
would say that any business under $500,000 of receipts doesn't
need to come into the VAT, unless it elects to come into the
VAT. Some of them will elect to come in because they will get
refunds, because of where they are in the chain. I agree with
Mr. Johnson, Professor Johnson, that the financial services
problem is a big one, under many VATs.
Financial services transactions with businesses are over
taxed, and their transactions with customers, with retail
customers, are under-taxed, and we have come up with some
solutions that we think will work on that front. These problems
of implementation are solvable and the advantages of having a
value added tax are large and eliminating, if we can eliminate
a large part of the income tax in the process and get our
corporate rate down.
You can't solve the corporate income tax problem in this
country by tinkering with the international tax rules. It's not
going to work.
Mr. DAVIS. I am sorry, Mr. Johnson, but the clock has run
out on me there. Hopefully, someone else will pick up on this.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Altshuler, the relationship of the VAT or proposed VAT
and exports is a lot of conflicting advice on whether or not
the VAT actually would help our exporting industries.
Ms. ALTSHULER. Well, I think as you know we economists
don't think that the border adjusting attacks will have an
affect in the long-term on trade. What we think will happen is
that there'll be exchange rate adjustments that will take away
any advantage or disadvantage that we would gain from adopting
a board or adjustable tax.
That said, it's possible that during the transition period
there could be advantages or disadvantages in terms of trade;
and, if you were to do what I think we would all advise that
you should not do and adopt a VAT that has lots of holes and
lots of exemptions, you'd create a system in which there would
be some disadvantages and advantages in terms of export and
import. But, again, a reason to adopt the VAT is not because it
will be a positive for trade or negative for trade.
Mr. GRAETZ. An export driver. Can I make just one quick
comment on that, Mr. Neal? Not all exchange rates are moving
freely. As we know, China does not, and exempting exports and
taxing imports from a country like that might make a real
difference, in addition to its other advantages and compliance.
Mr. CARROLL. I would just add to that. The economic
theories would suggest that it's the relative price levels
between nations that would adjust for countries where there are
flexible exchange rates that would happen through the flexible
exchange rates, for countries with fixed exchange rates or
where they're pegged. It would probably happen in other ways,
but it would happen much more slowly. There was a lot of
inflexibility in labor contracts and so on, but I would agree
with Rosanne that it would still happen, but it would happen
more slowly.
And I would just reiterate one of the points that Rosanne
made, that border adjustments could have significant
differential effects if you were to enact a narrow base such as
they have in Europe, or even as they have at the state level in
this country through kind of the partial sales taxes that are
in effect.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Chairman, given DOHA and the fact we have
three pending bilateral agreements, I think this would be worth
pursuing as we go forward. So I think these panels have been
helpful, and I think something along those lines could be more
helpful.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Jenkins is recognized for 3 minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
I think most of us in this room acknowledge that the
current Tax Code is broken. Pro growth tax system should be
simpler, more efficient, fair. A simple Tax Code is essential
in my belief to promoting economic efficiency and reducing the
interference of taxes with families' everyday business making
decisions. It seems that the layering of a VAT tax in addition
to this already complex personal and business tax would only
produce an ever more burdensome Tax Code.
Instead of promoting widespread economic growth promised by
fundamental tax reform, it would promote two sectors above all
others: accountants and tax lawyers. That continues to be
highly contentions and controversies over virtually every
aspect of that includes a laundry list: the determination of
what activities fall within the scope of that; the delineation
of exempt and zero-related supplies; the characterization of
supplies and determination of where they're provided; treatment
of the composite supplies; apportionment of input taxes to tax
exempt supplies as VAT tax is immune from controversy. I'd just
like you all to comment briefly or elaborate on which aspects
of that tend to invite controversy and litigation, and are
there any particular cases that should caution the United
States from following other countries in an acting VAT.
Mr. GRAETZ. Well, I would say two things. One is I do think
if you have a broad base, these issues are much, much simpler.
New Zealand and those countries, Singapore, are not having a
great controversy over their value added taxes; and, if you
used the revenues from a value added tax to remove 150 million
Americans from the income tax and you use it to get a 15
percent rate on income above $100,000 and 25 percent above
$200,000, which is distributionally neutral and can have a 15
percent corporate income tax rate, we will have put the United
States in a much better position, and I think you'll find that
the amounts of money that are being spent by businesses on tax
planning and tax advice, this is the only sector in which the
current system creates jobs is the tax planning, tax return
preparation, tax advice sector. And I think a value added tax
from all experience, if it is used to buy down the income tax
significantly, would make a big difference, a positive
difference.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Ms. Black is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I know that my
time is very limited with just 3 minutes, but having just had
the presentation prior to you on the FairTax, and what I would
like each of the panelists to do as briefly as you can with a
little comment on why you would support or not support the
difference between the VAT and the FairTax.
So maybe we could start on this end, since Mr. Johnson
seems to be left out. Mr. Johnson, let's do that and go down.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yeah. I actually would echo again what
President Bush's advisory panel said, which is they came out
strongly against FairTax or national sales tax. So they were
split, but they were rather more favoring the VAT in terms of
how you administer the system, in terms of the compliance risks
that you have, in terms of the burden that you have on small
business; and, of course, in terms of the inherent regressivity
and how easy it is to do with it. You are creating a massive
new entitlement plan with the prebates. Why would you want to
do that when we have enough difficulty managing our existing
structure?
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you. Mr. Mitchell.
Mr. MITCHELL. And if we could repeal the 16th Amendment and
put it so deep under the ground that no Supreme Court could
possibly let an income tax ever spring up to haunt us again,
then either a VAT or some sort of national retail sales tax
would be a less destructive way of raising revenue. That's not
going to happen, and therefore I hope that we keep a VAT or a
national retail sales tax deep under the ground.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you. Mr. White.
Mr. WHITE. As I noted, both a sales tax and a VAT are
consumption taxes, so the economics is the same for the two.
The administration of them is quite different; and so you've
got different issues concerning compliance, non-compliance,
risks of non-compliance.
That would have to be addressed. I would note that with a
sales tax, our experience has been with relatively low rate
sales taxes. I don't think around the world there's been any
experience with very high rate sales taxes and the compliance
risks there.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you. Mr. Carroll.
Mr. CARROLL. I would make the same point. I think one of
the two major differences that I would highlight, some of which
have already been made, one is the collection of a retail sales
tax that is focused at the retail level. That makes evasion a
much more significant problem, and so that is one area.
The second point I would make is it is probably the case
that would be much more likely to have base erosion with the
retail sales tax than with the value added tax, and it is much
more likely that the experience that we would follow over time
would be more typical of what we have seen at the state level
where there has been a very significant erosion of the base by
excluding various consumption items.
Maybe the third point I would make, it is much more likely
we would tax, we would include some intermediate inputs in a
sales tax base but not in a VAT, and that would lead to
cascading and undermine the efficiency benefits of the sales
tax.
Mrs. BLACK. Time is running out. Ms. Altshuler.
Ms. ALTSHULER. I'll echo what everybody else said. Well,
not what everybody else said, but I was the chief economist for
the tax reform panel. We looked closely at the FairTax. We
looked fairly at the FairTax. The FairTax is not a FairTax and
it just doesn't work.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Herger is recognized for 3 minutes to conclude this
session.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank our witnesses. I feel the consumption part tax of the VAT
is very admirable. I have some very strong concerns about the
lack of transparency, and also the fact that it hides the true
cost of government from voters.
Mr. Mitchell, you mentioned in your testimony that value
added taxes are typically built into the price of goods and
services. Can you elaborate on why this is a problem?
Mr. MITCHELL. If the tax system is supposed to be the price
of government, and you want prices to be transparent so voters
can understand what they're getting and whether it is worth it,
then you want a tax system that is very visible. You don't want
it hidden. And we certainly have seen in Europe--I included a
chart that I took out of a European Commission report that just
was released, showing that just in the last couple of years
alone value added tax rates have jumped by something like two
percentage points.
And, of course, because they're such broad-based taxes,
that is a huge increase and a burden on the people of Europe.
And one of the reasons why that tax is always so easy to raise
is precisely because it is hidden. And one of my concerns is if
we put in a VAT at five or ten percent in the U.S., as we get
further and further into this entitlement tsunami, we will try
to keep up with that wave by just raising the VAT rate one or
two percentage points every other year. And, of course, we will
make the same mistake that the Europeans made, higher taxes,
following higher spending, leading to more stagnation, leading
to higher deficits and debt.
As I said in my oral testimony, I don't want a copy of the
fiscal policy of countries that are on the verge of collapse,
especially when we have--if want a single rate consumption
based tax, we already have a harabuska system that would be
much easier and safer to implement.
Mr. GRAETZ. Mr. Herger, Canada separately states their
value added tax just like a retail sales tax. There's no reason
why in legislation if you want people to know what they're
paying. You just don't have it separately stated, just like a
retail sales tax. And Canada's spending has gone down and its
rate actually went down. So, you know, there are ways to
control these issues.
Mr. HERGER. I admire what Canada has done. I also remember
back in the days when I am old enough to remember when you
bought gasoline, and you had when you filled your tank exactly
how many cents of tax you were paying. We don't see that
anymore. My concern is future congresses that will hide it. So,
therefore, again I share your concern, Mr. Mitchell. I thank
you. It could be right if we had the perfect people in.
Regrettably, we more times than not do not have that be the
case. But, Mr. Chairman, again I thank you for this hearing,
and I thank each of the witnesses.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. I heard the bells. We
are having a series of votes, and we are having a series of
votes on the floor. So I want to thank you all.
Members who did not get a chance to question may want to
submit some questions to you in writing. If you would be kind
enough to respond to those promptly, we could make those part
of the formal hearing record. And I would very much appreciate
you all being here. This was a very strong panel, and I really
appreciate the good information that you brought to the
committee.
Thank you. This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:20 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[Submissions for the Record follow:]


