- THE INDEPENDENT PAYMENT ADVISORY BOARD

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE INDEPENDENT PAYMENT

ADVISORY BOARD
=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 6, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-HL08

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
00-000                    WASHINGTON : 2009
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer Safavian, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

WALLY HERGER, California, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published
in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the official
version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare both
printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of
converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of March 6, 2012 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Scott Gottlieb, M.D., Resident Fellow, American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research...........................     5
Katherine Beh Neas, Senior Vice President, Government Relations,
Easter Seals, Office of Public Affairs.........................    14
David F. Penson, M.D., MPH, Vice Chair, Health Policy Council,
American Urological Association................................    19
Marilyn Moon, Ph.D., Senior Vice President and Director, Health
Program, American Institutes for Research......................    27

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

ACOG, statement..................................................    57
American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
statement......................................................    60
American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons, statement..........    63
American Osteopathic Association, statement......................    67
American Physical Therapy Association Private Practice Section,
statement......................................................    70
American Society of Anesthesiologists, statement.................    74
Center for Fiscal Equity, statement..............................    76
Healthcare Leadership Council, statement.........................    79
National Right to Life Committee, statement......................    86
PTPN, statement..................................................    91
Retire Safe, statement...........................................    95

THE INDEPENDENT PAYMENT

ADVISORY BOARD

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 6, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Wally Herger
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Tuesday, March 6, 2012
HL-08

Chairman Herger Announces a Hearing on

the Independent Payment Advisory Board

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Wally Herger (R-
CA) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
to examine how the Independent Payment Advisory Board (IPAB) will
impact the Medicare program, its beneficiaries, and health care
providers. The hearing will take place on Tuesday, March 6, 2012 in
1100 Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of witnesses
will follow.

BACKGROUND:

The health care overhaul created IPAB to ``reduce the per capita
growth rate in Medicare spending.'' This 15-member board, which will
consist of unelected, Presidentially-appointed members, will make
recommendations as early as January 15, 2014, to cut Medicare spending
if the per capita Medicare spending rate is expected to exceed an
economic growth rate over a 5-year period. IPAB's recommended Medicare
cuts are ``fast tracked'' in Congress and will go into effect unless
Congress amends IPAB's recommendations with legislation that produces
the same level of savings.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Herger stated, ``One of
Congress' most important responsibilities is to oversee the Medicare
program and protect its beneficiaries. When Democrats created this
panel, they chose to empower unelected bureaucrats at the expense of
patients and their doctors. IPAB robs Medicare beneficiaries of their
voice and stifles their Constitutionally-mandated representation. Our
seniors and those with disabilities deserve more than nameless
political appointees who will deny care if they decide it costs too
much. This hearing will allow the Subcommittee to fully understand the
impact this ill-conceived rationing board will have on Medicare
beneficiaries and their health care providers.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will examine the impact sections 3403 and 10320 of the
``Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act'' (P.L. 111-148) will have
on the Medicare program, its beneficiaries, and health care providers.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Tuesday, March 20, 2012. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman HERGER. The Subcommittee will come to order. We
are meeting today to hear from those who will be directly and
adversely impacted by the Independent Payment Advisory Board,
or IPAB. In an era where our two political parties are best
known for their deep divisions, this is one area where there
appears to be bipartisan concern.
IPAB was created in the Democrat's health care overhaul,
and is designed to reduce the per capita rate of growth in
Medicare spending. That might sound benign, but when you peel
back a couple of layers it is clear that IPAB is a real threat
to Medicare beneficiaries' health. Those concerned about a
government takeover of health care need look no further than
IPAB.
If implemented, the board will consist of 15 unelected and
unaccountable Washington appointees. IPAB is given the
authority to meet in secret, make its decisions in secret, and
it does not need to consider the perspective of Medicare
patients or their health care providers. To top it off, IPAB's
rulings cannot be challenged in a court of law. My good friend
from California, the Ranking Member, Mr. Stark, characterized
IPAB as a ``mindless rate-cutting machine that sets up for
unsustainable cuts that would endanger the health of American
seniors and people with disabilities.''
Yet, despite the growing bipartisan opposition to this
unaccountable board, the President once again proposed further
expanding its authority in his most recent budget.
Why is IPAB so dangerous? I have heard numerous concerns
from patients and doctors. But to me, nothing is more troubling
than IPAB's ability to drive a wedge between Medicare
beneficiaries and their doctors. There is nothing in the
Democrat's health care law preventing IPAB from slashing
Medicare reimbursements for services or procedures that IPAB
members feel are unnecessary or ineffective to levels so low
that physicians would be willing to provide such care. As long
as IPAB is allowed to exist, access to care for seniors and
those with disabilities will forever be in jeopardy.
IPAB supporters argue that it cannot ration care. What they
won't tell you is that the term ``ration'' is not defined
anywhere in the Medicare statute. This means that what is and
is not rationing will be left to 15 faceless, unaccountable and
unelected appointees to decide.
There is a better way. Rather than endangering Medicare
beneficiaries, we should empower them. House Republicans have
put forth such a plan. Our plan would let beneficiaries, not
bureaucrats, decide the coverage they want and need. We have an
excellent and diverse panel of witnesses here today who will
share their thoughts and concerns about IPAB. We should all
take note that when patients and providers are in agreement
that access to care is in jeopardy, where those concerns exist
it is our fiduciary responsibility to address them.
Before I recognize Ranking Member Stark for the purpose of
an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that all Members'
written statements be included in the record.
[No response.]
Without objection, so ordered. I now recognize Ranking
Member Stark for 5 minutes for the purpose of his opening
statement.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess you saw how
long this was so you slipped that 5 minutes in there on me.
That is okay.
I am proud of what we have done with the Affordable Care
Act. We have provided more than 2\1/2\ million young adults
with health coverage. We have reduced prescription drug costs
for nearly 4 million seniors, provided free preventative care
to 86 million people of all ages. And in 2014 it will go fully
into effect, and expand coverage to over 30 million uninsured
Americans, providing security, permanent security, for those
who already have coverage.
That said, the Affordable Care Act is a large bill with
many provisions. And none of us probably agree with every
single provision. To that point, the Independent Payment
Advisory Board, or IPAB, is a provision I strongly oppose.
Remember, the House included no similar provision in our health
reform bill. It is a product of the other body and we really
had no part in it.
Let me be clear. I oppose IPAB for reasons different,
perhaps, from my other colleagues. Congress has always stepped
in to strengthen Medicare's finances when needed. I have always
worked on this Subcommittee to protect and strengthen Medicare,
and ensure that it works for its 50 million beneficiaries.
One only has to look at the Accountable Care Act, which
extended solvency, slowed spending growth, lowered beneficiary
costs, improved benefits, modernized the delivery system, and
created new fraud-fighting tools, to see that we have done a
good job on this Committee.
I see no reason why Congress should hand that authority
over to the executive branch. That undermines the separation of
powers. And I won't go into detail now, but I have other
concerns about IPAB's process. I am sure we will hear more
about that today.
No one should interpret my opposition to IPAB as a knock
against the ACA. I stand by my vote there. Nor should anyone
interpret Republican support to repeal IPAB as an attempt to
improve or preserve Medicare. I still believe that the other
side of the aisle would like to end Medicare, provide it as a
voucher, and that would underfund what is needed for
individuals' disabilities.
Despite my opposition to IPAB, I think it is far less
dangerous than a voucher plan. It doesn't undermine Medicare's
guaranteed benefits. And its ability to reduce Medicare
spending has guardrails. It doesn't permit cuts to come from
reduced Medicare benefits. It prohibits rationing and has
annual limits on Medicare cuts. The Republican voucher plan
does not have these protections.
So, I believe that the witnesses may share my confusion or
skepticism, but I look forward to discussing with them, if they
believe there is a better plan on the other side of the aisle
for Medicare's future. And I will see what the witnesses have
to say.
Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Stark. Today we are joined
by four witnesses: Dr. Scott Gottlieb, resident fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute; Katherine Beh Neas, vice
president of government relations at Easter Seals; Dr. David
Penson, a practicing urologist from Nashville, Tennessee, who
is vice chair of the American Urological Association Health
Policy Council; and Marilyn Moon, senior vice president and
director of the health program at the American Institute for
Research.
You will each have 5 minutes to present your oral
testimony. Your entire written statement will be made a part of
the record.
Dr. Gottlieb, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT GOTTLIEB, M.D., RESIDENT FELLOW, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY RESEARCH (WASHINGTON,
DC)

Dr. GOTTLIEB. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, thank you
for the opportunity to testify before the Committee.
IPAB was created based on the premise that decisions about
the pricing of Medicare benefits are simply too contentious to
be handled by a political system. But changes to the way
Medicare pays for medical services affect too many people in
significant ways to be made behind closed doors. How Medicare
prices medical products and services has sweeping implications
across the entire private market. They are some of the most
important policy choices that we make in health care.
To these ends there are some considerable shortcomings with
the way that IPAB is structured and how it will operate. Among
these problems, IPAB has no obligation to engage in public
notice and comment that is customary to regulatory agencies
whose decisions have similarly broad implications. IPAB's
decisions are restricted from traditional review. In creating
IPAB, Congress provided effective patients, providers, and
product developers no mechanism for appealing the board's
pronouncements. IPAB's recommendations will be fast-tracked
through Congress in a way that provides only a veneer of
congressional review and consent.
And for practical purposes, IPAB has been given the
authority to legislate. Moreover, there is a belief that if
IPAB fails to fulfill its mandate, these decisions will default
to Congress. Actually, under the law they default to the
Secretary of Health and Human Services.
But most significantly, IPAB is unlikely to take the steps
to actually improve the quality of medical care and the
delivery of services under Medicare. That is because IPAB does
not have any practical alternative to simply squeezing prices
in the Medicare program.
The program we have in Medicare is a problem with the
existing price controls that erode health care productivity in
Medicare's outdated fee-for-service payment system. This leads
to inefficient medical care. There is too little support for
better, more innovative ways of delivering health care.
IPAB can pursue longer-term reforms to change incentives
and behavior. These ideas--for example, aligning reimbursement
with value and quality, or expanding cost sharing--don't
generate savings in the short run, since they are premised on
long-term changes on how efficiently doctors and patients use
medical services. These proposals will not produce the kind of
immediate savings that IPAB needs to achieve a narrow budget
window that will be its focus. Yet these are precisely the
kinds of reforms that Congress has aimed to pursue on a
bipartisan basis.
By doubling down on the existing practice of simply
whacking price schedules with no meaningful eye to how these
changes impact long-term incentives, IPAB will put more
systemic payment reform further out of reach. IPAB will be
working at cross purposes to Congress' broader reform goals.
IPAB's need to focus on short-run manipulation and price
schedules and coding procedures is evidenced by the fact that
longer-term payment reforms don't score saving money by either
the CBO or the Medicare actuary who has to sign off on IPAB's
recommendations.
All of these ideas for broader payment reform also rely on
changes in payment to providers, especially hospitals. IPAB
can't do these kinds of structural reforms if these
constituencies remain off limits until 2019.
Moreover, because IPAB has its purview narrowly targeted to
specific slices of the industry to achieve its targeted
savings, IPAB may be forced to implement unusually deep cuts to
the limited terrain where it can operate. These deep cuts could
forestall access all together to certain products and services.
Medicare must continue to implement reforms to align its
coverage and payment policies with a value delivered to
beneficiaries. Congress needs to focus on real ways to get
longer-term savings, like premium support, modernizing benefits
in the traditional Medicare program, and paying for better
outcomes. IPAB makes it even harder to do all of these things.
If Congress believes that the political process is
incapable of making enduring decisions about the payment of
medical benefits, then all of this is an argument for getting
the government out of making these kinds of judgements in the
first place. It is not, in my view, an argument for creating an
insular panel that is removed from the usual scrutiny to take
decisions that other Federal agencies have failed to discharge,
precisely because those decisions couldn't survive public
examination. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gottlieb follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.006

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Ms. Neas, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHERINE BEH NEAS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, EASTER SEALS, OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
(WASHINGTON, DC)

Ms. NEAS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity to
testify. I am Katy Neas, senior vice president for government
relations at Easter Seals. For nearly 100 years, Easter Seals
has provided exceptional services so that children and adults
with disabilities in their families can live, learn, work, and
play in the community. Last year, Easter Seals served 1.6
million individuals through a network of 75 affiliates across
the country.
Easter Seals' experience over these many decades has
solidified our belief that when people with disabilities,
regardless of age, receive appropriate health care services,
they live with greater independence. This experience was one of
the main reasons Easter Seals supported and continues to
support the Affordable Care Act. At the same time, we strongly
concur that there must be cost containment within the health
care system, and believe that more can and must be done to
control costs within both public and private health care
systems.
To achieve true cost containment, Easter Seals believes
that two important steps must be in place. First, the cost
containment reforms established in the ACA must be given time
to be implemented. Second, any new policies must be designed to
ensure that people with disabilities can attain appropriate,
medically necessary services in a timely fashion as to promote
overall health and wellness.
We too have concerns about the effectiveness of the IPAB
that was included in the ACA. IPAB is not designed to be an
instrument of delivery reform, or to improve the quality of
care. The charge for this board is to reduce the per capita
rate of growth in Medicare spending. For people with
disabilities and chronic conditions, it is through better
coordination and provision of quality care that real changes in
health status can be achieved, and savings in the health care
system can be realized.
The language of the Affordable Care Act so limits where the
IPAB can make changes, that all that is really left is reducing
reimbursements to providers. The board cannot take any action
that would deny access to care, increase revenue, restrict
benefits, or change reimbursements to hospitals or hospices. If
circumstances bring about a mandated cut in reimbursement to
providers, it is likely that access to quality care will be
reduced, and cost will be shifted to the patient.
We are already experiencing a reduction in the number of
health care providers who will participate in public insurance
programs. The result is the same as if benefits were
eliminated.
A legislative correction such as the Medicare Decisions
Accountability Act would ensure transparency and an opportunity
for any beneficiary to talk with their Member of Congress about
how the Medicare program can reduce cost and increase quality.
It would also leave on the table more options for slowing the
growth of Medicare expenditures, and the support of new
delivery reform models. This seems the brighter path for people
with disabilities and chronic conditions, to assure the most
impact from money spent through the Medicaid program.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to speak with you
today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Neas follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.009

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Penson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID F. PENSON, M.D., MPH, VICE CHAIR, HEALTH
POLICY COUNCIL, AMERICAN UROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION (NASHVILLE, TN)

Dr. PENSON. Chairman Herger, Ranking Member Stark, and
other Members of the Subcommittee, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the IPAB. My name is David Penson,
and I am a practicing urologist from Nashville, Tennessee. I am
speaking today on behalf of the American Urological
Association, or the AUA, which has over 18,000 members, and has
promoted the highest standards of urologic care in the United
States and the world for the last 110 years. I serve as the
vice chair of the AUA's health policy council. My testimony
today does not represent the opinion of my primary employer of
Vanderbilt University.
The AUA strongly opposes the IPAB, and calls on Congress to
pass legislation that would repeal it. The AUA also
participates in the IPAB Coalition and is a member of the
Alliance of Specialty Medicine. Both groups support full repeal
of the IPAB. We believe that the IPAB, if enacted, will result
in reduced access to health care for Medicare beneficiaries.
Why do we believe this? We know the Subcommittee is keenly
aware of the ongoing issues with the SGR. Despite recent action
to temporarily prevent the steep cuts to the SGR, physicians
now face a 32 percent cut on January 1, 2013. Clearly, this
affects physicians' confidence in the Medicare program. To
understand how much it affects confidence, and to determine if
the cuts would impact access to health care, the Alliance of
Specialty Medicine last year surveyed physicians and found that
more than one-third planned to change their Medicare status to
non-participating if reimbursement is significantly cut.
Another third will opt out of Medicare for 2 years and
privately contract with patients.
The IPAB will only make matters worse. Hospitals and other
Part A providers are exempt from IPAB until 2020. In addition,
the IPAB is required to make recommendations that prioritize
primary care. The result will be a disproportionate share of
reductions on physicians with an emphasis on specialists,
including urologists.
Like the SGR, the IPAB, by its very nature, is flawed and
will result in providers leaving Medicare. Specifically, the
IPAB will consist of a board of unelected individuals that
lacks accountability, clinical expertise, and transparency in
its proceedings. In addition, the IPAB's recommendations will
be precluded from administrative or judicial review, and will
be enacted unless Congress specifically acts to prevent this
from occurring.
To understand the negative impact that IPAB would have on
Americans, we can look to the current impact of a similar body,
the United States Preventative Services Task Force. The task
force is an independent panel composed exclusively of primary
care providers, and charged with making recommendations on the
value of preventative services. The task force is not required,
nor does it consult with the specialty areas relevant to the
specific recommendations, and only recently added a public
comment period in response to criticism.
The task force got our attention this fall when it released
new draft recommendations to discourage PSA-based screening of
prostate cancer, giving it a D rating, asserting that there is
no net benefit, or that the harms outweigh the benefits. Based
upon our review of the evidence, we strongly disagree with
these draft recommendations. But the task force did not seek
our opinion. In fact, the draft recommendations were developed
without consultation of urologists, medical oncologists, or
radiation oncologists, the very specialists who diagnose and
treat prostate cancer every day.
Prior to the Affordable Care Act, the task force
recommendations were advisory and non-binding. Now, however,
their recommendations are tied to patient cost sharing,
intended to encourage or limit access to certain provider
services, preventative services. In short, the recommendations
of the task force will limit Medicare beneficiaries' right to
decide if they can be screened for prostate cancer, and have
reduced access to health care.
You may recall a couple of years ago that the task force
made similar recommendations discouraging mammograms for women
in their forties. Like the task force, the IPAB is another
board of unelected, unaccountable individuals that will have a
similar impact on Medicare beneficiaries. However, its impact
will be more severe, since the IPAB has much broader authority
to alter the delivery of care. Appointed members cannot be
individuals directly involved in the provision of Medicare
services or have other employment. Thus, practicing clinicians,
the very people who treat the patients impacted by the IPAB,
are excluded from participation on the board.
Although the IPAB is argued to bend the cost curve, it only
serves to ratchet down costs without clinical expertise or
consideration of medical evidence. Similar to the task force,
it doesn't have the research capability or accountability to
examine the effects of its recommendations and determine
whether the recommendations will threaten access to care.
While we are in agreement that Medicare spending growth is
unsustainable and payment policies are challenging, it is your
duty and responsibility as elected officials to address these
issues. The care of our Nation's seniors and individuals with
disabilities is far too important to leave in the hands of
unelected board members.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Penson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.015

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Ms. Moon, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARILYN MOON, PH.D., SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
DIRECTOR, HEALTH PROGRAM, AMERICAN INSTITUTES FOR RESEARCH
(WASHINGTON, DC)

Ms. MOON. Thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to be
here. My name is Marilyn Moon, and I am a long-term researcher
in the area of Medicare, with a particular emphasis on the
issues that affect the consumers of the program, the
beneficiaries. In this testimony I address both the context and
rationale for the IPAB, and some practical issues and concerns
that need to be addressed.
While the IPAB raises a number of very legitimate concerns,
it can be reasonable as a tool, if appropriately applied.
In addition to the Independent Payment Advisory Board which
is the subject of this testimony, substantial resources have
been given under the ACA to the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services to identify, evaluate, and introduce
innovations to the delivery and payment of care. This large
infusion of funds to find ways to improve delivery and quality
while holding down costs is at the heart of efforts to slow
growth over time.
It is only by identifying and implementing such changes
that we can expect to see improvements over time, and that is
the important aspect of reform that we should be focusing on.
On the other hand, the IPAB can play a role here as a backstop.
Until we understand better how to use our resources more
effectively, and what organizations and treatments work well,
it will be impossible to move forward to slow spending growth.
So it is important to fully--it is fully appropriate for this
to be done at the Federal level, which will ensure both a very
broad look at innovations, and make the information available
to all providers of care.
Research conducted by private insurers or providers is
likely to remain proprietary and to not be of the needed scope
to achieve the tasks that loom before us. With these other
activities, the IPAB makes considerably more sense than if it
had been enacted as a stand-alone gatekeeper of spending.
Moreover, it is important to contrast it with other
alternatives that people talk about. For example, those who
advocate decentralizing our Medicare program and turning
decisionmaking over to beneficiaries place an enormous burden
and risk on those beneficiaries. This is the hallmark of
options that would require Medicare beneficiaries to buy
insurance with a limited guarantee of subsidy from the Federal
Government.
Supporters of such an approach often talk about having
beneficiaries put more skin in the game as a way of improving
health care decisionmaking. Despite claims that this would
create better consumers of care, they are asking the most
vulnerable members of our society to make decisions for which
they are likely to be poorly equipped. And I believe the
evidence underscores that from the RAND experiment and other
places.
One positive aspect of IPAB that is often ignored,
particularly when the idea is broadly challenged, is that it
was explicitly set up to avoid cuts in benefits to
beneficiaries and reductions in their coverage. And although
the rationing aspect has some--I have some concerns about how
well it is drafted, that is part of the idea, that you are not
trying to harm beneficiaries. And treating this only as a
backstop after other things have not worked and as a way of
providing incentives to providers to be supportive of other
kinds of changes I think is the way to view the IPAB over time.
There are, nonetheless--though I have spoken somewhat
positively about the IPAB--concerns I have that reflect the
same kinds of concerns that you have already heard on the panel
this morning.
First, setting goals on limited time horizons and then
having short periods to implement change will put enormous
pressure on a system that needs to change in many ways, but is
not yet set up to readily adopt reforms. Fortunately, we will
probably have until 2020 or 2021 before that is an issue,
because the changes that were made in the ACA are likely to
slow the growth of Medicare sufficiently to avoid having the
IPAB have to go into effect. It could use that period of time,
for example, to focus on ways to incorporate more effectively
these kinds of changes in the decisionmaking that it
undertakes.
Second, I have concerns about the tight conflict of
interest requirements and the full-time paid status of board
members that are similar to issues that other people have
raised.
Finally, I think the cumulative effect of very stringent
controls over a long period of time needs to also be carefully
examined. Tightening up on payments, requiring coordination of
care, and improving the overall delivery of care are all
desirable activities.
But what happens if over a period of time these have
happened and, as a society we want to see spending on health
care decisions--on health care increase? The IPAB would be a
penalty in that regard.
So, I think that the IPAB should certainly be changed, but
I think it can be viewed as an appropriate tool in a broader
context.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Moon follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.020

Chairman HERGER. Thank you for your testimony.
Dr. Gottlieb, some have suggested that IPAB could rely on
information garnered from the experiments of another Democratic
health care tool, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid
Innovation, to develop cost-saving policies. However, many
Members, including myself, have serious concerns that CMMI was
given a blank check with no accountability to beneficiaries or
to Congress.
Are you concerned that the interactions between IPAB and
CMMI could lead to a perfect storm such as--these government
bodies will have unchecked powers to change Medicare in ways
that neither beneficiaries, providers, nor Congress can appeal?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. I think the interplay between IPAB and CMMI
certainly--it could be significantly problematic. You know,
IPAB could effectively authorize new authorities onto CMS, and
then CMMI could provide the funding for it. So you basically
completely sidestep Congress.
I think one can imagine IPAB skirting prohibitions on
changes in cost sharing of benefit by authorizing or
instructing the Innovation Center to use a more restrictive
standard for what Medicare will cover, and then providing--CMMI
would provide the funding to implement that. I think it is
almost a foregone conclusion that, if IPAB is constituted, it
will pursue some kind of reference pricing scheme like LCA
authority, conferring LCA authority explicitly onto Part B
drugs, something CMS has already sought and lost a number of
Federal court cases in seeking that authority. And CMMI could
effectively create the infrastructure to execute that. And so
you would have the two entities working together to effectively
accomplish what traditionally has been done by Congress,
granting authority and then providing funding for it.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Ms. Neas, you are not alone in
expressing unease about IPAB. In fact, I have heard from a
number of patient groups that have shared similar concerns that
IPAB need not count a single patient representative among its
15 members.
Can you discuss why you think it is important for
beneficiaries to have a strong voice while this unelected board
is making decisions to cut Medicare?
Ms. NEAS. Absolutely. In the disability rights movement we
have a phrase, ``Nothing about us without us.'' Patients and
beneficiaries are essential in this decisionmaking process.
People know what their bodies need, they know what they need.
And simply having the dollars of what you pay a provider be the
only factor in the decisionmaking process to us is simply
missing the point. We really need people to be invested in
their own health, and to make that opinion be part of this
decisionmaking process.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Dr. Penson, the President and
key officials in his Administration claim that IPAB will
strengthen Medicare. The President and these officials are also
quick to claim that IPAB supposedly cannot ration care,
increase beneficiary cost sharing, or reduce benefits. To me,
this means that the only thing that IPAB can do to cut Medicare
spending is to slash payments to providers.
Do you believe that simply cutting provider payments
strengthen the Medicare program? Or do you think it will weaken
the program by reducing beneficiary access to care?
Dr. PENSON. I absolutely am--agree with you that I think it
will weaken the program. The fact of the matter is that if you
reduce reimbursements to physicians--there are many physicians
out there in the community now who are struggling, particularly
primary care providers. But specialists, as well. And what I
think will happen is, if you reduce reimbursements, you will
have providers leaving the system, leaving the program, and
then that will reduce access for beneficiaries.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Stark is now recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We--one of the reasons
that I was happy to see ACA pass is that it was successful in
constraining health care spending, and extended the solvency of
the Medicare trust fund, slowed the cost growth in Medicare,
and growth in overall national health spending, all while
lowering beneficiary cost sharing. In fact, CBO estimates that
Medicare spending growth is so low, given the Accountable Care
Act, that IPAB won't be triggered until after 2021, I think, as
Ms. Moon indicated.
Could you tell us, Ms. Moon, how ACA is lowering the
Medicare spending, and how you suspect it may continue to do
that in the future? It is my understanding that the cost
containment from ACA means that, as you said, IPAB won't be
triggered for years. Can you elaborate on that a bit?
Ms. MOON. Certainly. A number of the changes that were made
in the Medicare program will reduce the level of spending over
time. There are a number of them. One of them that I think was
particularly important, for example, was to try to set on an
equal footing with the traditional Medicare program, the
Medicare Advantage aspects of the program in which now those
private plans will be paid on a level comparable to what
Medicare beneficiaries and traditional Medicare will get. I
think that was a very positive move forward, for example, and a
substantial piece of this.
I think other areas in which the projections of lower
spending are important are going to come from the innovation
center of the--of this new activity by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services. And unlike those who fear what it will
do, I think that finally we are putting resources into looking
at, very systematically and carefully, what things work to
improve the delivery of care in the United States, recognizing
that a lot of changes are going to have to be made.
Some of these are not going to be easy, and they are going
to be tough changes, but I think they will get the kind of
scrutiny that they need when they are put out there as the CMMI
does, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovations, and
that is by doing research and analysis and then talking about
the findings and how they can change over time. That is much
more transparent than will happen, for example, if these
changes are made by private insurance companies in their own
efforts to hold down costs.
Mr. STARK. I am sure you are aware of--well, not only
Canada, but I think almost all nations except Somalia and
someplace else have basically an effectiveness study which
would help patients and physicians, without regard to cost, but
through a study of how effective various procedures or various
pharmaceuticals are--is aspirin better than Tylenol? Somebody
will do a study on that and suggest to Dr. Penson that for this
particular issue or that particular issue the statistics would
show that this is more effective.
Should that, over time, provide better service to our--to
all Americans, but in particular to the Medicare beneficiaries,
if the physicians chose--it is a voluntary issue--to follow its
recommendations?
Ms. MOON. I think----
Mr. STARK. I will ask Dr. Penson if that would be useful--
would be helpful in his practice.
Dr. PENSON. Well, I am--as I also wear a second hat as a
health services researcher who focuses on comparative
effectiveness, so evidence-based medicine is very important.
The AUA supports it. I support it. I will add, though, that
sometimes we do a study and it clouds this issue even more so.
But evidence is very important for the practice of medicine,
absolutely.
Mr. STARK. Ms. Moon.
Ms. MOON. I think that that is key to the future, because
we really have to understand how to use our resources wisely.
And, as you indicated, this should be advisory to physicians
and other providers of care. It is difficult to ask physicians
in this very fast-changing world to be on top of everything.
And good and reliable information about what works and what
doesn't is going to be an essential piece of that.
Mr. STARK. Thank you. I want to thank the entire panel for
their contribution. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Johnson is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am appalled by the
government control of everything, and I think we need to get
the government out of it. You know, unelected and unaccountable
board trying to tell you docs what you can and cannot do is
ridiculous.
Are you still doing Medicare?
Dr. PENSON. I am, personally. I work for a large academic
medical center, so I suspect my medical center will always be
in Medicare. I can tell you many of my colleagues are
considering not participating, particularly if the SGR cuts go
through.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes, I know. I am aware of a couple of docs
that are thinking about going to the military and getting out
of private medicine. That is ridiculous.
Dr. Gottlieb, Secretary Sebelius testified before the
Committee just last week and claimed IPAB is prohibited from
rationing care-altering benefits. It is difficult to imagine
that with this Administration and its Washington-knows-best
mentality, that they could decide services and procedures
aren't warranted. As a result, they might recommend slashing
Medicare reimbursements for those services and procedures.
Do you see this as a possibility, and could you comment on
it?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Well, I think they are going to be forced to
manipulate payment schedules and coding because they need to
achieve budget savings in the near term, and in the near term
that is all you can really do, given the other constraints.
And what they are likely to do is import price schedules
that exist in one aspect of the market into new aspects of the
market so you can envision things like maybe VA pricing for the
specialty, tier drugs in the Part D benefit, they are likely to
just burn down existing payment rates, just drive them lower.
And they are likely to try to do things to the coding process
to try to change how certain products are reimbursed, maybe
giving CMS authority to engage in forms of reference pricing.
I think that the way that IPAB is likely to ration, if you
will, is by just conferring new authorities onto CMS,
authorities that CMS has long wanted to be able to engage in,
you know, aspects of what really amounts to reference pricing,
where you would categorize products along a judgement made by
CMS that products are clinically interchangeable.
So, for example, consolidating drugs with separate Orange
Book listings under the same payment code, even if those drugs
are paid separately, CMS could theoretically say that they
think that they are clinically interchangeable. And just
applying least cost, saying that within a category of
approaches to a given medical problem CMS doesn't recognize the
clinical difference between different approaches and is
therefore going to pay for the lowest rate. I think that is
what we are likely to see.
As far as rationing, I am not sure--there is no definition
of rationing in the statute, so I am not sure how that is
likely to be interpreted. And since you can't sue IPAB for
implementations of its recommendations, I am not sure how you
can challenge that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. I appreciate that. Do you think
Medicare can be saved with arbitrary reimbursement cuts, or do
we need more fundamental reform?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Well, I agree with you, Congressman. I think
we need more fundamental reform. I think that this endless
series of just burning down payment schedules and trying to
lump different treatments under the same payment code to bring
sort of bureaucratic efficiency to the management of the
program just makes more fundamental--far more difficult.
So, as we go through successive cycles of these arbitrary
cuts, I think it makes it harder and harder to achieve
something fundamental.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes. I am seeing some docs just getting out of
it, they are not accepting it any more. Do you still? You said
you did.
Dr. PENSON. I do, because I am an employee of a medical
center. But I will repeat what I said before, which is I know
many of my colleagues have either left Medicare or are
considering leaving Medicare because they are worried, frankly,
about keeping the lights on.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes, yes. It is a serious problem. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. As you can see, there is some agreement on this
panel this morning. And you have, I think, answered most
questions through your testimony, so some of these might be
repetitive. But I think that some of the topics bear a
highlighting during the questioning.
And I have only been on this Committee--this is going on my
fourth year. I know some Members have been here much longer
than that, and they have been struggling with health care and
health care reform and lowering costs and increasing
accessibility and quality versus quantity for a lot longer than
I have. But it has become obvious to me in my short tenure on
this Committee that there are some serious problems with this
so-called Affordable Health Care Act.
We have already removed language regarding the 1099 form.
We have also--the Class Act is one part of the program removed
from the health care law. It is not affordable. The--there are
other issues, as you know, regarding mandates. So now we have
lawsuits filed as a result of this law being passed. And now we
have also discovered that, if you like your health care plan,
you can't keep it.
And then, so today we are here to talk about another
problem that there is agreement on with this panel, at least in
the beginning of this discussion, and that is this advisory
board. And most of you, you have touched on this already.
But again, I want to highlight the--what Dr. Penson
especially said in his testimony. The advisory board only
serves to worsen the problem of physicians leaving Medicare.
And Mr. Johnson just spoke briefly to this, too. Can you
explain how the advisory board can restrict access to care for
our Nation's seniors? You have explained, at least in one case,
prostate cancer, for example. The screening has been rated now
as a D rating, which is going to restrict some coverage there
and some access. Patient cost sharing is designed to limit
access. Can you give some other examples of how access will be
limited, and why?
Dr. PENSON. Well, I think specifically with the IPAB, it is
primarily going to be cutting reimbursements to physicians, and
not just specific tests like the task force did with prostate
cancer.
With that being said, if we continue to cut reimbursement
to physicians, we are going to have a crisis, because
physicians are going to leave the Medicare program. And it is
going to happen not just with primary care providers, but
specialists. These days doctors, particularly community
physicians, are working on a very tight margin. And if you
continue to cut their reimbursements, they are going to close
their doors, or they are going to stop seeing Medicare
patients. And effectively, you are going to have American
seniors saying, ``Well, maybe I need to pay out of pocket to
see my doctor I have been seeing for 10 years, because he no
longer will accept Medicare.'' I see that as a huge problem.
And it effectively is rationing, depending on how you define
it.
Mr. REICHERT. And just to follow up on this idea, Ms. Neas,
your--I liked your ``no discussions about us without us.'' And
if you could, just elaborate a little more on that just to help
us understand how Medicare changes and reforms are impacting
beneficiaries, and especially if they are not there to
represent their own views, thoughts, and ideas, and us as
representatives have no place at the table to represent those
individuals most in need that your organization particularly
represents. Can you go into some detail on that?
Ms. NEAS. Sure. And I think, if I could be so bold, I think
Dr. Penson might agree with us. One of the ways that we are
healthy is when we have good relationships with our health care
providers. It is a two-way street. Your doctor tells you what
to do, and then you are supposed to do it. And that doesn't
always happen, but there needs to be direct communication with
the patient and their health care provider. And when that
happens in a positive way, people have better health. It is not
very complicated.
If you take that patient-doctor relationship out of the
delivery of health care so that it is harder to stay with your
doctor, you are going to somebody new every time, it can be
very, very difficult. I think you----
Mr. REICHERT. Would you say the board is sort of doing
this, then?
Ms. NEAS. If you make it so doctors can't stay in the
Medicare program--and we are seeing this--and I know it is not
the jurisdiction of this Committee, but we are seeing this
every day in the Medicaid program, where health care providers
simply are no longer taking children with disabilities who are
on Medicaid because they cannot afford to pay their light bill
and do this. It is not that they are being inappropriate in any
way. They cannot stay open if they continue to serve these
patients. We fear the same thing may be true with Medicaid--
with Medicare, if it is constantly--if there are fewer people.
I can give you one very quick example. I have a very dear
friend who has spina bifida. She is in her mid-fifties. She has
been on Medicare for times when she--and she has had over 50
surgical procedures. When she goes to a new doctor, they want a
full medical history. She is 50 years old. She has had 50
surgeries. They don't want--they don't need to know if she has
something wrong with her stomach when her legs were amputated.
It is--but--and that is an inefficiency in the system, that if
you make it harder for the people who know their patients to
stay in Medicare, you are going to have less good health
outcomes for patients.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It has been pointed
out many times in this room, Mr. Chairman, how critical it was
that health care reform included the cutting-edge delivery and
payment reforms that it did. I will refer back to this in a
moment.
But I have never believed that the Independent Payment
Advisory Board, as it stands now, would--will effectively
fulfill its stated mission to--in terms of cost containment. I
never really accepted that. I have concerns with how IPAB will
operate, and that it gives us important congressional authority
over pricing. That is why I am cosponsor of the bill, and I
intend to support it in committee and on the floor.
But let's be clear, that the IPAB was originally designed
to protect beneficiaries. That was its purpose. Despite what my
friends on the other side would have you believe, it is their
voucher plan that they endorsed, the majority endorsed, that
would end Medicare as we know it. That is what would end
Medicare as we know it.
So, while we may be talking about repealing IPAB today, we
should not lose the big picture, and that is the Affordable
Care Act was entitlement reform. Nobody wants to say that on
the other side. I don't know why. One-third of the Act was
entitlement reform, as far as I am concerned, concerning
Medicare. Very specific. Unlike their plan, it will actually
contain Medicare costs while improving benefits, not ending the
Medicare guarantee.
And I had a question for Dr. Moon, but I have--want a quick
question, if you would, Ms. Neas. You know, the vouchers are
not going to work for individuals with disabilities. Let's set
the record straight here.
Ms. NEAS. That is absolutely right. Our experience, whether
it has been in health care or in education, what people with
disabilities need is what they need.
Mr. PASCRELL. So what the voucher program does is turn
people with disabilities and senior citizens over to the
private health insurance industry. It turns it over to them to
determine what care and how much care they are going to
receive. Can you just briefly talk about converting Medicare to
a voucher and what it would do to the very people you are
focused on?
Ms. NEAS. Over time, the Medicare program and others have
been altered to include specific services and supports. Those
were because people needed them, and we needed to spell out in
very specific ways that there was a range of services that
needed to be reimbursed by the Medicare program. People need
those services.
And because it is a big pool, not everyone is going to need
the same amount. But they need to be able to have medically
necessary service available to them, as decided by their health
care provider, and not say, ``If you cost more than $15,000 a
year, too bad for you.'' If you have a stroke and you need
ongoing physical therapy to regain the strength in one side----
Mr. PASCRELL. Right.
Ms. NEAS [continuing]. You need that. And it is not--and
you may need, depending on you as an individual, you might need
physical therapy for 2 months, or you might need it for a year.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you. Dr. Moon, we know of the various
and very specific cost containment under the Affordable Care
Act--just to name a few, efforts to reduce preventable hospital
re-admissions, improving payment accuracy--has an effect on
what we are talking about. Promoting value-based purchasing, et
cetera, encouraging innovation through the new Center for
Medicare and Medicaid, establishing--and funds research on
effectiveness of different clinical interventions with the
Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute. These are among
many.
Now, do you think it is likely that IPAB will focus on
improving quality through delivery system reforms, considering
how hard CBO showed it is to create any savings in such a small
timeframe?
Ms. MOON. I think that is a very legitimate concern about
IPAB, and I think that if there were to be changes in the
program that kept it, it should allow it to have a longer
timeframe than the 1 year. I think that is a dangerous aspect
of the IPAB program.
Mr. PASCRELL. What do you think would be the result of
that?
Ms. MOON. I think that does bias you in favor of some of
the cuts in payments, and that is something that I think you
want to avoid.
Again, I see IPAB mostly as a backstop, if absolutely
necessary, and I would hope it would be viewed that way, and
not as a first line.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you. Mr.----
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, if I may?
Chairman HERGER. Yes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, I think the witnesses that we
have heard over many, many weeks and many hearings are an
indication. They are an indication of the concerns, legitimate
concerns, of folks who are involved day in and day out with
health care.
I think all sides should just back off an inch or two at
least, and take a look at what we are learning might not be the
causes of the major problems we are facing in health care, and
that we could all take a deep breath, Mr. Chairman, all take a
deep breath, and understand that we are combined in intellect
here, that we need to look at reducing----
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you very much.
Mr. PASCRELL [continuing]. Reducing one thing and not
throwing away the entire essence of the bill.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Roskam is recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, in that
spirit of taking a deep breath, the Democratic leader of the
House, when she was the speaker, sort of famously now
prophesied that we had to pass the bill in order to see what
was in it. And she did, and we do. Now we are walking through
this IPAB adventure.
And I think what is interesting, to the gentleman from New
Jersey's point--and I accept the premise of what he is saying--
and that is there is nobody here--it is interesting--no voice
on this panel is defending IPAB. Nobody. We have heard, well,
it didn't start in this chamber. We have heard it is not--you
know, this wasn't the real purpose. But it is fascinating that,
at least to date, an hour into this hearing, there has been no
voice that has defended on this panel the status quo of IPAB.
So let's talk about why.
Dr. Gottlieb, can I turn to you? And let me ask you this.
Under IPAB, will health care providers' ability to provide care
to patients be affected by reimbursements being cut for
particular services?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. I think it absolutely will. I--you know, as
we have been saying, I think IPAB's scope is so narrow and
constrained, in terms of what it can do, and how far out it can
look--getting to Ms. Moon's point--that it is going to just
have to burn down payment rates. And we have seen time and time
again, when payment rates get driven too low, certain services
just become unavailable.
If you look even under the DRG system, when DRGs get driven
down too low, certain technologies will fall out and just won't
be available in a hospitalized setting. I think the same thing
is likely to happen on the Part B side in the outpatient
setting, is IPAB has to just burn down payment rates and
manipulate coding schedules.
Mr. ROSKAM. So the downward pressure--in a nutshell, the
downward pressure is so fierce that it will have an impact.
Let me ask you this. The debate around the word
``rationing'' has created a high level of anxiety. You know,
and so the proponents of the Affordable Care Act say, ``Well,
IPAB can't ration.'' Rationing, as you know, is not defined in
the statute. Let me ask you this. Can you have, per se,
rationing, based on what the Independent Payment Advisory Board
makes decisions to reimburse?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Sure. You are going to have payment driven so
low in some settings that certain services just won't be
available. Physicians won't be available to take patients. I
think entrepreneurship is going to suffer, because you are
going to have less investment in certain sectors in
anticipation of the inability to get reimbursement for certain
things. And I think the third leg of this is the fact that IPAB
could confer authorities--give CMS new authority so CMS can
engage in the rationing.
I don't see--I am not an attorney, I am a physician, but
you know, I have spoken to attorneys in town. There is mixed
opinion about this issue. But most people seem to agree that
IPAB can confer authorities onto CMS that CMS would then use in
ways to explicitly change benefit design and coverage rules.
Mr. ROSKAM. Ms. Neas, on behalf of Easter Seals, I am
interested. I have a world class Easter Seals facility----
Ms. NEAS. Yes, you do.
Mr. ROSKAM [continuing]. In Villa Park, Illinois, which is
doing remarkable work. And I have had the privilege of
visiting, and really commend you and the vision and the mission
that you have.
Can you comment on what you are hearing from, let's say,
parents of children whom you are serving, and their level of
concern about what patients--or what physicians might be
prescribing based on an IPAB decision? In other words, if IPAB
makes a decision, is the smorgasbord of options, the treatment
options, possibly cut down as a result of the bureaucratic
decisionmaking process?
Ms. NEAS. Yes, thank you for that. Yes, you do have one of
our superstars in your district, which serves predominantly
children, and children with very significant physical
disabilities.
Our biggest concern is when you make it impossible for
providers to stay in business and serve this population, they
have no place else to go. And so the practical realities,
particularly in smaller communities, where you may not have the
same degree--breadth and scope of providers, if they cannot
keep their doors open because reimbursement is the only thing
that is keeping them afloat and that just gets cut, then,
practically speaking, people are just afraid that those
services, regardless of what is in the benefit package, if
there is nobody to provide them, then they cannot access those
services.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you. Dr. Penson, quickly. Can--there is a
lot of discussion in this town about income inequality. You
mentioned this a minute ago, but can you give us a little bit
of a highlight? What happens, for example, if a person of means
goes in and a physician--well, my time has expired. I will----
Chairman HERGER. Maybe he will answer it in writing. You
want to finish the question?
Mr. ROSKAM. That is okay. I will follow up with you. Thank
you.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Kind is recognized.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding this
important hearing. And I appreciate the witnesses' testimony
here today.
I would be the first to admit that IPAB requires a leap of
faith. But I supported it. I think it makes sense. I think it
is a fail-safe backstop effort to constrain the largest and
fastest growing area of spending in the Federal budget and
State budgets and local budgets and business budgets and family
budgets, which is health care costs. And if people have a
better idea of how we can bend the cost curve out in the
future, I am all for that as well.
But I think the key to reforming a health care system that
was in desperate need of reform was through delivery system
reform and through payment reform. It had to change the way
health care is delivered, so it is more integrated and
coordinated and patient-focused. And we have a lot of models
throughout the country that have shown us ways to do that.
And then, ultimately, we have to change the way we pay for
health care, so that we are paying for the value or the quality
or the outcome of care that is given, and no longer the volume
of care. And that has been the nemesis of the so-called fee-
for-service system for years. And everyone on this panel, I
think, recognizes the challenge that we are facing. Fee-for-
service is not producing the type of outcomes or the bang for
the buck that we need with our health care dollars. IPAB is
merely--from my perspective--is a fail-safe mechanism that, if
certain reforms don't lead to spending reductions and better
outcomes, there is a way to address that.
And one of the big problems out there is the over-
utilization of health care: more tests, more procedures, more
things being done, but without the desired results. But we have
competing ideas on which way to go. The other side, from what I
can tell, would just as soon shift the cost on the backs of
people who can least afford it.
Ms. Moon, let me start with you. For example, under the so-
called Ryan budget plan that virtually all of them had
supported last year, the Republican plan would end Medicare's
guaranteed benefits for things like hospital stays and doctor
visits. They would replace it with a cash voucher. Can IPAB do
that?
Ms. MOON. No, it cannot.
Mr. KIND. Also the Republican plan would increase the cost
for Medicare beneficiaries, according to the CBO analysis of
it, by more than doubling out-of-pocket costs for new enrollees
up to $6,000 a year when it is fully implemented. Can IPAB
accomplish that?
Ms. MOON. No. Fortunately, it would not.
Mr. KIND. And finally, the latest version apparently that
they are toying with and might include in their next budget
resolution, is the so-called Ryan-Wyden Plan that embraces this
concept of a target growth rate, that if certain spending
reductions don't occur, automatic spending reductions occur
under this target growth rate. Does IPAB mirror any of that?
Ms. MOON. No.
Mr. KIND. You know, so there is really a choice here of
what we can do, moving forward. We can allow time to transpire
for delivery of system and payment reform to take place, or
there is the ACO models or medical homes for the better
coordinated care, the Center for Innovation coming up with
ideas on how we can get better value for the dollar, and have
IPAB as a backstop for that, ultimately. Or, we can go down
another route, which merely privatizes Medicare, turns it into
a private voucher plan, shifts the cost on the backs of
seniors, an additional $6,000.
And when I look at my congressional district, 80 percent of
the seniors in western Wisconsin rely on Social Security as
their sole source of retirement income, 80 percent. They can't
take a $6,000 hit in Medicare. So what I think we need to be
working on is what we can do together to try to reform a
delivery system so we do get better value out of the dollar.
So am I wrong here, Ms. Moon? Am I missing something of
what needs to be accomplished in the health care system?
Ms. MOON. No, I think that is exactly right. I think that
this is a very tough problem, and the Federal Government has a
role to play, along with consumers and providers, and everybody
else. And to shift it off on to beneficiaries and make them
responsible, I think----
Mr. KIND. Well, the way I see IPAB ultimately is a panel.
Again, a backstop if cost constraints don't occur, but they
would kick in, their relevancy would kick in. But their whole
task is to find out what is working and what isn't, and then
stop creating incentives for doing things that don't work.
I mean, in its simplicity, that is what IPAB is really all
about. And I support it, because I have been around here long
enough to see how reckless Congress is, trying to act on these
reimbursement issues ourselves. I know there is great cause for
representative democracy, but you just look back at SGR, and
what an abysmal failure SGR has been throughout the years. It
was a budget savings mechanism inserted in 1997 that has always
been restored. And that is the problem we always have with
these reimbursement issues.
Congress doesn't have the backbone or the guts to stand up
and try to make these decisions ourselves, because we are not
experts. And yet IPAB is supposed to be staffed with people
with greater knowledge and greater expertise in order to make
some of these difficult decisions. Congress can still
intervene. There is still that mechanism. But I would feel more
confident going down the IPAB road than not, given what we face
today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is so much
misinformation in the last 5 minutes, I don't know quite where
to start. But maybe I will start by saying that the SGR, which
all of us agree is a disaster, in terms of its compensation of
physician--reimbursements for physician services for seniors,
everybody understands that. The IPAB has been called the SGR on
steroids. So if you liked the SGR, you will love the IPAB.
Our whole goal here is the highest quality of care. We
disagree drastically about how to get to that highest quality
of care. Our side believes that patients and families and
doctors ought to be making medical decisions. The other side
believes that Washington ought to be influencing those medical
decisions in very intimate ways, which is why I think it is
important to point out, Mr. Chairman, that a list of medical
entities, physician entities, folks taking care of patients,
nearly 500 of them--500 of them--support repeal of the
Independent Payment Advisory Board.
So, it is important to remember that we are talking about
patients, and the people that are taking care of the patients
are saying that this will be a disaster, a disaster.
We have heard a couple of things from our friends on the
other side who say, ``Oh, don't worry about it, it is 2020,
2021, not going to happen.'' I draw their attention to appendix
A in their packet. The first date where something regarding
IPAB must occur by law, April 30, 2013--2013. That is when the
chief actuary has to begin to state whether or not these costs
are going up at rates that are unacceptable, not according to
patients, not according to any market at all, but according to
Washington.
We have heard that the--words tossed around like
``voluntary'' and ``advisory,'' as it relates to IPAB. There is
nothing voluntary or advisory about the Independent Payment
Advisory Board. It is a denial of care board. And its sole
purpose is not quality of care, as my colleague just talked
about. Its sole charge is to ``decrease''--``recommend cuts in
areas of excess cost growth.'' Decrease costs--excess cost
growth, which--then you have to look at why the cost of health
care is rising. And it is rising higher than the gross domestic
product. Why? For two main reasons.
We heard this last week from the chief actuary for CMS as
well as the OMB director. The 2.5 percent is due to
``utilization and innovation,'' utilization and innovation. So
if you are going to decrease the cost, what do you have to do?
You have to decrease innovation--that is quality of care--and
utilization--that is access to care, which brings me to my
questions to, first, Dr. Penson.
There is some notion that if you decrease payment to
physicians, that doesn't decrease the access to care for
patients. Can you put--can you help us understand that, that
mechanism, a little bit?
Dr. PENSON. Well, it is going to affect--you decrease
reimbursement to physicians, it is going to affect things in
two ways. First is the example I have thrown out there already,
which is at a certain point physicians are going to close their
doors and turn off the lights, simply because they can't make
ends meet. And so, for many physicians, they will just opt out
of Medicare. And we have already seen this in Medicaid.
The other thing that physicians will do is that they get
paid--if the reimbursement gets paid less, if they try and keep
their doors open and keep things open for Medicare, they will
just try to see more patients.
Now, you say, ``Okay, well, that is good. We want our
doctors to see as many patients as possible.'' But Ms. Neas
will back me up on this. There is a big difference between when
you get--and you know this, as a physician--you get a good,
long visit with your doc, where you get to talk with him or
her, or you are sort of in and out really quickly, because that
is what he or she has to do, just to keep the office open.
Mr. PRICE. Dr. Gottlieb, I want to talk about some real-
world consequences for the physicians out there trying to care
for their patients, in spite of the rules that we toss upon
them.
My understanding is that if a physician is continuing to
try to see Medicare patients, and if a payment for a service in
Medicare is not of a rate that would allow the physician to
continue to keep his or her doors open, that physician can't
see that Medicare patient and provide that service if they
agree upon another price that the patient would want to pay to
that physician to see him or her. Is that right?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. That is right. Under the law you can't
balance bill the patient. You have to accept the customary rate
under Medicare if you opt into the Medicare program.
I think the other caveat here, and what I am seeing in my
clinical practice--I practice hospital-based medicine, but I
will refer the patients to primary care providers as they are
discharged from the hospital, and what I see more and more is
just physicians capping how many Medicare patients----
Mr. PRICE. Exactly.
Dr. GOTTLIEB [continuing]. They will allow into their
practice, and they will say, ``I am closed to new Medicare
patients.'' We have seen this in Medicaid for years now. It is
very hard to get specialty care for Medicaid patients that I am
discharging from the hospital, and it is quite unfortunate.
Mr. PRICE. And, therefore, huge decrease in access to care.
In fact, last week, when the Secretary was here, she said 98.4
percent of physicians see Medicare patients. And I asked her
specifically how many physicians are decreasing the number of
Medicare patients that they are seeing, and the Secretary could
not answer that. And it is a huge, huge number. Access to care
is being compromised. IPAB damages access to care, and it is
time to repeal it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
thank the witnesses for being here today, taking your time.
I represent 170,000 seniors in southwest Florida, Sarasota
and Manatee Counties. And many of the seniors that I talk to
are very concerned about what this unelected board of
bureaucrats will mean to Medicare, as it decides what
constitutes necessary care for our seniors.
Dr. Penson, you represent doctors who are concerned about
this board. How do doctors feel about President Obama's call to
expand the reach, in terms of this board?
Dr. PENSON. I think, in general, the doctors who I
represent in the American Urological Association are strongly
opposed to this board, and they certainly wouldn't favor any
expansion of it.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Dr. Gottlieb, I had a quick question. You
mentioned in your testimony that the decision of this unelected
board of bureaucrats is exempt from judicial review. I find
this very concerning. Please explain to us what the full
consequences of this exemption are.
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Well, my understanding, by talking to
attorneys in town, is that the implementation of the board's
provisions is exempt from judicial review. So, effectively, if
you are a sponsor, if you are a company manufacturing a product
or even a provider group affected by a decision of the board,
you wouldn't have legal standing to challenge a decision in
court. You also don't have any ability to appeal; there is no
appeals mechanism.
I had my research assistant--and I don't have her with me
here today--do a survey--we are going to be publishing it
soon--of all the mechanisms in place on private health care
plans, what they have in terms of adjudication. And, you know,
I don't think Congress would ever allow a private plan to
operate the way IPAB is going to operate, in terms of not
allowing any mechanism for appeal, or any open process, in
terms of how these decisions get made. And the private sector
obviously does a much better job because--frankly, because they
have to, under the law.
Mr. BUCHANAN. And let me--just a follow-on question that
was brought up the other day, that if the Congress doesn't like
what gets done at IPAB, what kind of reach--or what is their
ability to try to overturn a decision, as you understand it?
Because I have heard different comments on that.
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Well, there is sort of a veneer of
congressional consent built in, right, where the proposals of
IPAB go to Congress for a very limited time, and that Congress
would have to come up with proposals that cut Medicare by the
same magnitude, if they didn't like the proposals that IPAB put
forward. I think it is unlikely Congress is going to be able to
come up with competing proposals in the timeframe that they are
allowed under the law.
So, it is effectively a way to fast-track the IPAB
proposals into law and provide a veneer of congressional
consent, I assume, because there were separation of powers
issues if it didn't go before Congress.
Now, Congress can always pass a law later to repeal the
IPAB provisions. But I think the whole idea here is that the
idea was to make it very politically hard to do anything to
stop the implementation of IPAB's proposals.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask
unanimous consent to enter into the record an article from the
New York Times called ``Knotty Challenges in Health Care
Costs.''
Chairman HERGER. Without objection.
[The submission of Hon. Jim McDermott follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.023

Mr. MCDERMOTT. This points out that the average cost of
health care per capita in the United States is $8,000, which is
twice what it is in every European country. So we all know
there is a cost problem. I don't think anybody up here
disagrees.
And the question is--I guess Bill Friske said it pretty
well, in my view. He said, ``Don't repeal it, fix it.'' So I am
sitting here, trying to figure out--people don't like the IPAB.
I think it is as good a mechanism as we have, and we will fix
it on the way, maybe we will figure out better ways. But the
question is, how do you fix--let's just take one area, doctor's
fees?
Now, when we started Medicare, we said to the doctors,
``You can submit your usual and customary fees.'' That was the
deal. Doctors weren't coming in unless they got their usual and
customary fees. Okay. So now, Dr. Penson, you sit out there at
Vanderbilt University. Do you decide your fees?
Dr. PENSON. No, I do not.
[Laughter.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, who does?
Dr. PENSON. Well, I----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. An accountant?
Dr. PENSON. I believe the physicians and the leadership at
Vanderbilt University, and I understand----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. No, wait a minute. You mean you don't set
them? They are set by the university?
Dr. PENSON. And by the payers in the region.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. The payers of the regions?
Dr. PENSON. The payers in the region, the insurers.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Ah, so United Health sits down with
Vanderbilt and says, ``Here is what we will pay. Send me a bill
for that amount.'' Is that the idea?
Dr. PENSON. I don't know the exact mechanism, honestly.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Isn't that interesting? Now, here we have a
doctor who doesn't know how his pay comes. And what we have
written into law right now is doctors can submit any pay--any
fee they want, and then the government is supposed to write a
check and pay them exactly what they ask for. Well, then
somebody has to make a decision on how much doctors should be
paid, right?
Now the question. Here is what I would like Ms. Moon and
Dr. Penson and Mr. Gottlieb--Dr. Gottlieb to talk about. How
should it be done? Should it be Members of Congress up on this
dais decide? Or should it be by the doctors, the doctors should
decide how much they are paid? Because doctors will always say,
``I was not paid my fees.'' Of course you weren't paid your
fees, they were too high. And Aetna or United Health or
somebody said, ``No, no, no, no. We are only paying this
much.'' Or should it be done by a board that sits and talks
about it?
What is the answer to this question of setting fees? How
should it be done?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Thank you, Congressman. I would just say up
front we don't have a cost problem in medicine. I think we have
a value problem in medicine. And the question is are we getting
what we paid for? And I think most of us would agree we are
not.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, who decides the value?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. I know how my fees are established, and they
are established, frankly, by Medicare. I mean I am paid--most
of the patients I see are Medicare patients or Medicaid
patients. And where I do have private-pay patients----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. What do you get--you submit----
Dr. GOTTLIEB [continuing]. I am paid off of a Medicare
rate.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You submit $100, what do you get back, $70?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. I--when I see patients in the hospital, I
will fill out a sheet at the end of a day, and I will submit
billing codes. They are Medicare billing codes, regardless of
whether it is a Medicare patient or a private patient. The
private plans use the same billing codes. And there is a fee
schedule assigned to the billing codes. And that fee schedule
is established by Medicare. And the private plans will pay a
percentage off of that schedule.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And----
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Medicare rates vary across the country,
because doctors--because costs vary across the country. So
Medicare varies the rates, based on surveys that it does of the
actual cost of providing care. But that is how all physicians
are paid, unless they are taking cash.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, how would you fix that? You don't like
that system. And it is costing us too much. We are paying twice
what the French and the British and the Germans--everybody else
is paying for health care, and our health statistics aren't
better. So how do you fix this payment thing?
Dr. GOTTLIEB. Well, it----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Because paying whatever we are paying isn't
buying it.
Dr. GOTTLIEB. This gets to the question of, you know, do we
have--do we tweak things, or do we go for a fundamental reform?
I mean, first of all, the whole coding process for how
physicians are paid is done behind closed doors. AMA
effectively has a monopoly on establishing the codes. And I----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So you would be willing to look at the RUC
committee.
Dr. GOTTLIEB. I think you have to open up the RUC. I think
it should be a competitive process. And I think ideally you
want to move as many services and products as you can into
places where they can be bid in competitive markets. We have
seen that bidding products in a competitive market works in
Part D. Prices have been driven down. I would move other
aspects of Medicare into competitive schemes where those
services and products get bid in competitive markets.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Dr. Penson.
Dr. PENSON. Well, Dr. Gottlieb is clearly smarter than I
am. I am just a dumb urologist. But I will tell you, having
practiced in Los Angeles before I was in Tennessee, it is a
similar experience, in as far as what I get paid is set by the
payer, whether it is Medicare or the private payer. And the
institution I work for obviously negotiates that charge.
I don't have the fix. But the fix isn't just simply cutting
physician fees. It is--you need fundamental reform. I don't
have the answer. I don't think anyone does, that is why we are
here.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Gerlach is recognized.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Maybe that is a good
segue into a line of questioning particularly to Dr. Moon.
Thank you for testifying today, by the way, all of you on
the panel.
Dr. Moon, in your written testimony, you indicate that you
support the reasonableness of the goals of IPAB, but there are
some ``serious challenges'' that ought to be addressed. And
specifically, you say that setting goals on limited time
horizons and then having short periods to implement change will
put enormous pressure on the system. Instant savings should not
be expected nor used to measure success. This may create a bias
in favor of less complicated changes, such as payment limits,
which is what the doctors have described and others have
described, as well, that there needs to be perhaps a more
nuanced approach encouraging delivery system reforms.
That leads to this whole issue of how are we finally going
to attack the fraud that is in the system, in particular? We
had Secretary Sebelius here last week, and she indicated in her
testimony that they have undertaken health care fraud reforms
that will generate $3 billion over 10 years of savings. Well,
that sounds like a pretty good step in the right direction,
except for the fact there is widespread agreement there is $50
billion in fraud every year in Medicare. That is $500 billion
over 10 years. So, a $3 billion savings through these efforts,
and a $500 billion problem over 10 years seems minuscule.
So, isn't that the area that everybody ought to start
focusing in on to try to get a handle on the growth of the
Medicare program--growth and spending in the Medicare program,
issues like phantom billing, stolen identification of seniors'
patient information, stolen unique physician identification
numbers that lead to, again, fraudulent and criminal activity?
Shouldn't that be the focus of this panel? Shouldn't that have
been the focus of the Affordable Care Act, to really get to the
real fundamental problems in the system, rather than keep
setting up situations where doctors are going to get dinged for
another 1 or 2 percent every year? Should that not be the focus
of this panel, and everybody in the health care delivery
system?
Ms. MOON. I believe that going after fraud is a very
important aspect of trying to improve the health care system
over time. But I also believe that a lot of the numbers that
get thrown around are into the broader category of fraud,
waste, and abuse. And once you get beyond fraudulent billing
and some of the things that you can easily throw someone into
an orange jumpsuit in a Federal penitentiary, you have more
difficulty in terms of the subtleties of what is waste or
abuse. You have the difficulties of patients and physicians, in
some cases, wanting to do things for the right reasons but then
overdoing things, doing things inappropriately. And how
accountable we hold them is a difficult thing. That puts you
also down the road to a lot of very tough controls that people
have been reluctant to do.
In the fraud area, though, I would say some of the
improvements that people are seeking in terms of the ability to
track what happens, what the bills are, how large they are
before the fact, before you actually pay, and going after them
is a worthy thing to do. It is just going to be a little more
difficult to get the big numbers, I think, because there is a
sort of happy conspiracy out there that people--what may be
viewed as waste by some people is viewed as someone else's very
important----
Mr. GERLACH. Well, the Government Accountability Office put
out a report that in 2010 there was $48 billion of improper
payments. That is not just fraudulent activity, that is also
just erroneous, unintentional administrative errors, but
nonetheless is a waste of dollars that otherwise could be used
to make sure there is quality and affordable care for the
beneficiaries of the program.
So, we seem to get these reports periodically that there is
massive amounts of waste, fraud, and abuse, and yet the best we
can hear from the current Secretary of HHS is we are going to
come up with $3 billion in savings over 10 years, and somehow,
wow, we have done our job in all of this?
Don't you--has your institute--have you done any studies on
how to deal with waste, fraud, and abuse, so that we tackle
these very large numbers which, in turn--a portion of which
could be making sure that physicians are getting a fair level
of compensation for the patients they take care of?
Ms. MOON. We haven't looked at the fraud issue, but we have
been focusing a lot on comparative effectiveness, and some of
the kinds of things of trying to talk about getting value for
your dollar.
I don't know about the recent GAO study, but an earlier one
that they did that focused on fraud, waste, and abuse found
that many of the--much of the amount was where the physician
had not signed appropriately. And you don't know whether that
is really fraud, or whether it is simply administrative error.
So I think we have to be a little careful of being optimistic
we can get all our dollars from there. I wish it were true,
because that would keep us----
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. Well, you would agree we can hopefully
get more than $3 billion over 10 years----
Ms. MOON. Yes, I hope we could do more than that.
Mr. GERLACH [continuing]. In savings than what the
Secretary described?
Ms. MOON. I would like to see us get more than----
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Blumenauer is recognized.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks again for
an opportunity to have this discussion, think through some of
the issues.
I was struck by Dr. Penson saying he didn't have the
answers, he has some concerns about application, and I
appreciate that. But I do think that the Affordable Care Act
actually incorporates most of what the answers are. Unlike Dr.
Gottlieb, you know, we are not going to unwind Medicare. In
fact, the Federal Government now pays about half the health
care bill in this country.
And we are sort of--this is part of the system. That is not
going to go away. Hearken our Tea Party friends saying, ``Keep
Government's hands off our Medicare.'' It is ingrained in the
system. What we need to do is make it work better.
And I couldn't agree more about the SGR. I thought it was
bogus when I was here, I voted against it. I think an
artificial formula that we can just kind of put it on autopilot
and turn our back is wrong, and it is destructive.
It is interesting to note, despite sort of some of the
payment limitations, expenses continue to skyrocket up
because--and I think you, several of you, mentioned we need to
change the system that rewards value in outcomes, not just
procedures.
I agree with my friend from Pennsylvania. I don't know
whether--how big the fraud piece is, but I have joined him in
legislation for secure card, whether it is $10 billion, $20
billion, $40 billion, there is a chunk of money that will
enable us to be able not just to prevent loss of resources, but
also have better control and protection for patients, and have
better data.
I don't think there is a silver bullet. I don't think there
is one thing that is going to solve the problem. I know SGR
isn't. And if I had my way, I would get rid of it entirely. I
would, in fact, be willing to have some of the permanent tax
cuts--you know, we battle over that--I would have some of the
tax cuts go away, buy out the SGR, get rid of it. It is a goofy
thing, and we are always going to try to stop it, except when
we stub our toe. And the uncertainty, I think, does cloud the
practice of medicine for patients and doctors.
But for me, the Affordable Care Act had all the elements
that used to be bipartisan. You know, a mandate--the dreaded
mandate--was the creation of conservative think tanks as an
alternative to Hillary Care. This was touted by some of our
Republican friends. It was what Governor Romney, in a
bipartisan way, established in Massachusetts.
We have, you know, end of life care that came out of this
Committee without dissent, strongly supported, somehow morphed
into death panels and weirdness. I am hopeful that we can take
this conversation about the IPAB and use it to kind of unwind
some of these things.
I don't want that to be the default mechanism. I think--and
I appreciate suggestions people have to try to make it better.
But it is there because Congress has consistently failed. It
won't take recommendations. You know, everybody wants to go to
heaven, nobody wants to die. So we talk about restraint and
care, but then we blink on some things that aren't particularly
controversial. And even now, we have had people on the
Committee talking about government problems with the health
care reform, and then looking at ways to spend more money.
I am hopeful that we can work with you to find out ways
that there might be some modest adjustment. But I hope it
doesn't get to that point. It was specifically set up to give
Congress a chance. And it isn't something that will happen
unless Congress fails again.
We have the better part of a decade. Start moving. We have
seen--and, Ms. Moon, I appreciate you referencing it--there is
some areas where we are seeing some progress made. Health care
costs have not exploded of late. There has actually been a
little restraint, while we have been able to give some better
service. I have people thank me that the kids are still on the
parents' insurance policy, where kids are not going to be--have
a problem with the pre-existing condition.
But we need to--Congress needs a tool like this, because
otherwise we will do something really stupid, like SGR. And I
hope the framework of health care reform, good suggestions from
people like you, and Congress realizing that we can't continue
to blink, will result in this never having to be put in effect,
and we will do our job.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I didn't get to my
question, I am sorry.
[Laughter.]
But I feel so much better. I feel so much better.
[Laughter.]
Chairman HERGER. Good. The gentleman's time has expired.
I want to thank our witnesses for your testimony today. It
is my sincere hope that, given the bipartisan concerns that
were raised here today, this hearing will provide the
foundation for this Committee to move forward in addressing the
dangers posed by this ill-conceived board.
As a reminder, any Member wishing to submit a question for
the record will have 14 days to do so. If any questions are
submitted, I ask that the witnesses respond in a timely manner.
With that, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:29 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78590A.064


