- THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2011 BUDGET PROPOSAL WITH OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET DIRECTOR LEW

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2011 BUDGET
PROPOSAL WITH OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
AND BUDGET DIRECTOR LEW

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 16, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-08

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-631                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM McDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
DEAN HELLER, Nevada                  EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            RON KIND, Wisconsin
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of February 16, 2011 announcing the hearing.............     2

WITNESS

The Honorable Jacob J. Lew, Director, Office of Management and
Budget.........................................................     5

THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2011 BUDGET
PROPOSAL WITH OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
AND BUDGET DIRECTOR LEW

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:50 p.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave Camp
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

Chairman Camp Announces Hearing on

the President's Fiscal Year 2012 Budget

Proposal with Office of Management

and Budget Director Jacob J. Lew

Wednesday, February 09, 2011

House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp (R-MI) today
announced that the Committee on Ways and Means will hold a hearing on
President Obama's budget proposals for fiscal year 2012. The hearing
will take place on Wednesday, February 16, 2011, in 1100 Longworth
House Office Building, beginning at 2:00 p.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear the witness, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from the invited witness only. The
sole witness will be the Honorable Jacob J. Lew, Director, Office of
Management and Budget. However, any individual or organization not
scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a written statement for
consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the printed record
of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

On February 14, 2011, the President is expected to submit his
fiscal year 2012 budget proposal to Congress. The proposed budget will
detail the Administration's tax and spending proposals for the coming
year, many of which fall under the jurisdiction of the Committee on
Ways and Means.
In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``President Obama
has spoken about the need to get our deficits and debt under control,
and the budget will hopefully advance that goal. Republicans are
committed to reducing our nation's deficits and debt which are already
a drag on the U.S. economy and our ability to create badly needed jobs.
I look forward to discussing the President's proposals in detail with
Director Lew and exploring ways in which we can work in a bipartisan
manner to reduce government spending.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

Office of Management and Budget Director Lew will discuss the
details of the President's budget proposals that are within the
Committee's jurisdiction.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Wednesday, March 2, 2011. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman CAMP. The Committee on Ways and Means will come to
order to continue our hearings on the President's fiscal year
2012 budget proposal; and I want to welcome Budget Director
Jack Lew. Welcome to the Ways and Means Committee, Mr.
Director.
Mr. LEW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to be here.
Chairman CAMP. Good to have you here before the committee.
I am sure you were hoping that your first budget in this
administration was going to be met with great enthusiasm. The
chairman of the President's own fiscal commission has
criticized it, editorial pages from the Washington Post and the
Wall Street Journal have panned it, and even the New York Times
wrote that this budget is most definitely not a blueprint for
dealing with the real, long-term problems that feed the budget
deficit. There seems to be a pattern in those comments, and I
think with good reason.
I think this budget is a missed opportunity. It misses the
opportunity substantially to reduce spending so that our
private sector can flourish; it misses the opportunity to
address entitlement reform so that programs like Medicare and
Social Security will be preserved not only for current
beneficiaries but future generations as well; and it is a
missed opportunity to begin a substantive conversation with
Congress about how we can get this Nation back on track.
Mr. Director, I told Secretary Geithner yesterday that I
was interested in finding some real solutions; and I think you
will find the members of this committee, both Republicans and
Democrats, are interested in doing the same. So if we could,
let us begin that discussion today. Let us just try to get past
the talking points and let us try to find some real solutions.
I know the members are eager to hear from you, and I look
forward to your testimony. But, before you begin, I will now
yield to the ranking member, Mr. Levin, for purposes of an
opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Lew, welcome. I am sure you will take
advantage of the opportunity. Mr. Rangel is going to give our
opening statement.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much, my brother, Mr. Levin, as
well as the chairman and, also, Mr. Lew. And in the spirit that
the chairman has expressed, I do hope that, sooner rather than
later, we will be able to communicate in a way to see whether
we can resolve some of the serious problems that our country is
now facing.
I welcome you and look forward to your testimony, because
we will have an opportunity to discuss the Republican budget
really for the first time.
While the President's budget was reviewed by all of the
House committees, we in the Ways and Means Committee were
involved in that process. On the other hand, regarding the
budget that has been presented to us by the majority last
Friday, we haven't had any hearings. We need your help and
guidance to see what those differences are.
We do know that just saying that you are cutting does not
necessarily mean that you are saving. It is our belief that the
Republicans' budget, because of the severity of the cuts, will
destroy jobs and cause great harm to the American people.
Education, health care, decent homes, all are part of a growing
economy, a healthy, competitive America. That is what we are
looking for.
But what happens when you cut the funds of the Corporation
for National Community Service, which has 3 million at-risk
children, more than 10,000 pre-school students? What happens
when you cut programs such as the Harlem School Zone Program,
which has been a model for the Secretary of Education and
throughout the country to show that kids that statistically
come from communities that don't succeed? They have shown that,
with investment, and the proper training, almost all these kids
can actually go to college.
As for the community development bloc grants to cities that
are in severe financial difficulty, this is something that has
been relied on by mayors across the country.
I am hoping that, in addition to supporting the
administration, you might be able to help us to evaluate the
budget that the majority is offering us and, at the same time,
show us exactly whether or not these severe cuts would not have
a negative impact on our economic growth.
Once again, we hope that we can find some language, some
meeting of the minds, where we can say we fulfilled our
campaign pledges and then get on with what responsible
legislators have to do.
I personally want to thank you for your lifelong dedication
to working with government. Sometimes it is a hectic
opportunity, but, at least for us in the Congress, you are able
to bring to us experiences from so many different
administrations. We look forward to your testimony. And, Mr.
Levin, I thank you as well as the Chairman for the opportunity.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Lew, you have 5 minutes. Your full written statement
will be made part of the record. Welcome to the Ways and Means
Committee. We look forward to hearing your oral testimony.

STATEMENT OF JACOB J. LEW, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND
BUDGET

Mr. LEW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Levin,
Congressman Rangel. It is good to be here. It is good to be
back here, and I am proud to be presenting the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget.
After emerging from the worst recession in generations, we
face another historic challenge. We must demonstrate to the
American people that we can live within our means and invest in
the future. We need to work our way out of the deficits that
are driving up our debt and, at the same time, make tough
choices to out-educate, out-build, and out-innovate our rivals.
That is what it is going to take to return to robust economic
growth and job creation and to win the future.
This is the seventh budget that I have worked on at the
Office of Management and Budget, and it is the most difficult.
It includes more than $1 trillion in deficit reduction, two-
thirds of it from lower spending, and it puts the Nation on a
path back towards fiscal responsibility.
By the middle of the decade we will be able to pay for our
current bills and remain in what is called primary balance for
many years after that. This doesn't mean we are debt free. It
means that the government will be in a place where it is paying
for all of its current programs. In other words, spending on
government programs won't add to our debt.
And, as any family knows, the crucial first step to start
living within your means is to stop using the credit card when
you can't pay your bills. This budget in a few years will bring
us to that point.
But that is not enough. The debt is still there, and it is
accumulating interest. And just like a credit card bill, if you
don't start paying down the principal, the interest keeps
building up. We are going to have to start paying down the debt
as well. That is why the President has called this budget a
down payment, because we will still have work to do to pay down
the debt and address the long-term fiscal challenges.
But it is important that we not gloss over how significant
it is to go from historic deficits of more than 10 percent of
GDP to around 3 percent of GDP, which is where we will be
paying for our current government programs. This is the most
significant deficit reduction since the end of World War II,
and it is a crucial step towards a balanced budget, and we are
going to have to work together to do that.
But we cannot start to pay down the debt until we stop
adding to it, and that is what this budget does. Changing the
trajectory of our fiscal path is a significant accomplishment,
and we are going to need to make tough choices, and I would
like to highlight a few of them.
The budget includes a 5-year nonsecurity discretionary
spending freeze that will reduce the deficit by over $400
billion over the next decade and bring spending to the lowest
level since President Eisenhower sat in the Oval Office. To
achieve savings of this magnitude, it is not enough to cut
programs that are simply out of date or ineffective or
duplicative. We are going to need to make reductions in
programs which, but for the fiscal challenges we face, we would
not choose to be cutting--programs like the low-income energy
home program and the Community Development Block Program and
national security, which we are not freezing, we are also
making real cuts.
Defense spending for the past 10 years has been growing
faster than inflation, and we have it on a path to come down to
zero real growth and then to make the reductions that it takes
to accomplish that. This means $78 billion in savings from the
Pentagon's budget. And in order to do that while maintaining
our leadership in the world, we are going to have to make the
tough decisions and that means not buying the things that we
don't need and the things that we can't afford.
If you combine the spending in the defense budget, the base
budget, with spending in the area that we call the overseas
contingencies operations--that is Afghanistan and Iraq--we are
seeing savings because we are bringing our troops home from
Iraq and overall spending in defense is going down 5 percent
from last year's budget.
Now, of course, as I think we all know, we are not going to
solve this problem, this fiscal problem with discretionary
spending alone; and our budget does deal with mandatory and
revenue items. I would like to give you a few examples.
There are two particular areas where for the past years,
many years, we have been, on a bipartisan basis, making policy
decisions that have added to our debt. There is a consensus
that we shouldn't see doctor bills go up by--payments to
doctors go down by 30 percent, and there is a consensus that we
shouldn't see middle-class taxpayers fall into what is called
the alternative minimum tax. The problem is that, for the past
years, we have not paid for it and we have just put the cost of
making those policies on the national credit card. We need to
stop. We need to pay for it.
This budget proposes specific savings in health programs so
that we have $62 billion of savings to pay for a 2-year
extension of the so-called doc fix, and we have a specific tax
proposal to pay for a 3-year extension of the provision that
would make sure that the middle class do not fall into the
alternative minimum tax.
I think that the way we do that is also important. It has
been--the provision that we have proposed would say that
taxpayers in the highest tax bracket should get no more benefit
out of their itemized deductions than taxpayers in the bracket
below. It would be a roughly 30 percent reduction in the value
of itemized deductions, and it would bring the value of
itemized deductions back to where it was in the Reagan
administration. It is consistent with the fiscal commission's
concept that we should start scaling back on spending on the
tax side.
Now these are both down payments to what we need to do to
solve the long-term deficit problem, and in the State of the
Union and in the budget the President made clear that we need
to work together on dealing with many more areas. But we need
to start here, and I think that we need to start here now.
I can see that my time is out. If I can take another
minute, there are a few other things that I would like to
mention.
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. LEW. Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the State of the Union, the President said--and we
repeated in the budget--and he has made clear we want to work
together on corporate tax reform. We want to do it in a way
that is revenue neutral. We want to reduce the number of
special provisions, broadening the base and lowering rates. I
hope that is an area that we can work on in a bipartisan way.
In the area of Social Security, the President said in the
State of the Union that, while it is not contributing to the
deficit in the period of this budget or well beyond that, we
would like to work together in a bipartisan basis in order to
make sure that we can tell workers today who will be retirees
and current retirees that the system is sound. And we look
forward to working together on that.
Our budget also includes a number of investments in the
future. I won't go into all of the details because I am
conscious of all of the time limitations. But I think it is
important just to summarize them and say that, while we are
making the difficult cuts, we also have to make sure that we
are making the investments so that we are still able to have an
educated workforce that can do the work of the future, that we
have the scientific innovation to be at the cutting edge, as
America has always been, and that we build the infrastructure
so that we can have the kind of commerce we need to be
successful. We have proposals in our budget that would do that.
There are a number of tax proposals as well as spending
proposals in that area, and in the course of the testimony I
look forward to discussing that with you some more.
Mr. Chairman, I am under no illusions at how difficult it
is to make the tough choices to put us on a sustainable fiscal
path. As we make those choices, I think it is important that we
not cut areas that are critical to the economy and critical to
future growth and critical to the future job creation in this
country.
And, finally, cutting spending and cutting our deficits
requires us to put our political differences to the side and
finding the area in the middle where we can work together.
I look forward to working with you and enjoyed working with
you in December. I know we can work together to see how much we
can do to get this important work done for the American people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of The Honorable Jacob J. Lew
follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.015

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
First of all, your full written statement will be made part
of the record.
In your written remarks I noticed that you said the last
time you were OMB Director the government was running a budget
surplus. I do think it is important to acknowledge that during
that time, outlays as a percentage of GDP averaged about 18\1/
2\ percent; and, today, while we hear a lot of talk about
cutting spending, the budget's, outlays as a percentage of GDP
go to about 23 percent in 2021.
I want to take seriously the statements about the need to
reduce spending and deficits the President has made, but when
his budget runs up spending as a percentage of our economy to
historic levels, it is very difficult to take that at face
value. Do you think having government spending equal to about a
fourth of the U.S. economy is really the right approach to
sustainable growth and also to reducing the deficit?
Mr. LEW. Mr. Chairman, I am very proud of the work that I
did in this 1990s. We worked in a bipartisan basis to balance
the budget. And I think it is important to note that, when we
had a balanced budget, when we ran a surplus, we were also in a
period of unprecedented economic growth. The economy was
growing much faster than was spending on programs.
We have just come through one of the worst economic periods
that required extraordinary expenditures in order to get the
economy moving. There was a loss of revenue, there were special
provisions that had to be put in place, and we are right now at
a time where the economy has been hit very hard. We are coming
out of that.
As we look ahead to the period later in this window, and
you are looking to 2021, we are seeing a number of things
happening at the same time. First of all, we are seeing a
population that is aging. The Baby Boom is retiring and
collecting benefits. In 1995, we knew that looking ahead to
2021 there were going to be more people 65 and older collecting
Social Security.
Chairman CAMP. I appreciate that. But if we are really
going to seriously reduce our debt and tackle our deficit,
don't we need to reduce the spending part of that formula?
Mr. LEW. Mr. Chairman, we agree totally that we need to
reduce spending, and that is why the President has proposed
$400 billion in discretionary spending. He has proposed $62
billion in mandatory saving. In his budget, he has proposed a
lot of spending reductions, and they have real impact.
Chairman CAMP. But the debt level has increased every
single year under this budget, reaching a hundred percent of
our economy by 2021. So, again, that will require successive
increases of the statutory debt limit. What additional spending
reductions, budget reforms, or other reforms can we expect in
order to prevent this massive increase in the debt?
Mr. LEW. First of all, this budget would put us in a place
in the middle of the decade where our current spending is not
causing us to run deficits that increase the debt. The only
thing left when we get to the middle of the decade that is
increasing deficits and the debt is interest on the debt that
has been accumulated already. And we agree that is a problem. I
don't think there is going to be an argument between us that we
have to start working on getting that down. But all that is
left once we have hit the 3 percent of GDP target is the
interest on the debt that is driving it up.
Chairman CAMP. You say in your written statement that the
biggest contributor to our Nation's long-term deficits is
health care spending and that any new entitlement spending must
be offset.
But when I look at the increase in the physician payment
formula, the $300 billion, there is no offset in the budget.
There is no indication about how that increase is going to be
paid for. And while we may agree on the need to get to a long-
term sustainable physician payment formula, or SGR, how can we
move forward on that when, again, you don't offset the spending
or you don't show how we are going to reach that goal in the
budget.
Mr. LEW. Mr. Chairman, I think it is very important that
last December Congress, working with the administration, on a
bipartisan basis paid for a 1-year extension of that provision.
That was the first time that it had ever been paid for. It
didn't have to be paid for under the budget rules. It was the
right thing to do, and we commend the Congress for doing it.
And what we have said in this budget is that we have now
put $62 billion of specific offsets down which will cover the
cost of the 2-year extension. With 3 years of time where we
have paid for the sustainable growth rate provisions to be
extended, that gives us a healthy window to work through the
issues to come to a place where we don't need to do it every
year, where we make the right level of policy adjustments and
pay for them. And we have called for that. We want to work
together on that.
But a 3-year window to do it in is a big difference from
where we were before, and we think it is very important.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you. And I appreciate your
comments on international tax reform, business tax reform,
Social Security, and other areas that I hope we can work
together on.
So, with that, Mr. Levin may inquire.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you. Welcome.
I think it is useful to look at history to the extent that
it is instructive for the present and future. I also think we
need to proceed in a bipartisan basis to the extent possible.
I don't think it is true that the action we took in 1993
was bipartisan. I mention that there wasn't a single Republican
vote. And I mention that because I think if people remember
that it gives this administration and those of us who were here
then some credibility when we talk about deficit reduction. I
think it gives us considerable credibility.
Also, I think it is important to look at history in terms
of spending and GDP.
Mr. Lew, we so much welcome your insight. You are too young
to remember, and I guess none of us remember the Depression or
previous recessions. Has there been a tendency for spending to
go up at times of a depression and a recession?
Mr. LEW. Mr. Levin, it is very much the case that when the
economy is weak spending goes up. It goes up automatically for
things like unemployment insurance. And then it goes up when
policy is made, as it was I think appropriately and correctly
made 2 years ago to take actions to get the economy moving
again.
Mr. LEVIN. And that was considerable, wasn't it?
Mr. LEW. Yes, it was very considerable. It was hundreds of
billions of dollars.
Mr. LEVIN. Let me just ask you----
Mr. LEW. And I might add it helped to get the economic
growth rate into the positive area. We are seeing economic
growth that is several percentage points higher than it would
be without having taken that action; and we are seeing
unemployment, while still unacceptably high, at a rate that is
lower than it would have been by many, many millions of jobs
had we not taken action.
Mr. LEVIN. Now, I think it is important for that to be
stated by all of you without equivocation. I don't think you
have any. So why is there a combination here of deficit
reduction and investment? I am not sure the public understands.
Why does this budget do both?
Mr. LEW. It is a good question, and it is actually a hard
question. Because we are at a pivot point here where we are
going from dealing with a recession where we had to spend a lot
of money to looking at reducing the deficit where we need to
save a lot of money. And at the same time while we are saving
money we have to look farther down the road to make sure we are
building an economy that will continue to create jobs in the
future, and this budget tries to make those tough tradeoffs.
And while I think it is something that sounds good and
common sense we want to pay for education, it is not just
something that we do because we think it is a nice thing to
educate our children. If you talk to the CEOs of technology
companies, what they will tell you is they need more young
applicants for jobs who are trained in math and science and
engineering. So what we are doing is very much driving the
future economic growth.
The same is true in innovation, where America is the
world's leader in innovation. We have a wonderful partnership
in the public sector that pays for basic research and the
private sector that adapts it and commercializes it. We need to
continue that. Those are the kinds of areas where we are making
investments.
Mr. LEVIN. You mention education, and training. The CR cuts
money for training. We are also in this battle to try to
continue TAA, which needs to be done this week.
Let me just mention community health centers. The CR, I
think, cuts it 50 percent. Is that a good investment?
Mr. LEW. Community health centers have been a good
investment. They are part of our overall health infrastructure
in this country, and I must say I don't know the exact funding
level in the Continuing Resolution. I have been working on this
budget the last few days, so there may be some numbers that I
am not exactly current with.
Mr. LEVIN. You may be shocked. I hope the public is.
I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Herger is recognized.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lew, I would like to draw your attention to two
numbers. The first number is $6.3 trillion. That was the total
debt held by the public when President Obama took office on
January 20 of 2009. The second number is $8.1 trillion. That is
the amount this budget proposed to add to the publicly held
debt over the course of the next decade. And that is on top of
some $2.5 trillion this President already added to the debt
during his first 2 years in office.
Again, that is $6.3 trillion in debt over the first 219
years of this country's existence versus $8.1 trillion in debt
over the next 10 years.
This budget does virtually nothing to confront the crisis
of our Nation's growing debt. Last year, we were told that
there were no major deficit reduction proposals in the budget
because the President was waiting for his Fiscal Commission to
study the issue and make recommendations. Mr. Lew, does the
President support the reforms proposed by the Simpson-Bowles
Fiscal Commission?
Mr. LEW. Mr. Herger, the President has said that he thinks
the Commission did important work. There are things in the
Commission report that he has embraced and put in this budget.
There are ideas that he thinks we need to work together to
refine them. He has really gone to great lengths to lead a very
broad space for us to find a path towards working together on
many of the ideas. He has not embraced the entirety of it, but
he thinks they did very important work.
If I could just comment on the first part of your remarks.
When I left the Office of Management and Budget in January
of 2001, my last day in office we projected a surplus of $5.6
trillion over the next years. When President Obama took office
in January of 2009, the projection of the deficit for the
following 10 years was over $10 trillion. The world had changed
in the years in between, and there is going to need to be tough
decisions to reverse it.
But the pattern had been established by a combination of
factors. One was the recession. But another was a set of
decisions that was made to have tax cuts and spending without
paying for it that built a structural deficit into the
projections. And that is really what we are dealing with when
we look ahead to solving the problem of the future. We have to
remove the structural deficit.
Mr. HERGER. Well, Mr. Lew, I am sure you can see our
concern, of course.
Mr. LEW. I share the concern.
Mr. HERGER. When the President came in, he indicated, his
stimulus, was above an unemployment rate of 8 percent. And as
you are aware, we have been over 9 percent, and we have this
incredible debt, the numbers of which I just mentioned, on top
of that. The economy hasn't turned around. We have more people
unemployed. We haven't created jobs. So I am sure you
understand the concern that we have.
Beginning on January 1, 2012, government agencies at the
Federal, State, and local levels would be required to withhold
3 percent of all payments to contractors and vendors as a tax
enforcement measure. This 3 percent withholding tax would
allegedly raise $10 billion over the next decade. But a 2008
Department of Defense study found that the provisions will cost
the DOD alone more than $17 billion to implement. That is in
addition to other Federal agencies that have their own
contractors, not to mention the costs to the IRS to track and
process all of these new withholding taxes.
I have introduced legislation that would repeal this 3
percent withholding tax. Are you familiar with this provision;
are you aware of any efforts to estimate the cost it will
impose government-wide; and would you agree that it doesn't
make sense to enact taxes that cost more to collect than they
raise in revenue?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I am going to have to confess that in
the 9 weeks I have been back at OMB I have not come across that
provision. I am not up to date on it. So I would really rather
get back to you. I can comment in principle on it, but I think
it would be better for me to get back to you.
Mr. HERGER. I would appreciate that.
[The information The Honorable Wally Herger follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.016

Chairman CAMP. Mr. Johnson may inquire.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome aboard.
Mr. LEW. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. Securing Social Security's necessary
administrative funding has been a bipartisan effort for years
at Ways and Means. Regretfully, instead of working together to
find sustainable solutions for Social Security's future, the
other side, your side, has chosen to scare seniors through a
misleading analysis of Social Security's budget in the
Continuing Resolution being considered on the floor.
Let me remind you that Social Security is on a level budget
due to the failure of last year's Congress to pass a budget.
The proposed CR cuts are only 1 percent from Social Security's
funding level established under the Democrat majority. The
remaining $500 million the CR reclaims is the money in a
reserve fund the agency has not spent from previous general
budgets.
The President's 2012 budget request assumes a 5-year budget
freeze based on 2010 enacted levels. How can we work together
to make sure Social Security delivers its core services during
these times of fiscal restraint?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I think that is one of our most
important jobs, to make sure that we can deliver services that
people are entitled to in a way that is both sufficient and
makes them accessible and in a way that is not too burdensome.
I think that it is an area where we have made great
progress in improving service; and part of that involves
people, part of it involves technology. I think that as we look
at places where we are going to be needing to make savings,
this is not an area where we think savings or, if you look at
our budget, we don't make savings in this area because we think
we need to maintain with a growing population applying for
benefits the quality of service.
Mr. JOHNSON. You need to get the President to doctor that
issue, because he hasn't agreed to fix Social Security, and you
know and I know it can be fixed.
Do you agree with the argument that the arithmetic in
Social Security works, Social Security is fine? That is one of
the arguments that is being made.
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I was speaking to the question of the
administrative costs. You are talking now about the financing
of Social Security long term.
I think Social Security is soundly financed until 2037. The
trust fund--last reported, the trustees said that the trust
fund was sound until 2037. I think we do have issues that----
Mr. JOHNSON. There isn't any money in it. You know that. It
is all IOUs.
Mr. LEW. I would beg to differ.
Since 1983, when on a bipartisan basis we worked to reform
Social Security and to refund Social Security, we have a system
where there is a Social Security trust fund that has a surplus,
and it is invested in U.S. Treasury notes. It is our job to run
a fiscal policy so that we can pay those notes back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, that is right. We are borrowing from
that trust fund.
Mr. LEW. And part of the contract we have with Social
Security is we have to be able to pay that back.
Mr. JOHNSON. Do you agree with the statement in the
President's 2010 budget that the existence of large trust fund
balances, i.e., the IOUs, does not by itself increase the
government's ability to pay benefits.
Mr. LEW. That is a paragraph that--it doesn't appear in the
budget that I sent up, because I think it is a little bit
misleading. It is something that is true in its technical terms
as an economic matter. But there is legal and technical issues
regarding Social Security.
Social Security is an entitlement program. We have payroll
taxes that employers and employees both pay into it. There are
fund balances that are invested in Treasuries. We have never
defaulted on paying back Treasury bills.
So, as a legal matter, there is a right to a benefit, and
there is funding available. As an economic matter, we can only
pay those benefits back if as an overall government we are in a
fiscal position to do so. So the problem is are we running our
fiscal policy so we can pay our bills. And I think it was
easier when I sat here with a surplus to say with confidence
that we can do it.
I understand why the question is asked. But that is not a
Social Security question. It is a question of are we running
our fiscal policy correctly.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, Social Security is broke, and you know
it. And it is nothing but pieces of paper out there. If we
can't pay our other bills when we are in big debt, how do we
plan on paying Social Security?
But let me add I believe, and I think you agree, that we
can reform Social Security so that it exists forever. I haven't
heard the President talk about wanting to do that.
Mr. LEW. Well, no, no. I totally agree. And the President
just yesterday repeated he wants to work together on a
bipartisan basis. We believe we can work together to come up
with another 75-year plan to make the kind of commitment that
we made in 1983 that says, looking far down the road, Social
Security is sound. Beyond 2037, we do have work to do. And we
look forward to working together on that.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel is recognized.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much.
It is good to be working with you again, Mr. Lew. And the
last time we worked closely together was when we, along with
Gene Sperling and President Clinton, zones, attempted to bring
in local government, State government, the private sector, and
the Federal Government by having a plan with respect to
empowerment zones. I understand that soon, very soon that will
expire in the budget, the President's budget?
Mr. LEW. Yeah. There is a proposal for a follow-on program.
Mr. RANGEL. I would like to talk about the follow-on
program. Because I was talking to Dr. McDermott, and he was
sharing with me what the human body, when it is attacked
outside, the first thing that happens is that the chemicals
that go to try to stop the bleeding. Then there are white
corpuscles that keep the thing from expanding and red
corpuscles come in to start the repair.
I would assume that with budgets, you find out the country
is in trouble, and you are able to identify where the highest
unemployment is, where there are dropouts, and where there is
lack of productivity. And just like the body, the weak get
weaker. It just seems to me that these communities that have
all of this economic distress didn't cause this economic injury
to themselves.
And yet the President says that he had to help the wealthy
to enjoy a further tax cut because that was political. But, by
the same token, he can't help it if someone in worthwhile
programs are going to be cut back. I think we all agree,
whether it is the President or certainly if it is the
Republicans, that these cuts cost jobs. These cuts cause the
misfortune to grow worse.
Do you have anyone on your staff or in the administration
that takes a look at our country the way a doctor takes a look
at our body to determine how much emergency relief has to be
there and just to stop the hemorrhage?
That was the concept of the empowerment zone. I do know
that you and Dr. Sperling have something that you are thinking
about. But once it gets bad in communities like Detroit and
Watts and Harlem, it just gets worse. And then when you come in
and say you are going to lose jobs on top of it, you are in
intensive care.
Mr. LEW. Mr. Chairman, when I moved back to New York after
the Clinton administration, I started taking the train through
Harlem every day to go home. I felt a huge amount of pride to
see the work that we had talked about happening on the streets.
And it was one of the things that reminded me that what we do
here it is real and it affects people's lives. We did a lot of
good work.
Mr. RANGEL. You should take pride.
Mr. LEW. And in this budget we have a proposal for
something called growth zones. And, you know, what it will be
is a competition for 20 areas that would meet the criteria. I
am not sure I can quite follow the medical analogy, but the
places where there is need and where we bring together the
right assistance and we can make a big difference.
Mr. RANGEL. Who is in charge of that program, because we
won't have time.
Mr. LEW. I am happy to follow up with you afterwards, Mr.
Rangel. There is a group, a number of people; and we can work
with your staff to make sure that we are working closely on it.
Mr. RANGEL. We need that. We have rural areas, and so many
other areas that cannot even compete because they have been
trying to get out of this situation which is a massive
recession; close to depression. We have lived through that, and
we are still living through it.
But you are right. The empowerment zone shows that if we
bring all of these resources at one time, improve the school,
get the private sector working, we can get a town back on its
feet.
So I look forward to working with you, Dr. Sperling, and
Mr. Daley to see all of the things that you are thinking about,
and to see whether or not there is a coordinated effort to
bring in this emergency team when there are hemorrhages taking
place throughout our country.
Thank you for your great contribution.
Mr. HERGER. [Presiding.] Thank you.
Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for coming today.
I discussed the administration's unemployment insurance
proposal with Secretary Geithner yesterday, but I wanted to
talk with you about it as well.
The administration's budget describes the UI proposal as
offering ``relief'' to employers. But according to page 191 of
your budget, there is about ``$9 billion in relief,'' in
quotation marks, through 2013 and then subsequent tax hikes
totaling over $52 billion starting in 2014. On top of that, the
budget proposal also extends the FUTA surtax for 10 years,
which yields another $15 billion in revenue.
To sum it up, that is $9 billion in short-term relief and
$67 billion in higher, permanent tax increases over the next 10
years. Do I have that math correct?
Mr. LEW. I can tell you the numbers in the budget are that
it is net $43 billion. And if that was the number you used, it
is correct. I apologize. I didn't write down the number.
Mr. DAVIS. I think we are dealing with a little bit larger
number there.
But it seems to me that employers would pay about $58
billion less in unemployment taxes over the next decade if
Congress simply ignored that proposal and followed current law.
Would you agree with that? In terms of that outlay?
Mr. LEW. If you are looking over the 10-year period, there
is an increase in the base of salaries that are subject to the
unemployment tax.
Mr. DAVIS. Plus the tax increase.
Mr. LEW. Yes. And what it would do is it would restore the
wage base in real terms to where it was in 1983 when President
Reagan was in office and it was set for the last time. So it is
in real terms back to where it was in 1983. It was frozen, and
it hasn't been changed since 1983.
Mr. DAVIS. So it is short-term relief for a long-term
permanent tax increase.
Mr. LEW. So it is short-term relief, which is I think very
important, because the State funds are running very low right
now. They need to have some headroom to be able to do what they
need to do to build the balances back up. So we have a
moratorium on increases that would otherwise take effect at the
Federal level. And afterwards, in 2014, the base would be
adjusted so that, as I say, in real terms it would be back to
where it was when it was last set in the Reagan administration.
Mr. DAVIS. Has any administration in U.S. history to your
knowledge ever proposed such a large net unemployment insurance
tax hike?
Mr. LEW. I actually can't tell you. I haven't gone back
historically. I do know that in real terms it is just
calibrating it so that it is back where it was when it was set
the last time in 1983.
Mr. DAVIS. Regarding the question of who pays for
unemployment insurance, Secretary Geithner was a little bit
fuzzy on that. He suggested the economy pays for it. Who pays
for unemployment insurance?
Mr. LEW. We have unemployment trust funds that are drawn
down to pay benefits.
Mr. DAVIS. Who actually contributes to those, though?
Mr. LEW. The trust funds are funded by payroll taxes, and
there are other funds as well.
Mr. DAVIS. One of the wake-up calls to me running a
business in the corporate world, actually signing the checks,
was the amount of additional taxes going out the door. I guess
the question I have for you, hypothetically, as an employer, is
do you think you would view this as a good deal? I mean this
getting $9,000--let us use the hypothetical number $9,000--in
relief in exchange for $67,000 in higher taxes in the future?
Mr. LEW. You know, I think we are comparing different
numbers of years. On a year-by-year basis, this is a level of
taxation that was in place in real terms for many years. It
only eroded as the years went by since 1983.
So I think if you look at in real terms the impact this
would have on employers, we had a pretty good economy in the
1990s when the real effective rate was much closer to what we
are proposing than where it is now.
Mr. DAVIS. One last quick question on UI. The budget
proposal doesn't include any funding for extending Federal UI
benefits beyond their expiration in December of this year; is
that correct?
Mr. LEW. That is correct.
Mr. DAVIS. Extending the current program through 2012 would
cost about $40 billion. Do you think the program should be
extended? And, if so, why wasn't it included in your budget?
Mr. LEW. You know, I think the whole idea of extended
benefits is that we do it when we need to do it and for the
duration of time that we need to do it. And I think we need to
see where we are at the end of the year. It is not something
one ought to look ahead in advance and say we know that we are
going to be in a situation where we still need extended
benefits.
Mr. DAVIS. Final point, real quickly.
Do you think it is fiscally responsible in your view not to
include funds like these in the budgets the way you might in a
variance account in a private sector company to at least
project the potential need for that out there?
Mr. LEW. There are a number of contingency areas where we
don't include it in budget, some where we do. This is an area
where I hope that we are in a place where we don't need it in
there, and we will have to see where we are at the end of the
year.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you very much.
Mr. HERGER. Mr. Reichert from Washington is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Lew.
My questions will focus on jobs for a second.
The budget dictates new resources to the International
Trade Administration to help achieve the goal of the national
export initiative which I am proud to be a part of along with
Mr. Tiberi.
The goal, of course, is to double exports, create 2 million
jobs by 2014. Your budget explains that these funds will be
used to promote exports from small businesses, sell American.
That is our goal. We also want to enforce existing free trade
agreements and reduce trade barriers for U.S. products. And I
congratulate the President on his recent negotiation with Korea
and look forward to voting on that bill.
But there is hardly a mention, other than the fact that the
Korean agreement has been agreed to, in the budget as to the
role of the pending free trade agreements with Colombia,
Panama, and, for that matter, really Korea.
The last time that we doubled exports was between the years
of 1995 and 2007; and, as I have said many times and you
probably know yourself, during that period of time nine trade
agreements were passed.
So my question is, what really is the President looking to
do when it comes to trade agreements, recognizing the
importance if their goal is to double exports, create 2 million
jobs? Is it not important to get these trade agreements to
Congress so we can have a vote on those--Colombia and Panama
languishing, Korea we are still waiting for. What really is the
plan? Because it is not mentioned in the budget at all. It has
been said before, it is a no-cost stimulus.
Mr. LEW. Congressman, the Korea agreement was completed
right at the end of the year as the budget was being put
together, and it is something we are very proud of. We think it
is an important piece of work. It shows how, working together,
we can address the serious issues that come up with trade
agreements and still promote American exports and to make sure
that we are competitive in important markets.
So I don't think there is any ambiguity about the
administration's support for the Korea agreement. I think it is
more just a question of timing, funding for the agreement. But
the provisions were there.
As far as the Colombia and Panama agreements go, I think
the President has been clear that we are continuing to work on
them. There are issues there we have to work through, and we
are working as hard and as fast as we can to get those
completed.
Mr. REICHERT. Well, I haven't seen any language in any of
the budgets presented by the President relating to trade. So
this isn't the first time that the language has been omitted
from a budget proposal.
Mr. LEW. It is not intrinsically a budget issue. As you
said, it is something that has some implications, and the
implications of trade agreements are addressed. We have been
very vocal in speaking to the question of the Korea agreement
and would be happy to follow up with you on it. There should be
no ambiguity of the administration's position on it. It is a
historic agreement that the President has spoken to.
Mr. REICHERT. Okay. We will be looking forward to voting on
those agreements this year.
Now to health care. Last week, the director of the
nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office testified before the
Budget Committee that the health care law would reduce
employment in 2020 by about 800,000 workers. Do you agree with
that analysis?
Mr. LEW. You know, I think that as I looked at that
analysis last week, what it said to me was that there are a lot
of people who are in jobs that they would either be ready to
change or retire from if they weren't locked in to their jobs
because of their health insurance. And that by passing the
Affordable Care Act and ending job lock we have created more
flexibility and mobility in the labor market. I am not
persuaded that there is a net job loss, and I would be happy to
pursue it with you further.
Mr. REICHERT. You don't have a number? If you disagree with
this 800,000 loss number, do you have a number that you are
looking at that possibly----
Mr. LEW. I do not have a number to give you. But we can
follow up.
Mr. REICHERT. Would you agree that there would be job
losses?
Mr. LEW. I think that the thing that I would agree with is
that there will be people who leave jobs, people who couldn't
retire because they were going to lose their health benefits.
Mr. REICHERT. So let me understand. The Congressional
Budget Office says that we are going to lose 800,000 jobs. But
you are saying that--at least what I am hearing is--we are not
going to lose any.
Mr. LEW. I said I am not familiar with an analysis that
says it is loss of jobs because of loss of economic activity.
And I am happy to look at the analysis.
Mr. REICHERT. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lew, as we begin the budget scenario, this is really
about, in some measure, preparing for the debt ceiling question
that will be before us in the near future. But the debt ceiling
question really isn't an argument about just the budget that is
in front of us. It is an argument about bills incurred from the
past. Isn't that correct?
Mr. LEW. It is not at all about the budget in front of us,
because the debt that we have is all the result of past
decisions.
Mr. NEAL. Which brings me to the next point. How much money
have we borrowed for the war in Iraq?
Mr. LEW. Well, I don't have a separate calculation, but we
have been running a deficit for the entire time from the
beginning of the war of Iraq through the withdrawal. So
depending on what you consider to be the thing that we are
borrowing for, one could come up with different calculations.
We don't identify borrowing for one or another activity, but we
have been running a deficit that whole period.
Mr. NEAL. Well, let me take you back to projections then,
and then we will come back to the debt issue.
There have been 31,000 men and women who have served us
honorably in Iraq and Afghanistan who have been wounded. And on
a visit that I made last week with one courageous young guy, I
did the calculation. He is about 28 years old and, with his
life expectancy, he is probably going to be in the care of the
VA system for the next 50 years. So not only are there costs
that have been incurred based upon the last few years but it is
also a discussion about the costs going forward. Is that
correct?
Mr. LEW. Absolutely. We have seen the costs of veterans'
care, the need for workforce that deals with returning
veterans, Wounded Warriors, climb dramatically as we have seen
the number of brave men and women who are injured in battle
come home. I think we have a pretty bipartisan consensus that
we have an obligation to the men and women who put their lives
on the line who come back injured to take care of them. And our
budgets will reflect that for the rest of a generation.
Mr. NEAL. I am certainly in agreement with the point that
you made. I think there is bipartisan support on the committee
and certainly in the House for the statement that you have just
offered about the obligations that we have going forward.
Let me go back to the debt issue.
So it is conceivable that some of those who have voted
repeatedly for the war in Iraq and then voted for a period of
about 7 years out of the 8 to borrow the money for Iraq
conceivably would say that they are not prepared to meet the
obligations based upon the votes that they have cast?
Mr. LEW. Mr. Neal, I would rather not speculate on the
motives of individual Members. But I would just say that we
have a national debt that includes hundreds of billions of
dollars that we have spent in the last number of years on the
war in Iraq and the war in Afghanistan. And we are paying that
debt and the interest on the debt is one of the things that
would be paid when the debt limit is raised. We don't identify
which expense is connected to which dollar of debt. So there is
no one-for-one correlation, but, conceptually, it is part of
the whole.
Mr. NEAL. But frequently the votes that we had on the House
floor during those years were called supplemental budgets.
Mr. LEW. Yes, they were.
Mr. NEAL. And to call it a supplemental budget, Mr. Lew,
what does that infer?
Mr. LEW. A supplemental appropriation is an appropriation
that is outside of the regular cycle. It is funds that weren't
requested in the regular budget and were appropriated either
after or parallel to but not part of the regular budget.
Mr. NEAL. So is it fair to say, just based upon on some of
the calculations of the numbers you have come across in your
time, recently anyway, that the cost of the war in Iraq is
north of $750 billion right now?
Mr. LEW. I think that is pretty close. I mean, I haven't
gone back and totaled it up from the beginning. But it has been
an expensive undertaking. Yes.
Mr. NEAL. Okay. And then, going forward, one might make the
argument, I think with some accuracy, that because of the
obligation we are going to have to those honorable men and
women who have served us that the VA system is going to require
a considerable infusion of money for years and years to come,
maybe well north of another trillion dollars if it is over the
life of that young man's expectancy.
Mr. LEW. I am reluctant to put a specific number on it. I
agree in principle it is a large number. I think the point is
the same even if the number is a little off. I could go back
and try and calculate a number, but I don't have a number.
Mr. NEAL. Okay. Thank you very much, Mr. Lew.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Brady is recognized.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Director, thank you for being here today. I look
forward to working with you.
Mr. LEW. Thank you for having me.
Mr. BRADY. You know, I don't think this budget adds up,
either for deficit reduction or for getting the economy moving.
I am concerned about two things.
One, last year's budget did talk about the need for
increasing U.S. sales abroad through passage of trade
agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea; and we have
been working with the administration to move those forward. The
House has taken a very strong position to move these three
before July 1. The budget last year talked about the
administration's goal of finding a way forward on all three.
The budget this year is silent on Colombia and Panama. Is there
a reason why?
Mr. LEW. Well, in December, as you know, we reached
agreement on a very important agreement with South Korea. As we
were closing this budget down, we accommodated that, as we
should, in the budget proposal. And we are continuing to work
on Colombia and Panama. So we need to get the Korea free trade
agreement ratified as quickly as possible. We need to continue
working as quickly as we can to get the others agreed to.
Mr. BRADY. Did you put in the budget the tariff reduction
amounts resulting from passage of all three?
Mr. LEW. We put in the budget the one we have reached
agreement on.
Mr. BRADY. Korea, but not Colombia and Panama?
Mr. LEW. Until we have an agreement, I don't believe we
asked for funding for it.
Mr. BRADY. But you didn't plan for it in your budget?
Mr. LEW. Actually, I stand corrected. All three free trade
agreements are assumed in the budget in terms of accommodated
in the costs. They are not assumed to have been agreed to.
Mr. BRADY. Understood.
Mr. LEW. But there is not a financial barrier to it.
Mr. BRADY. Good. That is reassuring.
I want to follow up with Mr. Herger's point about the
deficit. We oftentimes hear repeatedly about the debt and
deficit the administration inherited. So we took a look at what
CBO put down for the baseline from 2010 on forward. That is in
the blue line on this graph. On the red are the
administration's budgets and its own projections for the next
decade. What they show is that the baseline that President
Obama inherited is less than $2 trillion of debt over the next
decade, but his budget and your budget shows deficits of nearly
$8 trillion, four times larger than the baseline that the
President inherited.
Now, understandably, there will be some adjustments for the
tax relief for the next few years, but this clearly shows that
the White House is driving this deficit in a major way through
its policies. That is one of the areas that we hope to work
with you on, Director, to find ways to cut spending, put
discipline back in the government, convince job creators that
now is the time to invest, and convince consumers that they
will not face higher taxes as a result of higher debt and
deficits in this country. And I hope you will work with us as
we try to rebuild some confidence in America's economy and
fiscal condition going forward.
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I can't quite see the chart, so I am
going to just comment on----
Mr. BRADY. It is a good-looking chart. You are going to
love it. Maybe not love it, but you will like it.
Mr. LEW. My peripheral vision isn't good enough to get it.
I think I mentioned earlier, before you came into the room,
that when I left OMB in January 2001 we projected a surplus
over the next 10 years of $5.6 trillion. I was extremely proud
to have been part of making that possible and, frankly, working
on a bipartisan basis in 1997 to do that. When I came back just
about 9 weeks ago, it is a $10 trillion surplus that I saw the
President inherited when he came in in January, 2009; and it
has gotten worse because of the recession, because of the deep
economic difficulties we have.
I don't think there is any question but that we need to
work together to put a dent in it and turn it around and move
it in the right direction. It is going to take a while. There
is a desire, as the President said yesterday, for kind of
instant solutions. This is a deep hole that we are in.
And some of it was of our own making, some of it was not.
The economy took a turn for the worse that I don't think anyone
anticipated before the depths of the recession. There may have
been things that we could have done differently to prevent it,
but it certainly wasn't planned.
The decisions made in the early part of this century, from
2001 to 2009, did make the problem worse. I mean, we passed
bill after bill, tax cuts and spending bills----
Mr. BRADY. The attacks of 9/11 didn't have an effect on
that at all?
Mr. LEW. Well, I think certainly the fact that we have had
a different defense posture, we have had two wars, that has all
contributed to it, no doubt. But when you remove all of the
things that kind of come and go, the recession will abate. We
are growing our way out of it, not fast enough, but we are
growing out of it. We are bringing our troops home from Iraq.
Those expenses will go down. It is the structural deficit that
we have to deal with.
Mr. BRADY. But these are your budgets and your numbers, and
they are very serious.
Mr. LEW. I am happy to go over it or get back to you.
Mr. HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this.
Director Lew, I really appreciate you being here today,
your testimony, and also the very difficult task you have in
putting these budgets together. It is not an easy task.
I want to discuss an issue that is very important to me and
my State of Louisiana. As you may or may not know, Louisiana is
a leader in international trade; and, in fact we rank fourth
among the 50 States in exports to China. In the year 2009, we
saw a 56 percent increase in our exports to China in a somewhat
down economic year.
As a southern State and a coastal State, one of the
problems we have every single year--and we never have really
good solutions to this--is a sediment buildup in our shipping
channels. It is a significant problem. It requires constant
maintenance. I have the honor of serving a coastal State,
Louisiana, a coastal district, and see firsthand the importance
of having these dredging operations done in a timely manner.
But I want to be really clear, this is a national problem.
Back in 1986, Congress was very wise in setting up the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund. This was a fund that was a dedicated ad
valorem tax to be used for operation and maintenance dredging
in all the federally authorized channels to maintain their
width and depth.
However, over the years, Washington bureaucrats have held
these moneys hostage to a budget process. And these critical
waterways have been neglected. In fact, if you look at what the
Army Corps of Engineers tells us, if you take our 59 largest
ports, which are critical for us to meet the President's goal
of doubling exports in 5 years, you take those 59 ports, only
about 35 percent of them are operating at the full capacity of
width and depth. This backlog of maintenance is growing year by
year.
Now, the ad valorem tax, the harbor maintenance tax brings
in somewhere between $1.3 and $1.6 billion a year. In fact, in
fiscal year 2010, it was $1.3 billion. But only half of those
funds are currently being used by the Army Corps of Engineers
for maintenance dredging. The President's fiscal year 2012
budget proposes only $758 million to be distributed from the
Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund for operation and maintenance
purposes.
Now, what is the impact of this? Vessels and companies that
are shipping lose millions of dollars each year as they are
forced to light load vessels for shipping. They are forced to
operate under reduced shipping schedules when high tide is in
to make up for the silt that has built up. And these are extra
costs to American companies that are trying to compete
globally.
So if we are going to try to really meet the President's
goal of doubling exports over the next 5 years, how do you
justify spending only half the fees--these are dedicated fees
that were supposed to be used for dredging--half the fees
collected each year, leaving a $5.6 billion surplus in this
fund when our Nation's exporting channels are becoming less
competitive?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, in the Army Corps program we have
made difficult decisions, difficult trade-offs. In general,
funding levels are not as high as they would be if we weren't
on a path where we are trying very hard----
Mr. BOUSTANY. But this is a dedicated tax that is supposed
to be used. It is paid by these shippers, by this maritime
industry; and it is dedicated in law for operation and
maintenance dredging. So why is only half of it being used? Is
this a budget gimmick?
Mr. LEW. Well, I think if you look at the Army Corps
program overall, the way the decisions have been made in the
Corps budget are to look for the highest-value projects and to
put funding behind the highest-value project.
Mr. BOUSTANY. But I have talked with the Corps, and they
consistently say they need access to that money. They could
actually take care of all these authorized projects achieve the
maximum efficiency so that we meet the President's goal and
still have some left to put into the fund. This is not an
efficient use of funds.
Mr. LEW. I understand that there are a lot of projects that
might well be worthy projects.
Mr. BOUSTANY. These are all worthy projects identified by
the Corps that they are underfunding because they can't get
access to these funds.
Mr. LEW. It would nonetheless be additional spending if we
were to do the projects.
Mr. BOUSTANY. No, No, no. Stop. It doesn't add to the
deficit, because this is money that is already coming in
dedicated for these projects. Otherwise, it goes into a surplus
fund. CBO scores this as adding nothing to the deficit.
Mr. LEW. I will go back and check. In general, when we draw
funds down from a trust fund, changes in trust funds are
scored.
Mr. BOUSTANY. We are not talking about drawing down from a
trust fund. We are just talking about using the incoming annual
money. The fund is continuing to grow.
Mr. LEW. Let me get back to you on that, Congressman.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Could you get back to me in writing on that?
Mr. LEW. I will.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
[The information from the Honorable Charles W. Boustany,
Jr. follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.017

Chairman CAMP. [Presiding.] Thank you very much.
Ms. Berkley is recognized.
Ms. BERKLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here. I appreciate it. And let me share
with you my tale of woe before I ask you a few questions.
You know my district and my State probably almost as well
as I do. You know I have got the highest unemployment rate in
the Nation. It is officially close to 15 percent, but it is
probably more realistically near 20. I have got the highest
unemployment rate.
UNLV, one of our leading institutions of higher learning,
my alma mater, is threatening to declare bankruptcy because the
State of Nevada is broke, and they are trying to fill a $3
billion hole in a $6 billion budget. Very difficult to do.
I have got 600,000 Nevadans that have no health insurance.
It doesn't mean they don't get sick. It means they go to the
hospital and our tax dollars are paying for their health care
because they have no insurance. It is no accident and no
mistake that every one of the hospitals in southern Nevada is
operating in the red, and that is because they are absorbing
the costs of these uninsured Nevadans.
We are fighting two wars in this country. We have been
doing that for a number of years. We have huge homeland
security needs. Our veterans are coming back, and they are
coming back with significant problems, if not physical,
certainly emotional. Our health care system is broken; and
until we made some reforms last year, I would say it was not
going to exist in that current form.
The SGR and people have complained that we are losing
doctors. Well, my husband is a doctor. My daughter is a doctor.
We do health care. My income is dependent on health care. So
this is important to me.
Maybe the reason we are losing doctors is because we don't
have a permanent fix for the SGR. And any doctor who has to
have a 30-day extension and a 60-day extension and a 6-month
extension is going to throw up their hands and retire because
they have had enough. And nobody can run a business or a home
the way we are asking doctors to conduct their practices.
So, having said all of that, the number one problem in my
district is the economy. When the rest of the economy recovers,
Las Vegas will recover, because we tend to be a one-industry
town.
I need to know, in your budget--and I have specific
questions--what does the President's budget do to help get this
economy moving and to create jobs? And let me hit a few areas
that I think are important.
Nevada, particularly Las Vegas, has long-standing
transportation challenges. I believe that improving and
diversifying the Las Vegas and Nevada economy requires
significant investments in our transportation infrastructure.
What investments do you propose in this area, and how will they
affect communities like mine? What return do you expect on that
investment?
Mr. LEW. Congresswoman, I can't relate it exactly to
Nevada. But, in general, the budget proposes a major expansion
in the surface transportation program to take the historic
levels up by I think almost $50 billion a year, a total of $558
billion of investment.
Ms. BERKLEY. Do you think we can continue to be a
superpower if we have a crumbling infrastructure in our
country?
Mr. LEW. No, we need to work on our infrastructure. And it
is not just our roads and bridges and tunnels. We need to work
on the infrastructure for the economy of the future as well as
for the more traditional infrastructure. That is one of the
reasons that the broadband initiative is in our budget, paid
for by fees that will be generated from selling spectrum. And
it is, in a sense, the key to communities that are now locked
out of the modern economy being connected to the modern
economy.
Ms. BERKLEY. I couldn't agree with you more. And I think
not only does it prepare this Nation for the future, but it
also provides good-paying jobs.
Let me get to renewable energy, because this is a very
important issue for the State of Nevada. It is an economic
sector that has long-term growth potential throughout Nevada,
and it is a job creator for my constituents. How does your
budget advance this sector?
Mr. LEW. Our budget invests in renewable technology in a
number of ways.
One, it encourages the expansion of the use of electric
vehicles, both in terms of the development and in the
commercialization; and we have tax proposals that would help
with that. It invests in building standards, helping to
increase our conservation using modern technology and
materials. And we invest in development of renewable--solar and
renewable technologies so that we don't have to be as reliant
on fossil and imported fuels.
Ms. BERKLEY. I could listen to you forever, but I have one
more question, and my seniors would be very upset if I didn't
ask it. The backlog of Social Security Disability claims is
huge, particularly huge in my district. Will the funding
increase for the Social Security Administration help with the
backlog? And with the proposals of the cuts in the CR, how will
that affect the backlog?
Mr. LEW. Well, obviously, our budget in general very much
supports the idea we need to reduce spending and find savings.
We did not think it was necessary to reduce the Social Security
Administration. We have provided funds to try to work down the
backlog and are concerned about the impact that reductions
would have.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Heller is recognized.
Mr. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and, Director Lew,
thank you for being here. I appreciate you spending some time
with us.
I think you just said you can't relate to Nevada. I am
going to try again. I am from Nevada. She is from Nevada. I
don't disagree with anything----
Mr. LEW. No, no, I can relate to Nevada. I couldn't connect
the policy directly to Nevada. I don't have State by State
numbers.
Mr. HELLER. All right. I don't disagree with anything my
colleague from Las Vegas said. I guess the squeaky wheel gets
the grease. I want to run through some numbers again that are
very similar to what she said.
Nevada's unemployment rate increased to 14.5 percent in
December. Las Vegas' unemployment rate jumped to 14.9 percent,
which marked a new all-time high. The unemployment rate in the
Reno-Sparks area north of that increased to 13.8 percent,
another new all-time high for the area. And then the Carson
City unemployment rate, which is the capital, reached a new
high as well, surging from 13.1 percent in November to 14
percent in December. At 14.5 percent statewide, that is a total
of 193,500 Nevadans who are out of work.
I was looking at some of the Bureau of Labor Statistics'
numbers on the amount of jobs we have created in Washington,
D.C., at the same time; and it is debatable. One will show we
have created, since Obama came into office, 58,000 new
bureaucratic jobs. Another statistic says it is closer to
141,000 new jobs we have created, and that is debatable. I
think just yesterday Speaker Boehner said we created 200,000
new Federal jobs since Obama has been in office. I would hate
to think that for every job we lose in Nevada we create a new
bureaucratic job here in Washington, D.C.
Recently, the average duration of unemployment in Nevada
climbed to above 35 weeks, or about 8 months. From 1997 to
2007, in that 10-year span, the construction industry added
40,000 jobs in Las Vegas, 9,000 in Reno and Sparks. In the
years since, the construction industry in both areas has seen
massive declines. In Las Vegas, construction employment is down
55,000 from 2007 to 2010. In the Reno area, there are 12,000
fewer construction jobs now than in 2007. Combined, the two
areas have lost 19,000 more construction jobs in the last 3
years than were gained in the previous 10 years.
So in promoting the stimulus--I guess this is my question--
the President's economists presented a very clear forecast of
what they would expect in terms of job creation if the stimulus
passed. And I am asking you, has the stimulus been a success in
Nevada, in your view?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I think the stimulus has been a
success nationwide. Obviously, it hasn't worked well enough in
Nevada or we wouldn't be seeing unemployment rates as high as
they are. I think we agree that those are unacceptably high
unemployment rates. But, nationwide, we have several million
more jobs because of the stimulus; and, with that, we have an
unemployment rate that is still 9 percent or higher, and we
need to work on getting it down. So I don't think we have a
fundamental disagreement there is more work to do. But we
believe very strongly that the economy has grown several
percentage points more, and several million fewer people are
unemployed.
I would just want to respond to one thing that you
mentioned about the growth of the Federal workforce, and it
kind of relates to something we were talking about a few
minutes ago. Some of that growth in employment is related to
the veterans' issues we were discussing. Eleven thousand of
those new positions are in the Department of Veterans Affairs.
We do have growing needs to take care of wounded warriors when
they come home, and I think that we need to not put them in a
category of just kind of Washington bureaucratic jobs. As you
break them out, I think there are missions there that we have
bipartisan consensus that we need to follow through on.
Mr. HELLER. Let me continue on my questioning, Director. Do
you believe the stimulus has reduced unemployment in Nevada?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I think that the stimulus bill has
increased employment in this country nationwide. I can't speak
with precision about Nevada. But I know there are projects in
Nevada, there are jobs in Nevada, there was assistance in
Nevada in terms of aid to the State that made it possible for
the State not to lay off workers, for teachers and firemen and
policemen to keep their jobs. So I know there was benefit in
Nevada, and I know that unemployment in Nevada would be higher
but for the stimulus bill. I can't sit here today and say that
it did enough for Nevada, because you wouldn't be seeing the
kind of unemployment rate you are seeing. But that doesn't mean
it didn't work. The recession was very deep.
Mr. HELLER. Where would you predict unemployment would be
without the stimulus?
Mr. LEW. You know, I don't have a point estimate, but I
have seen ranges of estimates that are as high as several
million jobs. And that is a big difference. I mean three
million Americans is a lot of people.
Mr. HELLER. In your proposed budget, you indicate it will
take until 2017 for the country to reach full employment again.
Why do you think it will take so long?
Mr. LEW. You know, this has been a very deep recession.
This is the deepest economic decline since the Great
Depression. We are confident that we are in a recovery. We are
confident that we are growing back to the point where we can
have full employment in sight. But the history of financially
led recessions is that the recovery period is longer and
slower. It is not something we are happy about. That is the
economic history.
One of the reasons we fought so hard for the Recovery Act
and why it was so important that we worked together on a
bipartisan basis with the chairman and others to have the tax
bill in December was that our economy desperately needed that
extra boost not to have us slip back into recession. There is
nothing more important in our country than making sure that we
keep economic growth going and reducing unemployment.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Roskam is recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Director.
You had a tough day yesterday in terms of the
administration's rollout. I am sure I am not telling you
anything you don't know. But there seemed to be near unanimity
on the editorial pages.
The USA Today said, ``He whiffed.''
Investment Business Daily said that the budget was gutless,
far worse than merely bad.
New York Times, which is usually pretty friendly to the
administration, said what Mr. Obama's budget is most definitely
not is a blueprint for dealing with the real, long-term
problems that feed the budget deficit.
The Post said the larger problem with the budget is the
administration's refusal to confront the hard choices that Mr.
Obama is so fond of saying must be faced.
You mentioned earlier in your opening remarks that there
are difficult choices that need to be faced, Director. Let me
ask you this. In the deficit projection that the administration
rolled out in its first year for 2012, the projected deficit
was $581 billion. Now for 2012 that number is $1.1 trillion.
How did the administration get it so wrong so quickly?
Mr. LEW. Well, there has been a lot of policy made in the
period, some of which we made together. When we worked together
on a bipartisan basis to have a tax bill last year, we knew it
was going to have a substantial impact. And it is the right
thing to have done. We needed to not have a tax increase this
January. We needed to have tax provisions like the refundable
tax credits extended. We needed to extend unemployment
compensation.
Mr. ROSKAM. But those were things that were not
contemplated by the administration in year one?
Mr. LEW. You know, I don't think there was anyone who
thought at the beginning of the administration, who knew with
certainty where the bottom of the recession was. We were in a
free fall, and we knew that we had to take very substantial
action to stop it. We succeeded in stopping it.
Mr. ROSKAM. Director, if you are arguing that you were in a
free fall at that time, you would have contemplated the worst
possible scenario and you would have further contemplated the
highest deficit figure. And that figure that you published then
was 581. Now, how is it that things have gotten better in the
country by your own testimony and you are projecting a higher
deficit figure?
Mr. LEW. There are a number of policy decisions, as I said.
Because the recession was deeper than projected, there was a
greater shrinkage in the economy, a greater loss of revenue.
There are real consequences to having the economy decline.
Mr. ROSKAM. Do you think the new health care law, for
example, had anything to do with boosting the deficit?
Mr. LEW. No, I think the CBO reported, both when it scored
the bill and its most recent report, the health care bill
reduces the deficit in both the first 10 years and in the
second 10 years.
Mr. ROSKAM. So in terms of a collapsing amount of time that
we have together, so far you have argued that it is the
extension--or just extending out for 2 years the 2001 and 2003
tax cuts. That is the thing that got it off to the point where
you were off--I mean, you weren't, but somebody was--off by
almost 100 percent? That is not even in the strike zone.
Mr. LEW. I think that the degrees of variance from
projections are always greatest when you are in extreme
economic times.
You know, when I was at OMB the last time----
Mr. ROSKAM. Listen, I understand that. But if the extremity
is diminishing, why is the amount of deficit increasing?
Mr. LEW. We are now in a recovery period after a recession
that was deeper than it was projected to be. That means that
the total size of the economy is smaller than it would have
been had we not had as deep a recession as we had. That means
that lost revenue and it means there was need to take more
action than was contemplated originally. I think it was the
responsible thing to do. But I think that looking at the
projection and comparing it in that way doesn't capture what
was going on either in the economy or the policy world.
Mr. ROSKAM. Let me ask you this. Do you think that it is
more likely true than not true that 2 years from now you are
going to be making a different argument based on the past
experience?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, this is the seventh time I have
presented a budget for the President. I was always estimating
conservatively in the previous budgets. So my experience has
been being surprised by good news. You are always surprised by
news, because projections are just that, they are projections.
Mr. ROSKAM. This time you got surprised by bad news, right?
Mr. LEW. Well, I think we were at historic moment.
Mr. ROSKAM. No, no, but you are not arguing that this
number is better than the projection that the administration
made in year one, right? So, in other words, 581 is a better
number in terms of a deficit than 1.1 trillion. Isn't that
right?
Mr. LEW. I am not going to say I wouldn't be happier if we
had a smaller deficit. I would be much happier if we had a
smaller deficit. We would all be happier. But I would also be
happier if we didn't have as bad a recession. I would be
happier if the growth rate had been higher. I would be happier
if unemployment was lower.
Those things didn't happen, and we now have the results of
it, and we have a recovery where, if we hadn't taken the
actions that we took together as recently as December, we would
have more people unemployed and less economic growth. That
would have been a bad thing for the American people.
Chairman CAMP. All right.
Mr. Lewis is recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Director, for being here. Thank you for your
years of service to our country.
I want to follow up to a line of questioning that my
colleague, Ms. Berkley, asked you near the end.
People in my district stop me in the shopping malls, on the
streets, airports, and they are always complaining about the
time that it is taking to get their Social Security cases
because there is such a heavy backlog. Now, it is my
understanding that with these legitimate complaints, Mr.
Director, the Republican-proposed continuing budget resolution
gives me unbelievable and great concern. It is my understanding
that the cuts House Republicans have proposed to the Social
Security Administration will require a month-long furlough.
That would mean that in the Atlanta region that the delay would
be much longer than other regions around the country. Do you
agree?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I know that there are reductions in
the Social Security Administration in the pending Continuing
Resolution. I have asked our staff to analyze them. Clearly, if
there are reductions in staff and there are fewer staff, it
presents concerns. We in our budget proposed to maintain or
increase funding in this area because we believe it is
important to maintain the quality of service and avoiding
backlogs. There are going to be trade-offs, as we work
together, to reduce spending and choices that have to be made.
This was not a choice that we thought had to be made.
Mr. LEWIS. What does this mean to the average person that
had been waiting in some cases for more than a year or 2 years
and that even in some cases where people filed claims and they
pass on, they die? They just pass on, and they never get their
claim addressed.
Mr. LEW. You know, I think we have a deep obligation in
programs like Social Security, but really in all of the ways
that we provide service to the American people, to meet their
needs, to meet it efficiently, promptly. And if we have long
backlogs, we have an obligation to try to reduce that.
And it is not just backlogs. If people have to take hours
to be on the phone waiting for someone to take their call or
days before they can get an appointment, we need to do better
than that.
I feel a little bit like I am looking back in time, but
when I was at OMB the last time we worked really hard to reduce
the waiting periods and the backlogs. And it actually affected
the way the American people felt about their government,
because it is important that when people apply to the Social
Security Administration they get good service. So this is a
very important area. I think that we will have to work
together. We are at the beginning of the process in this
Continuing Resolution. I certainly hope that in the end there
isn't a need for those kinds of reductions.
Mr. LEWIS. Maybe if I was out someone raised a question,
the President in his State of the Union address made it clear
that we need to invest in jobs and job creation. Can you tell
me what does this budget do to create like not tomorrow----
Mr. LEW. Right, looking down the road.
Mr. LEWIS.--down the road jobs and job creation. In my
district, for some time in the City of Atlanta, unemployment
has been more than 10 percent, and there are some parts of the
city it is 15 and more.
Mr. LEW. Congressman, as we look down the road beyond the
recovery, we see it as being critically important that we
invest in the things that will drive economic growth and job
creation for the future, which is why the President put such a
heavy emphasis on education, innovation, and building the
infrastructure. Those are the ingredients that a strong,
growing economy need. If you talk to employers, they are very
concerned that they need to have access to a workforce that has
the skills they need.
When the President announced his budget in Baltimore the
other day, it was pretty exciting to look out at a group of
hundreds of young people in middle school who are excited about
learning science, engineering, technology, math. That is what
we need to be doing in the economy, and those are the kinds of
investments we need to make.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Chairman Camp.
Director Lew, thanks for being here today.
I came here in 2007 in a small class, a lot of Democrats.
But everybody has a different motivation why they run for
office. And I was before that, as I mentioned maybe earlier, 30
years in business. But my passion, when I look back over 50
years, and one of the motivations why I ran is because if you
look back 50 years we have only balanced the budget five times
or six times out of 50 years. And you get some credit because
you were there during a period of that time. So I give you some
credit on that. But it blows me away to think about when I look
at 49 out of 50 Governors have to balance their budget.
Do you believe in a constitutional balanced budget
amendment? I do a lot of town halls, and I got to tell you
people just don't understand why we don't put that in place.
Not today, but something that gets voted in today
constitutionally and then phases in over 5 or 6 years like 49
out of 50 Governors have.
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I agree that we need to work together
to reduce the deficit. We need to ultimately have in mind a
balanced budget again. So I think--in principle, I think that
when the economy is growing we should be able to have a
balanced budget. I don't believe in a constitutional amendment.
I think we have a lot of tools at our disposal which, if we
used them well, if we have budget control rules, things like
PAYGO rules, control the process----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me just come back, because I am limited
on time. I go to these town hall meetings, and I do a lot of
them, pretty much every Saturday twice a month. And everybody
is outraged--and I think that is why a lot of Members lost
their job this last cycle--outraged about the spending.
I voted for a Democratic bill, PAYGO, because I thought it
is a move in the right direction because I want to do something
on a bipartisan basis. I applauded the President to set up this
commission on spending. But at the end of the day, I think this
is a lot of nonsense, because it never seems to go anywhere.
People are tired.
And then I take a look at the deficits projected going
forward. We are $14 trillion going to $20 trillion. And if
someone presented me a plan when I see that much ink over a
period of time, I would fire them, frankly, in my businesses.
I just don't understand, the American people don't
understand why everybody else but Washington has to figure out
how to balance their budget. Working families, businesses, you
have got to be able to cut expenses, make these strategic
investments where you need to.
But people, I got to just tell you, back home in my town
halls, and I feel I am representative, they are completely
outraged about where we are at as a country and where we are
going. They feel like we are the next Greece, the next
Portugal. The only difference is there is nobody to bail us
out.
We are at $14 trillion going to $20 trillion. If you look
at a normal cost of money at 4 or 5 percent, you are looking at
a trillion dollars in interest a year in the next 4, 5, 6
years. That is where we are headed before you pay out $1 to
Medicare or $1 to Social Security. Doesn't that alarm you?
Mr. LEW. The deficits that we are looking at do alarm me,
and I think we have to remember how we got here. We got here--
--
Mr. BUCHANAN. We are projecting going forward these massive
deficits. We had a trillion and a half last year, another
trillion and a half this year, a trillion that you guys are
projecting next year, half trillion dollar deficits, and that
is assuming we raise taxes going forward for the next 7 or 8
years. I mean, I just don't know how in good conscience you
guys can do that.
Mr. LEW. Well, Congressman, the projections are based on
laws that are in place in the 10 years between 2001 and--8
years between 2001 and 2009. We passed a lot of tax cuts. We
expanded----
Mr. BUCHANAN. But, again, why wouldn't you--if you haven't
in 50 years, we have only balanced the budget five times--why
wouldn't we want to put in a constitutional balanced budget
amendment? Nobody has any confidence in Washington. And I am
not talking about Democrats. I am talking about Democrats and
Republicans. Because there is plenty of blame to go around. We
need a constitutional balanced budget amendment.
Mr. LEW. So I think we need to make the decisions that
would put us back on a firm financial footing. We need to pay
for what we do, which is--I am glad that you voted on a
bipartisan basis for pay-as-you-go. I think it is important
that it apply to everything, to taxes and spending. The truth
is, if you have a tax cut that you can't afford----
Mr. BUCHANAN. That was good for about 6 weeks. The State of
Florida has gone from $72 billion. They have lost 7 or 8
billion. They made the tough choices.
We don't make those tough choices in Washington. We are
incapable. We came within one vote in 1994 of a constitutional
balanced budget amendment. The American people want us to go
back there. They have to pay their bills. They can't continue
to run up credit cards. If they do, they go bankrupt. And that
is where we are headed, towards bankruptcy, if we don't change
the way we do business in Washington.
Mr. LEW. In the 1990s, we worked together on a bipartisan
basis, and we did balance the budget. I was proud to present
three surplus budgets to the Congress on behalf of President
Clinton. We have a proposal which would reduce the deficit so
that we eliminate new spending contributing to the deficit. We
will be down to just the interest on the built-up debt that
contributes to the deficit. Then we can start building down the
debt, paying down the debt. Like any other large debt, until
you stop adding to it, you can't pay it down.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Director.
Obviously, your job is not easy. And we are trying to sort
through various components of a budget, the President's
proposed budget, the proposed budget from Congress as well. We
have heard various numbers tossed around.
And yesterday I know I heard some comments of concern. I
thought that they might contain a little bit of hyperbole in
terms of Social Security administrative efforts. And there is
in the Continuing Resolution a proposed 1 percent cut to the
Social Security administrative fund. Is that accurate in
terms----
Mr. LEW. That is my understanding. I have to confess the
last couple of days I have been up here testifying, and I am
not familiar with all the details, but I do understand that to
be the case.
Mr. SMITH. Fair enough.
Now, in the last 10 years, the funding for the
administrative budget for Social Security has seen, on average,
an annual increase, annual increase of 5.4 percent in funding;
and in fiscal year 2010, it was an 8.7 percent increase. That
is $1 billion, roughly. Now, obviously, you have budgetary
experience; and now a furlough would be an administrative
prerogative. Is that accurate?
Mr. LEW. If funding is not available to pay the people who
are on board, it is a prerogative. But at some point it is the
only option that you have if you don't have sufficient funding
to pay for the personnel on board.
The first thing you would do----
Mr. SMITH. But it would be an administrative prerogative.
Mr. LEW. The first thing you would do is not fill open
positions. But if you needed to, you then have to furlough
workers. We are all governed by a law that says we can only
spend money that has been appropriated; and, under the Anti-
Deficiency Act, you have to take steps to make sure you stay
within it.
Mr. SMITH. But perhaps a wage freeze would be an option to
a furlough. Is that conceivable?
Mr. LEW. We have a wage freeze proposed in this budget. We
have frozen Federal workers' pay going forward. You wouldn't
have the option as an agency head to freeze wages on your own.
Congress already voted to freeze Federal workers' pay for the
next 2 years.
Mr. SMITH. Right. Right. But is it reasonable to think that
an administrative fund that has seen some fairly substantial
growth over the last several years could absorb a 1 percent
cut?
Mr. LEW. Congressman, I have tried hard to avoid hyperbole.
Several members have asked me questions about this subject, but
I don't want to overstate or understate the impact. If there is
a reduction in funding for the Social Security Administration
of the order that is in the Continuing Resolution as it now
stands, I am told that it could mean furloughs that would be
required. I have got to go back and do more analysis. Do you
run out of other options at some point?
I think if you look at the increases in the Social Security
Administration budget, we were working hard to eliminate
backlogs and to process claims and to give Americans the
service that they expect. It is a very labor-intensive process;
and if we have fewer people, we will see more delays and
backlogs.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. But I just--have you ever had any
experience where a 1 percent reduction in funding would lead to
a furlough?
Mr. LEW. I cannot tell you from my own personal experience.
But I have asked my staff, who is familiar with the Social
Security Administration budget, and they say that they think a
reduction on the order of what is in the current bill would be
very difficult in the remainder of the year that is left to
meet without there being some furlough. You know, I don't want
to overstate it. Obviously, you would do everything you could
to avoid a furlough. But when you run out of other options,
that is one of the tools that an administrator has.
Mr. SMITH. What are some things that one could approach or
consider to avoid a furlough?
Mr. LEW. Obviously, not filling open positions would come
first. But that is not without cost. If you need to fill a
position to process, there is still delays in service. It is a
little bit easier in terms of your management of your
workforce, but it doesn't help the ultimate beneficiaries
because you are still short of staff.
You know, there are various things you can do that are
relatively small in an agency like this. There is not a lot of
travel for most Social Security Administration workers. You
know, they go to their offices and they work there. So you have
people who are interfacing with the public on a day-to-day
basis, and that is what the staff there does. So the money goes
to pay the staff, for the most part, which is why I think the
reduction would have that effect.
In other agencies, where there is a different mix of things
you are doing, things you are buying, it might have a different
impact.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. McDermott is recognized.
Mr. McDERMOTT. Good afternoon, Mr. Lew. I didn't think I
would ever see you back here.
Mr. LEW. I didn't think you would ever see me back here
either.
Mr. McDERMOTT. After you presided over creating a
magnificent surplus and went away and watched for 8 years the
economic binge as it was squandered with tax cuts and war, I am
surprised you are willing to come back and sweep up after the
parade as the elephants have left. And I really, as I look at
this budget, you have put a budget up here with the President
which does yeoman's work in a very difficult circumstance, in a
time when you have to make cuts, you have to make some trade-
offs, and you have to decide how tight you are going to make
it, how much of the deficit you are going to try and make up
immediately without stalling out the economic growth that is
appearing to go on in this country.
And the Republicans, watching what is going on out on the
floor, it is kind of terrifying to realize that it is all being
balanced on the backs of the poor and the old and the young.
They cut 200,000 kids out of Head Start, and they are wiping
out stuff all over the place. Veterans, throwing 10,000
veterans out of housing programs. And when you look at that,
you have to ask yourself if that is the priorities that the
Republican plan is going to have.
I can see how the President would be struggling and you
would be struggling with what to put up here, and I would like
to hear you talk about the trade-offs that you had to think
about. Because you made some cuts that I don't particularly
like, but I would like to hear the discussion that went on in
the White House.
Mr. LEW. Congressman, we made some cuts that none of us
like either. I think we are well beyond the point of being able
to just take things where it is either waste or duplicative.
The proposals in our budget that reduce funding for programs
like the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, the
Community Development Block Grant program, even some of the
things that don't affect people, the water and sewer grant
programs and the airport grant programs, these are all things
which in other times we would be supporting increases, not
decreases in.
But we face a very, very dangerous economic future if we
don't get our economic house in order. We need to cut spending,
and we are showing a way to cut spending in a balanced way as
part of a plan which overall would reduce the deficit so that
we are left with just the burden of paying down the debt, as
opposed to adding to it.
You know, I think that there are a lot of different ways to
get there. Clearly, our plan has in it some things that will
not be acceptable to everyone. We do rely on some net new
revenues. You know, we have about $350 billion of net new
revenues. We don't extend the income tax rates that give
benefits to people in the highest tax bracket. We let them go
back to where they would have been. And there are a number of
things in this budget that are hard choices.
I think that the challenge we are going to have is to
figure out how we can work on a bipartisan basis. We put a plan
out there. There will now be a process where other plans are
put out there. We are going to have to find a way to work
together. What we can't do is just kick the can down the road
and not deal with it.
Mr. McDERMOTT. Have you looked enough at the proposal? I
personally think we are going to be on a Continuing Resolution
for the rest of this year. I don't think that what is going on
out on the floor is ever going to get through the Senate. And
when the Senate sends back something reasonable, I can't
imagine that the majority in the House is going to ever get
together on it. So we are either headed for a Continuing
Resolution from now until September or we are headed for a
shutdown of the government.
I would like you to talk about what the consequences of a
shutdown are. Because a lot of people weren't around here in
1994 when it happened--or 1995.
Mr. LEW. I never thought that my experience managing the
OMB during the 1995 shutdown would be relevant again. I hope it
never is. It is not the right thing to do. I don't think that
that is what the leadership in Congress wants, it is not what
we want, and I hope we can work together to avoid that.
Mr. McDERMOTT. But if they are unreasonable in the amount
of cutting--do you have any bottom line where you will not cut
anymore?
Mr. LEW. Look, the President has made clear that there are
things that--there is a right way to do it. We proposed, we
have our budget out there. We sent up a statement today that
made it clear that if it is a budget that undermines our
ability to invest in the future and accomplish the things that
we need that it is not acceptable. I think we have to work
towards getting an acceptable bill.
The goal here has to be to getting to agreement, and it is
a long process. The House hasn't completed its work. The Senate
will have to take action. I hope that we can work together to
come up with a resolution that doesn't bring us to the edge of
having to manage through a shutdown. It wasn't a good thing to
do in the mid-90s. I don't think anyone wants to do it again. I
hope nobody wants to do it again.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Schock is recognized.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A couple questions. Last year, I served on the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee. I was very excited
to see that the highway bill remains a priority of the
President, and I was interested to see it in the President's
budget. Can you tell me where in the budget the funds are for
the highway bill?
Mr. LEW. Well, the President's budget makes clear that we
have a set of priorities in surface transportation that I think
will take some work for us to go through with the Congress to
agree on. We expanded some of the definitions of what we would
want to do with the surface transportation bill to get into
some of the technologies of the future. And I think that, as
far as paying for it goes, what we have done is we have shown
that we need to pay for it. We can't afford to do it without
paying for it. But we are going to have to work together on a
bipartisan basis to come up with the program and the funding
mechanism to do it. So we have indicated that it will be paid
for, but we have not specified the particular revenues. What we
have said is that we have to have both, because we can't afford
to do the spending without the revenues.
Mr. SCHOCK. And I am not trying to be smug, but that is
quite obvious. I mean, you can't do a highway bill without
paying for it. Isn't the purpose of a budget to show how you
are going to pay for your priorities, whether it be Medicare,
Social Security, education, or a highway bill? I mean, to
include something in a budget but not show how you are going to
pay for it, one would beg to question how much of a priority it
is then.
Mr. LEW. Well, I think that there are lots of things in
budgets which are proposed in ways that get a conversation
started, that put the idea out there. Sometimes you send
specific legislation, sometimes you don't. That is always the
case, not just in this budget but in all budgets.
I think particularly in the case of a highway bill, a
surface transportation bill where there is a substantial
conversation to be had of what the goals are, what are we
trying to accomplish, we first have to agree on the size of it,
the scope of it, the duration of it, and work together on the
revenue package that is appropriate to pay for it. I think the
principle that we can't do it unless we pay for it is something
that is very important. Because if we can agree on the fact
that we need to invest in infrastructure, then we will work
together on the mechanism to pay for it.
Mr. SCHOCK. Is the President planning to offer the first
proposal or is he waiting for the House Transportation
Committee to do that?
Mr. LEW. The administration is working on a package that
would reflect the priorities of what a surface transportation
program would fund.
Mr. SCHOCK. Do you know when they are planning to come out
with that?
Mr. LEW. I have to check on the date. I am not sure of the
date.
Mr. SCHOCK. I mean in the next 2 months, 6 months, the next
year?
Mr. LEW. I think on the sooner side rather than the longer
side. I don't know if it is weeks or months. I can get back to
you with a day.
[The information was not provided:]
Mr. SCHOCK. Okay. I am interested in your GDP calculations
in your budget. In 2013, in particular, you have calculated a
robust GDP in 2013. That is an interesting year, because it is
also the year where the current tax rates that we are enjoying
today are set to expire. And the budget, to my knowledge,
estimates that they do expire. They are not continued at the
current rate. 2013 is also the year in which the Obama health
care bill's capital gains taxes and the higher payroll taxes go
into effect. Those don't seem to be conducive to strong GDP. I
am just curious how 2013--how you are predicting such strong
growth.
Mr. LEW. The projections for GDP growth flow from our view
of how we are going to recover from what has been a very deep
and historic recession. So it is not a normal period of time.
It is a period of time where we have looked to the recovery
from other financially led recessions. We, frankly, have said
this is deeper, so it is going to take longer. So our growth
path out of it is a bit slower.
The first year, we are a little more pessimistic than some.
We get a little more optimistic actually beyond 2013, where our
view is that we will get back to where the economy would have
been but for the recession.
There are other forecasters who say we have had a permanent
loss of economic capacity. We don't believe that. But our
assumptions are related to the historical analysis of
recoveries from financial recessions.
In terms of tax rates, in particular at the high end, I
would just note that the tax rates that would be in effect when
we see the expiration of the lower rates for the top bracket
would put us in the same place where we were when we had a
period of unprecedented long economic growth in the 1990s. So
they are tax rates that we know to be consistent with economic
growth.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Director, for being here.
Earlier today, Secretary Sebelius acknowledged that the
CLASS program created in the health care law has several fiscal
problems that need to be fixed. Some ideas to combat those
problems include indexing premiums to inflation so that they
would rise along with benefits and closing a loophole that
allows participants to drop out and reenroll without penalty.
While modifications like these surely would increase the
program's revenues, they don't seem to put a dent in the
administration's own actuaries' analysis that I quote: ``In
general, voluntary unsubsidized and non-underwritten insurance
programs such as CLASS face a significant risk of failure as a
result of adverse selection by participants.'' The actuaries
continued to explain that severe adverse selection leads to an
insurance death spiral and there is a very serious risk that
the CLASS program is unsustainable.
How do you think the administration should get to the heart
of the problem as identified by your actuaries without
drastically changing the CLASS program? Or if it is not
possible, then wouldn't it be fiscally responsible to abandon
this program all together?
Mr. LEW. Congresswoman, I have not had a chance to see
Secretary Sebelius' testimony this morning, but I have spoken
with her on a number of occasions about the CLASS program. And
I know that she, both in terms of bringing the best actuaries
to work on the program and in terms of looking at specific
options, some of which you reviewed, is looking at what we can
do administratively to make sure that as we implement the CLASS
program we do it so that it can be a success and that it can be
a program that is fiscally responsible.
It is a challenging program. It is a new program. We are
very early in the implementation of it. But I think that the
bearing that the Department has taken on it, the Secretary in
particular has taken, underscores her very deep belief that we
have to look at it very carefully, take the steps that we can
take to contain the kinds of risks that would potentially be a
problem and use the administrative discretion we have to do
that.
Ms. JENKINS. So you support proceeding?
Mr. LEW. I think the Department is proceeding in a
responsible way to use its administrative flexibility to
mitigate some of the concerns that you have raised.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Over the first 10 years, the CLASS
program would take in approximately $70 billion in premiums.
But instead of setting aside money to pay for future benefits,
the bill spends the premiums on new subsidies. Can you just
explain how the CLASS program will pay out benefits to its
qualifying participants when these premium payments have
already been obligated to pay for the health entitlements in
the new law? And would you consider that double-counting?
Mr. LEW. I believe that it is funded, as all other programs
of government are funded, when it is in operation; and that
when it was passed it was a proposal that came out of Congress
in the consideration of the health reform bill. It was scored
as being paid for. And it did have savings up front. It had
costs at the back end, which under the PAYGO rules do work to
constitute paying for something. So I would have to go back,
and I wasn't involved during the enactment of the health
reform. I have worked in the last few weeks on the CLASS act,
but I don't want to exaggerate the depth of my experience with
it.
Ms. JENKINS. Well, based on how I explained it, would you
personally consider that double-counting?
Mr. LEW. No, I don't think it is double-counting in
general.
Under the PAYGO rules, we look at a 10-year window; and if
you have savings in one area and spending in another area that
net out to zero, it is paid for. So if you ever look at any one
point in time, it may not look like you have paid for it, but
over the cumulative period you have. So I don't think it
constitutes double-counting to treat something that has been
paid for under those kinds of rules as if it has been paid for.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Would you use that same kind of
accounting advice on a business that is trying to account for
their profits not matching the amount of revenues with the
years of expenses?
Mr. LEW. I think if a business has two product lines and
they need to be profitable in every year, a business can make
the choice that in year one product line A will make money and
product line B will lose money, because that is how you develop
the business, and in year five it will flip.
And that is essentially what the PAYGO rules do. Businesses
do all kinds of things to invest in the short term so they can
make money in the long term.
Now, we don't make money in the Federal Government, but
that kind of accounting is not considered double-counting if
you are in the business world. I mean, I know when I was in
business there were years when you did have to take a loss on
something, knowing that you were building a business that was
going to make money a year later.
Ms. JENKINS. Well, it appears this kind of accounting has
us at a $14 trillion national debt. Thank you.
Mr. LEW. I don't think that is what got us into the $14
trillion debt. If we had stuck to the PAYGO rules, we wouldn't
have as big a debt.
Chairman CAMP. Time has expired.
Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Director, for being here. Thank you in your
written testimony for acknowledging that in the '90s, both when
you were here and when you weren't here, there was work across
the aisle in a bipartisan way. Sometimes members up here on the
other side of the aisle forget that in the '90s there was a
Republican Congress that worked with the Democrat President.
And in fact----
Mr. LEW. And, in 1990, a Republican President worked----
Mr. TIBERI. Absolutely right. I worked for a Republican
Congressman by the name of John Kasich who I think you worked
with.
I worked for him back in the late 1980s and early 1990s
when he introduced budgets that everybody who voted for them
could have fit in a phone booth. They became a little more
popular later on in the 1990s.
But, nevertheless, thank you for acknowledging that there
was bipartisanship then.
You have stated a couple of times that the Bush tax cuts--I
don't want to quote you wrong--but the Bush tax cuts have
contributed to the deficits. And I have a chart here that I
just want to challenge you a second.
Mr. LEW. Actually, I was careful not to call them by
anyone's name.
Mr. TIBERI. Tax cuts earlier this decade.
I have a chart here that shows--from CBO from 1970 through
projected spending and deficits and debt through 2050, that
between then and now, at least, revenues have been generally
the same within a historical average. Ebbing and flowing some,
but generally revenues have come in at a historical average.
And that would say to me that the problem in Washington as you
look at debt is more of a spending problem than a revenue
problem.
But, further, here is my question. If you look at the
projected spending--debt spending in 2030, frightening to me.
Because if you take Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and
net interest just 20 years, it will be the size of what the
entire Federal budget is today. So most of the problems with
respect to where we are heading, it has been acknowledged by a
lot of people on both the left and the right, are our
entitlement programs and the growth of our mandatory spending.
And for me, and I am sure for you, I have got four
daughters who I hope are out of college by then and in the real
world; and I just am frightened what that means for their
quality of life and their standard of living.
So this week two papers, USA Today--not exactly human
events--headline is: Obama's Spending--in their editorial--Plan
Ducks Tough Choices on the Deficit. You may have seen it.
Washington Post editorial from Tuesday: President Obama's
Budget Kicks the Hard Choices Further Down the Road.
[The information The Honorable Patrick J. Tiberi follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.020

And in this committee--and you haven't been here to watch--
one of our colleagues--and it is not the Republican plan, but
it is a plan that Representative Ryan has introduced, a roadmap
to try to deal with these challenges has been maligned by
several people on the other side of the aisle. At least he is
trying to have a national debate.
Because hard choices--I think you would agree with me--have
to be made in a bipartisan way to deal with these mandatory
entitlement programs for our next generation and generations
beyond. And it is going to take what President Clinton quite
frankly did and what Republicans who were here both in the
House and Senate in the 1990s did to tame welfare and to come
up with the first balanced budget since man first walked on the
Moon.
These challenges look to me to be even greater than the
challenges in the mid-1990s that were faced in a bipartisan
way.
So my question after all of that is, I don't believe, as
someone who has been around this business for a while, that it
will happen without bipartisan support; and I don't believe
that we can do it, Chairman Camp can do it without leadership
from President Obama. And I hope that your experience from
where you were before leads you to be someone who tries to push
for leadership at the Federal level and, while this budget
doesn't do it, give me some hope that we will do it soon.
Mr. LEW. Well, in 20 seconds, I think that we have a budget
that is a responsible, comprehensive budget that, were we to
enact it, it would put us in a much better place and in a place
where we would stop building the debt with our current
spending. So I think that we may disagree on the content of our
budget, the policy in it, but the direction of it does get us
where we have----
Mr. TIBERI. I know you have to say that, but we don't touch
entitlements. And I know I have run out of time.
Mr. LEW. In terms of entitlements, the President has made
clear that he thinks we have to continue to work together on
health care costs. The action that has been taken in health
care costs in the last couple of years was in the Affordable
Care Act, and it was scored by CBO to have savings of hundreds
of billions of dollars in the first 10 years and a trillion
dollars----
Mr. TIBERI. We can relitigate the accounting.
Mr. LEW. I would just note that the repeal of it has costs,
not savings. And I hope we can work together to work from where
we are going forward to find additional savings. We put $62
billion of additional savings in this budget, and the President
did extend his hand saying we need to work together. It is
going to be hard.
And in the 1990s it was plenty hard. If I recall correctly
when now Governor Kasich put forward a proposal with Medicare
savings, it was not something that reached bipartisan consensus
right away. In the context of a bill that did other things that
didn't reduce the deficit in a way that had bipartisan support,
it was a long time before a conversation got going. In 1997, in
the context of a bipartisan commitment to work on what was then
a balanced budget agreement, we could work together towards
mutually agreeable savings on health care.
So I believe that it is possible to work together. My whole
career I have tried to work together, and I think I have
succeeded on more occasions than people even sometimes
remember. In the 1980s and the 1990s, we did a lot of good,
bipartisan work. I think we can do it again.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired.
I want to thank you, Director Lew, for being here today. I
think all members have had an opportunity to have a question.
Thank you for your responses.
There may be an opportunity for members to send letters to
you; and if you would respond in writing to any questions that
didn't get asked or from members who didn't have an opportunity
to be here this afternoon, I certainly would appreciate that.
Mr. LEW. I would be delighted.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you again.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:55 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

MEMBER SUBMISSION FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Patrick J. Tiberi

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.020

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Wally Herger

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.016

The Honorable Charles W. Boustany, Jr.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.017

The Honorable Ron Kind

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5631.021


