- FIRST IN A HEARING SERIES ON SECURING THE FUTURE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY INSURANCE PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FIRST IN A HEARING SERIES ON SECURING THE

FUTURE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY

INSURANCE PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 2, 2011

_________

Serial 112-SS11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
76-319                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

SAM JOHNSON, Texas, Chairman

KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   XAVIER BECERRA, California
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
RICK BERG, North Dakota              FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page
Advisory of December 2, 2011 announcing the hearing..............     2

WITNESSES

Stephen C. Goss, Chief Actuary, Social Security Administration.    18
Virginia P. Reno, Vice President for Income Security Policy,
National Academy of Social Insurance.........................    31
Andrew G. Biggs, Ph.D., Resident Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute....................................................    43

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Allsup, Statement................................................    58
Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, Statement.............    61
Home Dialyzors United, Statement.................................    66

FIRST IN A HEARING SERIES ON SECURING THE FUTURE OF THE SOCIAL

SECURITY DISABILITY INSURANCE PROGRAM

----------

FRIDAY, DECEMBER 2, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Social Security,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:34 a.m., in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Sam
Johnson [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairman Johnson Announces the First in a

Hearing Series on Securing the Future of the

Social Security Disability Insurance Program

December 2, 2011

U.S. Congressman Sam Johnson (R-TX), Chairman of the House
Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on Social Security, today
announced a hearing series on Securing the Future of the Social
Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) Program. The first hearing of the
series will focus on the history of the disability insurance program,
the income security it provides and its financing challenges. The
hearing will take place on Friday, December 2, 2011, in B-318 Rayburn
House Office Building, beginning at 10:30 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Subcommittee and
for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

The Social Security Act Amendments of 1956 (P.L. 84-880) created
the SSDI program to provide protection against economic insecurity
resulting from a disabled worker's loss of earnings. The SSDI program
pays benefits to those who have worked in the past but are determined
to be unable to work because of a severe medical condition that is
expected to last more than a year or result in death.
Monthly cash benefits are payable to disabled workers and their
families after a five month waiting period. These benefits currently
average $1,070 per month for disabled workers. Social Security is an
important source of income to SSDI beneficiaries. According to the
Social Security Administration (SSA), almost half of families receiving
SSDI benefits rely on Social Security for the majority of their family
income.
After a two year waiting period, most SSDI beneficiaries are also
eligible for Medicare. On average, each disability benefit award is
valued at $250,000 in SSDI and Medicare benefits over a beneficiary's
lifetime.
In September 2011, $9.7 billion in benefits were paid to 8.5
million disabled workers and 2.0 million of their spouses and dependent
children. According to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), the cost
of Medicare benefits for those receiving SSDI benefits in fiscal year
2009 totaled about $70 billion.
SSDI benefits are primarily financed through the Social Security
payroll tax, but the Disability Insurance Trust Fund also receives
income from the partial income taxation of SSDI benefits, and interest
earnings on its assets. Of the total tax rate of 12.4 percent (or 6.2
percent paid by employers and employees, each), 1.8 percentage points
are allocated by law to the Disability Insurance Trust Fund, while the
rest funds the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund. In their
2011 Annual Report, the Social Security Trustees project that the
Disability Insurance Trust Fund will become exhausted in 2018, at which
point revenues will cover only 86 percent of benefits.
According to CBO, between 1970 and 2009, the number of people
receiving disability benefits more than tripled from 2.7 million to 9.7
million. During the same period, inflation-adjusted expenditures for
the SSDI program, including administrative costs, climbed from $18
billion to $124 billion. The reasons for this apparent growth are
complex, and demographic changes play an important role. During this
same four-decade period, the size of the overall workforce has grown,
the large baby-boom generation has aged into its most-disability-prone
years, women have entered the workforce and become insured for benefits
should they become severely disabled, and Congress has periodically
revised eligibility guidelines. In addition, wage levels--which are the
basis for both the program's financing and its benefit levels--have
also risen substantially.
In announcing the hearing series, Social Security Subcommittee
Chairman Sam Johnson (R-TX) said, ``Disabilities have a devastating
effect on individuals and their families, and Social Security
Disability Insurance benefits provide important income security that
they rely on. Yet in just seven years the disability program will be
unable to pay full benefits unless changes to the law are made. Through
this hearing series the Subcommittee will lead a much-needed
conversation about the challenges facing this vital program and
solutions that can meet the needs of those with disabilities and the
workers who support the program through their hard-earned tax
dollars.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the history of the SSDI program, the
importance of its benefits, the growth of the program and the drivers
of that growth along with program's current and future financing
challenges.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word or
WordPerfect document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by the close of business on Friday, December 16, 2011.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word or WordPerfect format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages,
including attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Chairman JOHNSON. This hearing will come to order.
Good morning to all of you.
The Social Security Disability Insurance program has been
the source of great debate before and since its cash benefit
program was signed into law in 1956 by then-President
Eisenhower.
Soon after Social Security was established in law in 1935,
serious discussion emerged whether to expand the program to
workers who became permanently and totally disabled before age
65 and to their dependents. While some urged action to
establish these benefits, others were concerned about the
subjectivity in determining whether a person was truly
disabled.
Not surprisingly, this debate came to a head in a post-
World War II society. In the mid-20th century, still living in
a world created by the American industrial revolution, if the
sole breadwinner was disabled, there were few options.
The world in 1956 is a far cry from the world we live in
today, where we are connected not just by highways but by
bandwidth, where the Internet has redefined our idea of our
local neighborhoods, where modern medicine has extended our
lifespan well beyond anything conceived by our grandparents,
and where technology has opened up opportunities that are as
life-altering as the Model T was in the beginning of the last
century.
I had a Model A. I tried to get them to put that in there.
The global economy has changed too. Like Europe, we need
foreigners to buy our debt in order to finance our government.
Today, 46 percent of our debt is held by investors outside the
United States. The debt crisis facing Europe, where bond buyers
refuse to buy more debt, is forcing many in the European Union
to make changes to their social benefit programs. Greece and
other European nations remind us of the price America will have
to pay if we delay reform.
Against this backdrop, the disability debate still rages
on. And, today, the Social Security Disability Insurance
program pays benefits to individuals with a disability that
meet certain medical criteria as long as they worked long
enough and paid Social Security taxes.
The continuing growth of the program is striking. At a time
when workers paying into the system has increased nearly 70
percent between 1970 and 2010, the number of people receiving
disability benefits increased by almost 300 percent, from 2.6
million to nearly 10 million. By 2020, the number of
beneficiaries will continue to increase by 18 percent, to 11.8
million. By then, total benefits paid will reach $188 billion.
That is a 52 percent increase over the $124 billion paid in
benefits just last year.
Experts tell us the program's growth is due to the changing
workforce, including the aging of the baby boomers, changes in
disability policy, and the still struggling economy. That
continued growth is putting a massive strain on the Social
Security Disability Insurance program.
According to the 2011 Trustees Report, without
congressional action, the Disability Insurance Trust Fund will
be unable to pay full benefits beginning in 2018. That is only
6 years from now. The path we are on is unsustainable, and we
are putting individuals with disabilities at risk if we don't
act soon.
This subcommittee, through this hearing series, will lead a
much-needed conversation about the challenges facing this
important program and solutions that can meet the needs of
those with disabilities and workers who support the program
through taxes on their hard-earned wages.
We begin today with an examination of the history of the
Disability Insurance program, the income security it provides,
and its financing challenges. Through future hearings, we will
explore the inner workings of the program, including
vulnerabilities to fraud, the criteria used to determine
benefit eligibility, how decisions are made in the appeals
process, and the good thinking that is taking place about
possible solutions.
At a time when Washington doesn't seem to be able to agree
on much, I know that all the members of this subcommittee agree
on the importance of coming together to ensure that this
program stays strong for those who truly cannot work.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Johnson:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.007

I thank you again for being here.
And I now recognize the ranking member of the Subcommittee
on Social Security, Mr. Becerra, for his opening statement. You
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for calling
this hearing.
Today, nearly every working American and his or her family
is protected against the devastating consequences of premature
death, career-ending disability, and insufficient retirement
savings. They have earned the protection; they paid for it. It
is called Social Security. The benefits, they are basic. Nobody
gets rich from Social Security. But they are reliable, and they
are part of why America's families in the middle class grew so
strong.
Today we are beginning a series of hearings focused
specifically on Social Security Disability Insurance, or DI. I
am glad that we are because I believe in the program. It is
vital. It provides irreplaceable economic security to those who
have paid in but are no longer able to work through no fault of
their own.
At the same time, let's be as honest as we are human. There
is always room for improvement. And that, Mr. Chairman, is the
operative word for these hearings, ``improvement.''
Are we here today as representatives of those American
workers to strengthen Social Security's DI program, to re-
enforce that can-do optimism flowing through our own DNA? Or
are we signaling retreat--retreat from the protections, retreat
from the services and benefits Americans paid for?
Without Social Security, about half of Americans who
receive its benefits would be living in poverty. This is
particularly true for Americans who have become severely
disabled and who often have families to care for.
Remember, workers paid for their benefits. Over its
lifetime, Social Security has taken in $14.6 trillion and so
far has only had to pay out to contributing Americans $12
trillion. That is pretty good surplus.
Let's be clear. It is not easy to qualify for disability
benefits, and rightly so. DI is usually only for people who
have paid into the system--not usually, it is only for people
who have paid into the system. And it is only available to
those with the most severe impairments--Americans who are dying
or who genuinely can't earn a living wage and whose
disabilities are disabling for at least a year.
When considering whether you can work, the Social Security
Administration looks at whether you can do any job in the
economy, even if it is not in your profession or pays a lot
less than your old job or requires you to move to a different
city. In fact, most people with illnesses and disabilities do
not receive DI benefits; only the sickest people do. How sick?
About one in seven Americans dies within a few years of
becoming eligible for benefits. The benefits are not overly
generous either, averaging about $13,000 a year.
If you simply compare the number of people getting DI
benefits 40 years ago to the number getting benefits today, it
seems large, but that is a loaded way of looking at it. A lot
has changed in 4 decades.
For starters, women have entered the workforce in large
numbers. In 1975, there were about 37 million women in the
workforce; today, 72 million.
Baby boomers--we all know about the baby boomers. I
certainly do; I am one of them. We are not at the age of
eligibility for retirement benefits yet, but, more and more, my
cohort is beginning to become disabled or ill. A 50-year-old
today is roughly twice as likely as a 40-year-old to be
severely disabled, and a 60-year-old today is twice as likely
to be disabled as that 50-year-old.
In addition, we have had this great recession. Some people
who held a job in spite of very severe illnesses and disability
have lost those jobs and have not been able to secure
employment since.
Once you take into account these demographic changes--a
larger workforce, an older population, more working women--the
rate at which newly disabled workers begin receiving benefits
today compared to the working population is below what it was
in the mid-1970s.
Having said all this, SSA needs to have enough people and
technology to do a good job of managing the DI system.
Unfortunately, today SSA is operating under a budget that this
Congress cut imprudently. The result? The number of disabled
Americans awaiting a decision from SSA on their application for
earned benefits is again on the rise, despite previous years of
progress in reducing the backlogs. Today, more than 1.5 million
Americans are awaiting a decision on their application for
benefits.
Some Americans have lost their homes, their families, and
even their lives waiting for the benefits they have earned. An
Army veteran in Maryland became homeless and in dire need of
medical care because her hearing was not held. A gentleman in
Texas had to file for bankruptcy during the 6 years it took
before he received the benefits he had earned.
Mr. Chairman, we have a lot to do. And there are a lot of
good people who paid into the Social Security system. For the
smallest share of those Americans who are disabled, whose
cancer, traumatic brain injury, or arthritis is so severe that
they cannot work, we have a Social Security disability
benefit--benefits workers can pay for while working and count
on when they can't work.
And for that reason, the operative word for these hearings
really should be ``improvement,'' improvement of the Disability
Insurance program.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Becerra follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.011

Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank
you, Mr. Boomer.
As is customary, any Member is welcome to submit a
statement for the hearing record.
Chairman JOHNSON. Before we move on to our testimony today,
I want to remind our witnesses to please limit their oral
statement to 5 minutes. However, without objection, all written
testimony will be made a part of the hearing record.
We have one panel today, and our witnesses who are seated
at our table are: Steve Goss, who is the chief actuary at the
Social Security Administration--thank you for being here;
Virginia Reno, vice president for income security policy at the
National Academy of Social Insurance; and Andrew Biggs,
resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.
Thank you all again.
Mr. Goss, welcome, and you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN C. GOSS, CHIEF ACTUARY, SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION

Mr. GOSS. Thank you very much, Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Becerra, Members of the Committee. It is a pleasure to
be here, and thanks for the opportunity to come and talk to you
today about the Social Security Disability Insurance program.
I would like to talk to you about a couple of things today.
First of all, as has been stated, the Social Security
Disability Insurance program provides benefits to almost 9
million workers today, a total of 11 million beneficiaries,
including their family members, to the tune of about $130
billion of expenditures--essential benefits for people who have
been found to be quite severely disabled and not able to work.
It is clearly true that the administration of the
Disability Insurance program, of any disability insurance
program, is a challenge and is difficult. It is not like a
retirement program, where we know when you reach 62. It is not
like a life insurance program; we know when you die. Disability
insurance is inherently more difficult to administer. And I am
not here to be a cheerleader, but I would suggest that, in the
years of experience I have seen, the Social Security
Administration and the State disability determination services
are doing a pretty good job of administering this program.
There are lots of challenges, though. I would like to talk
to you about two things. One is the actuarial status of the
Disability Insurance Trust Fund, and the other is the drivers
that have really driven the cost of the program to be what it
is today.
I have a slide, Figure 1 in the written testimony, which
gives an illustration of what the trust fund levels are
projected to be for the Social Security Disability Insurance
program.
As Chairman Johnson mentioned, we are projecting about 2018
will be the year at which the trust fund will become exhausted
for the Disability Insurance program. However, at that time,
continuing tax income will still be sufficient to pay 86
percent of scheduled benefits. And, more important, that
percentage does not decline very much. By the year 2085, we
project we will still have enough tax income in to cover 83
percent of scheduled benefits. So the program is on a
sustainable course; it is just a little shy of funding.
In order to fully finance the program, we would have to
have as much as a 16 percent reduction in benefits over the
next 75 years or a 20 percent increase in revenue or some
combination of the two.
This next slide, which is Figure 3 in the written
testimony, puts in perspective what has happened with the
Disability Insurance program. And it is the first look at what
the drivers of the cost of the Social Security program are. We
can break those into two kinds of drivers for the cost of the
Social Security program.
One is the basic demographic drivers, which we have all
talked about. We have heard mention of the baby boomers. The
baby boomers are coming up into our retirement system over the
next 20 years. But the real news to the Disability Insurance
program is that they are already here. The baby boomers have
already had maximum impact as of today for the cost of the
Social Security Disability Insurance program. From 1990 to the
year 2010, over that 20-year period, the baby-boom generation
moved from ages 25 to 44, where not many people are disabled,
to ages 45 to 64, where disability is highly prevalent. So we
have already moved into the worst of times in terms of
disability problems. The boomers are there.
And, thereafter, you can see on this chart that the cost of
the Social Security Disability Insurance program as a
percentage of our gross domestic product is about level, in
fact even declining slightly. So we are at the peak of cost of
Social Security now, and, actually, the cost goes down
somewhat. We are at a shortfall, so it is something that needs
to be addressed, but at least it is not projected to be getting
worse.
So why is this? Well, we know on the basic demographic
driver of population, we have already reached the worst. So
where do we go from here? The next driver that is really worth
looking at that is more disability-specific is one that is
related to something that Mr. Becerra mentioned. More women
have been working over the last 20 years, but, more
importantly, more women have been working consistently enough
to be insured for benefits under the Disability Insurance
program.
And you can see on this chart, from 1970 to 2010, the
percentage of women in our population who are insured for
disability benefits should they become disabled has jumped from
35 percent to 70 percent. It has doubled. For men, the
percentage has stayed about the same. And, at this point, men
and women are very close together, and, therefore, we do not
expect a lot of change in the future. We have had a massive
increase in the number of women who are insured for disability.
Men have stayed about the same. And, in the future, we expect
this to be basically stable.
A second driver that we can look at for the cost of the
program that has had a lot of influence over time is, of
course, becoming disabled. If you are insured, the next step
is, have you become disabled? We look at the number of people
who become disabled each and every year.
You can see in this chart how up and down the numbers have
been in the past, our percentage of people in the population
that become disabled. They bounce around quite a bit between
1975 and 2010. But if you look at the line for the males, they
have been around, 5 per 1,000 over the past 20 years, on
average, and that is about what we project it will be in the
future. So we don't expect a lot of change for the probability
of becoming disabled amongst men.
Women, however, used to be much less likely to become
disabled at any given age than men, but they have moved up.
Just like with the insurance status, women have moved toward
parity with men. We are reaching a point where women and men
are now similar. And, going to the future, we expect stability
on this too.
We have a chart here that gives some explanations of why we
have moved up and down so much in terms of the disability
incidence rates or the probability of becoming disabled. There
are many factors: economic recessions; changes in policy that
we will be talking more about.
But getting back to the basic drivers that have driven what
has happened in the past, we have had the basic population, the
tendency to become disabled, and the insured status, and when
we put all those together, they explain a lot of why the female
percentage of the population that is disabled, the probability
of being disabled, has risen so much over the last 20 years.
Chairman JOHNSON. Can you sum up?
Mr. GOSS. Absolutely, yes. Virtually done. Thank you very
much.
One additional change has occurred, that explains why even
males have increased their percentage of the population that is
disabled over this time. We have had a shift in our probability
of becoming disabled toward younger ages for both men and
women. Hopefully that is something we can talk more about.
These are the basic drivers that have driven the cost of
Social Security up over the last 20 years. And we expect that
it will be relatively stable in the future.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goss follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.021

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
We are facing a vote here in about 10 or 15 minutes. And
what we intend to do is go ahead with your testimony, and,
should a vote be called, it will be a long one and we will not
continue this hearing. What we will do is ask our members to
submit questions to you in writing, and hopefully you all will
be able to answer them.
Mr. BECERRA. And, Mr. Chairman, to clarify, we will go as
long as we can before the votes are----
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes, of course.
Ms. Reno, welcome. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF VIRGINIA P. RENO, VICE PRESIDENT FOR INCOME
SECURITY POLICY, NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SOCIAL INSURANCE

Ms. RENO. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Johnson, Ranking
Member Becerra, and other Members of the Committee. I am
delighted to have the chance to talk to you today about the
Disability Insurance program.
I will make the following points very quickly. First, the
growth in the program is due largely to demographics, and I
will skip over that because Steve Goss has covered that very
well. Second, people who get the benefits rely very heavily on
them, and, as a society, we need this protection. Third, the
eligibility rules for getting benefits are very strict, and
they do not appear to have become more lenient over time.
Lastly, the program does appear to be affordable out into the
long-term future, as the actuarial projections show, if we are
willing to pay for it. And, yes, there is room for improvement.
On the question, ``do people need the benefits?,'' benefits
are an essential lifeline to those who receive them. That is
nearly 9 million Americans. Nearly half of the people who get
benefits rely on those benefits for almost all their income.
The benefits, yet, are modest: an average of less than
$13,000 a year for a disabled worker, which is a little more
than the poverty threshold for one living alone. For a disabled
worker with eligible children, the average benefit is under
$20,000 a year. That is a little more than the poverty
threshold for a family of three, but not much. But the
disability program helps account for the fact that Social
Security lifts over 5 million working-age people out of
poverty.
This is insurance that people pay for through premiums that
come out of their paychecks. And the fact that it is insurance
is critically important. People simply can't save enough on
their own to cover the risk of disability. This is a risk that
absolutely requires insurance, because few of us do become
disabled but the results are devastating when it happens.
This insurance is also most efficient if it is universal
through Social Security. We all need it and it is important to
preserve this.
On the eligibility rules, they are very strict: inability
to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of an
impairment that, as determined by medical evidence, is expected
to last at least a year or result in death. ``Substantial
gainful activity'' in this context means ability to earn a
$1,000 a month or more.
The test considers your capacity to do any work that exists
in the national economy, not just work you have done before. So
this test is stricter than in private disability insurance
systems, in most cases. It is stricter than workers'
compensation and veterans' compensation, which pay partial
benefits for partial disabilities. And it does require clear
medical evidence to document the existence of the condition and
the functional limitations imposed by that condition.
As partial evidence of the strictness of the rules, we have
looked at research over the years about what happens to people
who are denied benefits. A new RAND study issued just this year
looked at people denied benefits and found that 20 to 30
percent of those who had been denied did engage in substantial
gainful activity.
What does this mean? It means that, for that 20 or 30
percent, Social Security's decision to deny the benefits was
correct. They can, in fact, work, according to the rules of the
program. But, at the same time, 70 to 80 percent of the people
turned down for benefits did not go back to work. This suggests
that many people who have applied for benefits and are being
denied do, nonetheless, have significant impediments to work.
This does not necessarily mean we should be liberalizing the
rules, but it is simply a cautionary tale about the notion that
the program is becoming too lenient.
A blue-ribbon panel of the National Academy of Social
Insurance reviewed all past studies of the program of denied
applicants for disability insurance benefits from 1964 to the
1990s. It found that fewer than half of denied applicants later
worked. The nonworking denied applicants were generally poor;
they relied mainly on income of other family members or limited
welfare payments.
So, to recap, the history of our DI outlays, as Steve Goss
pointed out, shows that, by and large, the program is keeping
up with our growing workforce and our aging workforce, as
boomers are passing through their high disability years.
Clearly, people need the benefits, and, as a society, we need
the protection. The rules for getting benefits appear to be
very strict. The program is affordable and sustainable going
forward if we are willing to pay for it. And, yes, there is
room for improvement.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Reno follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.031

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Dr. Biggs, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW G. BIGGS, PH.D., RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. BIGGS. Thank you very much.
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra, Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today with
regard to the future of the Social Security Disability
Insurance program, which pays benefits to almost 9 million
disabled Americans and, perhaps more importantly, provides
protection against disability to over 150 million workers.
Much of the increase in Disability Insurance costs, as
documented by Steve Goss, are attributable to the aging of the
population, as individuals shift into the years in which they
are most likely to become disabled. But much of the cost
increase is attributable to increases in disability over and
above what an aging population would imply.
These increases are puzzling, given that self-reported
disability rates recorded by the Census Bureau have remained
roughly constant over the past 3 decades. Given the aging of
the population, these self-reported disability rates, in which
individuals report whether they suffer from a disability that
impairs their ability to engage in work--given the aging of the
population, these self-reported rates should have risen. So we
have a puzzle. This implies that the age-adjusted disability
rates likely have fallen in terms of self-reported rates--the
opposite of what we have seen in terms of program allowances.
Lower self-reported disability rates makes sense, though,
when you consider higher incomes, improved technologies in
health, and less physically demanding jobs. Remember that in
the past many Americans worked in factories, mills, and mines,
which exacted a significant cost to their health. If there is
an upside to this shift to a service economy, it is that the
health of workers should improve.
Whatever the causes, the data seem to reflect improving
health and lower self-reported disability among working-age
Americans, and yet caseloads continue to increase. The
percentage of Americans with self-reported disabilities who are
in the workforce today dropped by almost half since 1980.
The key to reform is incentives for employers to provide
rehabilitation and accommodation rather than to shift disabled
employees out of the workforce and onto the DI rolls. Under
current law, a disabled employee represents a cost to employers
that can be eliminated if the employee goes on DI. SSA,
likewise, cannot provide re-employment assistance until after
an individual has been approved for DI, a process that can take
years, during which time the worker's skills and motivation
decline. At the crucial time in which a disabled worker might
be helped to remain a worker, no one really has the incentive
to do so.
Proposed reforms are designed to give employers greater
incentives to keep workers working. Disability reforms passed
in the Netherlands over the past decade or so have worked from
this model and have helped reduce what was among the highest
disability rates in the world to levels that are comparable to
those in the United States.
The lesson is that reform cannot think solely in terms of
the program's finances--of finding a combination of tax rates
and benefit levels that keep the system solvent over the long
term. A sustainable solution goes beyond simply saying ``no''
to DI applicants but finding ways to keep Americans with
disabilities on the job and integrated into society.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Biggs follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.040

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. I appreciate your
testimony.
I am not sure that we have time to go into questions. I
think we are voting.
Mr. BECERRA. What if we agree to just, all of us, agree to
just 2 or 3 minutes instead of 5?
Chairman JOHNSON. That is okay with me. Can you all agree
to 2-minute questions? Ask one question? We will try to do
that.
Thank you. I appreciate you all being here.
Mr. Goss, let me ask you, on page 1 of your testimony, you
say the 3.6 percent cost-of-living adjustment for December 2011
was larger than expected and wages grew slower than expected,
both of which may cause the trust fund reserves to exhaust
earlier than is currently expected.
Can you tell me how much earlier?
Mr. GOSS. Yes, I think I can, Chairman Johnson. Our
projection in the 2011 Trustees Report was that we would be
solvent, that we would still have trust fund assets in the DI
program into 2018, but only just barely.
The level of our trust fund assets was projected to be only
5 percent of annual program cost at the beginning of 2018. So
it doesn't take much of a shortfall to bring us back into 2017.
And it looks as though the higher-than-expected cost-of-living
adjustment, which provides higher benefits to all of our
beneficiaries, would be sufficient in and of itself to bring us
into 2017.
I might also mention that OMB and CBO are both, at this
point, projecting 2017 for the exhaustion date. But, again, at
that point, we would still have enough tax revenue coming in to
pay 86 percent of benefits.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes, there is not as much payroll tax
going into that system these days.
Mr. Becerra, you are recognized for 1 minute.
Mr. BECERRA. Chairman, thank you very much. And thank you
for indulging us here.
Mr. Goss, a question. Dr. Biggs pointed out the issue of
self-reporting. As an actuary, are you and those who work with
you to come up with these estimates estimating that we are
going to see a drop in the number of people who are
classifiable as disabled over the years as the baby-boom
generation ages into that range?
Mr. GOSS. Well, we are not really projecting that. And I am
sure that Dr. Biggs would agree, self-reporting is a tricky
issue, especially when you are looking over a period of
decades. The way people view disability and whether or not you
are disabled can change at a societal level over periods of
time.
When we look at the disability incidence rates that we were
talking about before, the probability of becoming disabled, we
have seen that it has been really quite stable for men on an
age- and sex-adjusted basis over time. And for women, the rates
of becoming disabled have risen quite substantially, but only
just up to about the level of men.
So we feel fairly confident that, given that men have been
pretty stable for a long period of time in their tendency to
become disabled and women, who used to have a much lower
tendency, have moved up to be similar to men in their
likelihood of becoming disabled, that they will probably
continue to be marching at about the same rates into the
future. And we are not expecting surprises.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you.
Mr. Schock, you are recognized.
Mr. SCHOCK. I will yield back.
Chairman JOHNSON. One minute?
Mr. SCHOCK. No, I am good.
Chairman JOHNSON. Are you?
Mr. SCHOCK. Yep.
Chairman JOHNSON. You don't question the disability system
at all?
Mr. SCHOCK. I got so many questions that----
Chairman JOHNSON. Okay----
Mr. SCHOCK. Why don't we start with----
Chairman JOHNSON. Wait a minute. Are you going to ask a
question now?
Mr. SCHOCK. Well, I mean, with 1 minute, I will just yield.
I needed 20 minutes.
Chairman JOHNSON. Mr. Marchant, can you question?
Mr. MARCHANT. Mr. Biggs, in your testimony, you say that
disability is a subjective condition and that government isn't
good at making subjective judgments, leaving room for
discretion, error, and variability. What do you mean by this?
Mr. BIGGS. Well, disability covers a range of infirmities
that can go from a slight impairment of your ability to work to
a total impairment. And, ultimately, Congress has to decide
where on that spectrum they are going to draw the line and say
that people on one side of that line are going to qualify for
benefits and people on the other side of the line are not going
to qualify for benefits. So it is a subjective judgment, where
to draw that line. And, obviously, opinions can differ with
that.
One of the difficulties, though, is in applying this in
practice, that we see variability in acceptance rates from
examiner to examiner. So it means that, even given the rules
set down by Congress, there is subjectivity in terms who is
accepted and who is denied. I don't think you can get rid of
that. It is just the nature of what we are looking at.
But one of the points I make in my written testimony is
that Congress has to be very aware that it is the ones that
makes the decisions. The Congress has been elected to decide
how we are going to run this program. And so it should try to
be as concise and specific as it can be in laying out the
criteria by which people will be accepted for DI benefits so
that we are not simply passing that off to SSA or to examiners
or to ALJs, because I think that is not their job. And so I
think Congress should give them as much specific guidance as
they can based on the values and judgments that it comes to in
terms of where we draw that line.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you.
Chairman JOHNSON. Mr. Schock, you may question.
Mr. SCHOCK. I have a question for any of the three
panelists. I am curious if any of you have studied the effect
of claims for disability benefits based on economic conditions.
In other words, when there is higher rates of unemployment,
more joblessness, you could speculate that perhaps more people
decide that they are unemployable because of a disability.
Mr. GOSS. Well, we certainly have seen with the most recent
recession, which started in 2008 and reached the bottom of the
recession in mid-2009, a significant increase in the number of
claims for disability for both the Title II DI program and for
the Title XVI, as you might expect.
There are a substantial number of people in our population
who have medically determinable impairments, and many of these
people, through force of will, through just being very, very
determined, work anyway. But, clearly, the nature of the
program is such that people who are in that position have very
strong medically determinable impairments. If they lose their
job, they will have a greater opportunity than somebody who
does not have a medically determinable impairment to come and
apply for benefits and perhaps get them.
The other thing that I think is really important to keep in
mind about the Disability Insurance program and medically
determinable impairments is that most of these impairments are
things that do progress over time. If a person has a medically
determinable impairment to a certain degree, which, as Dr.
Biggs indicates, may not cross the threshold of qualifying for
disability, a year or 2 later it may, in fact, cross that
threshold. That is probably why through the determination
process sometimes people get allowed a year or 2 after they
first apply when they were not allowed initially.
But, certainly, at a time of recession--and on some of the
charts we have, we show this--the number of people who file for
disability benefits and end up getting benefits clearly rises.
This is in large part just because when employment is good,
when employers are trying to employ lots of people, people with
impairments and everybody else find it relatively easy to get a
job. When we hit a strong recession, as we have now
unfortunately, with lots of people out of work, people will
still look for a way to put bread on the table. And Social
Security disability benefits are available for those who would
qualify.
But I would hasten to say that I do not think that anybody
would suggest that the criteria used at Social Security, at the
DDS examiners, and elsewhere is modified at all at time of
recession. It is really just a matter of having more people
apply who would qualify in any case.
Mr. SCHOCK. So is it your estimation that the same criteria
is used to determine whether or not they qualify, but those who
wish to apply goes up because they are out of work?
Mr. GOSS. Exactly.
Mr. SCHOCK. Is this one form of receiving assistance?
Mr. GOSS. I would suggest, I think it is clear that
everybody in our population--the United States has a very
strong work ethic if we compare ourselves to many other
countries, especially on the other side of the Atlantic. And
given that strong work ethic, virtually everybody in this
country, given the opportunity for a good-paying job versus
taking benefits from Social Security, will take the good-paying
job. So----
Mr. SCHOCK. I agree.
Mr. GOSS [continuing]. People who really find their ways
onto the disability rolls, I think, in general, as Virginia
Reno indicated, are people who really are having a very hard
time finding a job, and for a very good reason: because they
qualify with a medically determinable impairment for----
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. SCHOCK. So I am hearing you say you don't think
Americans are lazy?
Mr. GOSS. I would concur with that completely.
Mr. SCHOCK. I agree. Thanks.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you all for bearing with us. We are
in a little bit of a time compression today. And thank you for
your testimony.
And the Members will have some time to write questions, if
you all will answer them.
Chairman JOHNSON. And so I thank you for being here, and I
look forward to working with you and our colleagues as we
continue to examine the challenges facing this program and
solutions.
With that, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:12 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Submissions for the Record follow:]

Allsup, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.043

Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.048

Home Dialyzors United, Statement
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 76319A.049


