- HEARING ON THE TREATMENT OF CLOSELY- HELD BUSINESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF TAX REFORM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TREATMENT OF CLOSELY-HELD BUSINESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF TAX REFORM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 7, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

78-663                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of March 7, 2012 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Mark Smetana, Chief Financial Officer, Eby-Brown Company,
Testimony......................................................     8
Mr. Dewey W. Martin, CPA, Testifying on the behalf of the
National Federation of Independent Businesses, Testimony.......    16
Mr. Stefan F. Tucker, Partner, Venable, LLP, Testimony...........    25
Mr. Jeffrey L. Kwall, Kathleen and Bernard Beazley Professor of
Law, Loyola University School of Law, Testimony................    47
Mr. Tom Nichols, Meissner Tierney Fisher & Nichols S.C.,
Testimony......................................................    57
Mr. Martin A. Sullivan, Contributing Editor, Tax Analysts,
Testimony......................................................    76

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Carrix, statement................................................   121
Center for Fiscal Equality, statement............................   125
ESOP, statement..................................................   128
Kogod Tax, statement.............................................   132
NAHB, statement..................................................   141
National Beer Wholesalers Association, statement.................   145
RATE, statement..................................................   148

HEARING ON THE TREATMENT OF CLOSELY-
HELD BUSINESSES IN THE CONTEXT OF
TAX REFORM

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 7, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave
Camp [chairman of the committee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairman Camp Announces Hearing

on the Treatment of Closely-Held Businesses

in the Context of Tax Reform

Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the Committee will hold the second of two
hearings on how accounting rules cause different types of businesses--
specifically, publicly-traded and closely-held businesses--to evaluate
tax policy choices differently. Whereas the previous hearing focused on
financial accounting rules and publicly-traded companies, this hearing
will focus on the special challenges faced by small and closely-held
businesses that are less concerned with financial accounting rules but
must confront tremendous complexity in dealing with tax accounting and
various choice of entity regimes. The hearing will take place on
Wednesday, March 7, 2012, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office
Building, beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

Unlike publicly-traded companies, closely-held companies often rely
less on Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (``GAAP'') to report
information to owners and creditors, although there are exceptions.
(For example, a non-public entity with outside investors or a closely-
held entity that issues debt instruments might be required to provide
GAAP-compliant statements.) Instead, closely-held entities tend to
focus almost exclusively on how tax policy changes affect cash flows.
Closely-held companies, however, face their own set of challenges with
regard to tax complexity and uncertainty. These challenges range from
compliance with complicated rules on inventory accounting and cost
recovery to numerous sets of tax rules governing different business
forms.

The three major business forms from which closely-held companies
must choose for federal tax purposes are C corporations, S
corporations, and partnerships, although a number of other types of
business entities exist to serve specific purposes. While C
corporations are subject to entity-level tax and shareholders are again
subject to tax on dividends and capital gains, S corporations and
partnerships are ``pass-through'' entities that do not pay entity-level
tax--rather, partners and shareholders pay tax on their share of the
entity's income on their individual tax returns (and therefore under
the individual rate schedule). Companies must choose to operate under
one of these regimes, and this choice can have significant tax
consequences. Many commentators recommend modifications to the choice
of entity rules to reduce the potential distortions introduced by such
rules--with ideas ranging from consolidating existing pass-through
rules into a ``unified pass-through regime,'' making it easier for
closely-held C corporations to convert to pass-through status, or even
subjecting some existing pass-through entities to double taxation as C
corporations. On the other hand, tax reform proposals that create too
large a spread between the top corporate rate and the top individual
rate risk exacerbating these distortions rather than reducing them.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``Closely-held
businesses--including millions of small and family-owned businesses--
form the backbone of our economy, but our current Tax Code imposes a
variety of burdens on them that public companies do not face. Tax
compliance costs are especially high for small and closely-held
businesses, and complex rules often prevent them from maximizing their
ability to invest and create jobs. Higher marginal rates on
individuals, as have been proposed by others, would stunt their growth
even more. As part of comprehensive tax reform, the Committee must
determine how best to reduce tax compliance costs and tax rates on
closely-held businesses so that they can devote their resources to
innovation and job creation, rather than to tax compliance and tax
planning.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will examine how the Tax Code affects closely-held
businesses in particular, and how tax reform might improve their
ability to grow and create jobs. To this end, the hearing will consider
how and under which sets of rules closely-held entities should be
taxed, as well as general burdens imposed on closely-held businesses
such as high compliance costs and tax rates.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Wednesday, March
21, 2012. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail
policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries
to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-2610.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman CAMP. Good morning. Before we begin, I just wanted
to say that I was saddened to learn that a former staff member
of the Joint Committee on Taxation, Cyndi LaFuente, passed away
earlier this week. I know she was a valued colleague and friend
to many people in this room, and I want to express my deepest
condolences to her family and her friends for their loss, and
just to say Cyndi will be missed.
Today we are continuing our series of hearings on
comprehensive tax reform and how a flatter, simpler, and fairer
Tax Code can lead to economic growth and job creation. Our last
hearing focused on publicly traded companies' use of generally
accepted accounting principles, GAAP, when compiling their SEC-
required filings. For these companies, both earnings results
and cash flow are important to investment decisions and
performance measurement.
During today's hearing, we will shift gears to examine the
other side of the coin, closely-held businesses. The complexion
of these businesses varies greatly. They range from mid-size
manufacturers to local law firms to the Main Street restaurants
that sponsor local Little League teams. In this hearing, we
will examine the rules that dictate how these entities should
be organized for purposes of taxation, as well as general
burdens imposed on closely-held businesses such as high
compliance costs and tax rates.
The difference between individual and corporate tax rates
has an important effect on a business and how it is organized.
For example, if individual income tax rates are substantially
higher than corporate income tax rates, there is a clear
incentive for taxpayers to organize business activity in
corporate form. In addition, businesses that are subject to the
higher individual rates may face a competitive disadvantage.
There is little doubt that economic distortions can be
created by a Tax Code that tilts too much in any one direction,
and naturally one of the most effective ways to prevent that
distortion is to create a neutral Tax Code in which the
individual tax rates are similar to corporate tax rates.
This is an approach that the Republicans have taken by
calling for a top rate of 25 percent for both individuals and
corporations. It also mirrors one of the most important
achievements of the 1986 Tax Reform Act, cementing the
principal of closely aligning individual and corporate rates to
eliminate abuse and economic distortions related to business
structures.
According to the Joint Committee on Taxation, in 2007 pass-
through entities earned 56 percent of total net business
income, which is taxed under the individual tax rate structure.
Census data reveals that in 2008, pass-through entities
employed more than 54 percent of the private sector workforce.
Both statistics point to the strong role pass-through entities
play in our economy, and recent proposals have raised concerns
from many in the pass-through community.
For instance, under the President's budget and other
corporate reform proposals, the top statutory rate on
individuals would rise to roughly 40 percent. At the same time,
however, President Obama proposes to lower the corporate rate
to 28 percent. Corporate taxpayers would enjoy a tax rate that
is 12 percent points lower than the top rate faced by pass-
through businesses, and this will create more harm than good.
As we continue to consider ways to transform the code from
one that inhibits to one that spurs job growth, we must take
steps to ensure that corporate reform is not financed on the
backs of those who we have historically depended on the most to
move us out of recessions, and that is small business.
Adding to the challenges posed by a disparate rate is the
ever-increasing tax complexity facing closely-held businesses.
Unlike large, publicly-held companies that have armies of
accountants and lawyers, the complexity of the Tax Code
disproportionately hits small businesses, which tend to be
closely-held businesses.
The Small Business Administration found that small
businesses face a tax compliance burden at $74.24 per hour.
That is 67 percent higher than that faced by large businesses.
This burden results from reporting requirements, such as 1099s,
as well as complex accounting rules for inventories,
depreciation, and other business activity.
In addition to the many tax rules a business must contend
with, it is the first tax-related decision that businesses
make, the manner in which they should organize themselves. That
will affect all other tax decisions from that day forward.
Whether a business organizes as a C corporation, an S
corporation, a partnership, or some other form of business
entity, that decision should not be driven by tax
considerations. Instead, it ought to be driven by what form of
organization best suits that business and its needs.
As we move forward on reform, this committee should ask
when it is appropriate to tax business income on a pass-through
basis and when, if ever, it is appropriate to subject business
income to entity-level taxation. And given the importance of
pass-through entities to the U.S. economies and the prevalence
of closely-held businesses, the treatment of job creators is
critical to tax reform.
Our goal with comprehensive tax reform remains clear, to
create an environment that is ripe for economic growth and job
creation. And I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
about how we can best achieve that goal.
And I now yield to Ranking Member Levin for his opening
statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much, and welcome to all of you.
And I know the chairman always wants you to have your testimony
in in advance, and you all did that, and that was really
helpful, though in one case your testimony was 12 pages and I
am curious how you are going to do that in five minutes.
[Laughter.]
Mr. LEVIN. But it let us read rather late into the evening.
Again, welcome, all of you knowledgeable people.
Today's hearing on closely-held businesses covers a vitally
important topic. One of the measures of tax reform should be
how well it promotes economic growth and job creation. So-
called pass-through businesses represented over a third of
business receipts in 2008 and just under half of business
income. They are a major part of our economy and a major source
of growth and jobs.
Because pass-through entities do not pay corporate income
tax at the entity level, and because they range in size from
very small businesses to very large ones, they face a different
set of issues with respect to tax reform than do C
corporations. To understand how pass-through businesses will be
affected by reform, we have to understand--and that is one of
the purposes of the hearing today--who exactly they are.
It used to be that pass-throughs were a reasonable proxy
for small businesses. But with the growth both in number and
size of S corporations and especially LLCs, this identity is
breaking down. This is vitally important, among other issues,
as we debate the question of whether to continue the upper
income Bush tax cuts.
Some have sought to continue to draw a straight line
between pass-throughs and small business to justify continuing
the tax cut for the highest earners. But pass-throughs are
often quite large. For instance, in 2008, 64 percent of
partnership income was earned by partnerships with more than
$100 million in assets.
Small business income is also a small fraction of the
income that would be affected by an expiration of upper income
tax cuts. Only a small fraction, 8 percent, is associated with
small business employers.
This has implications for how this committee approaches the
universal, or nearly universal, desire to encourage small
businesses. We need to keep in mind that if this committee
contemplates the repeal of provisions that affect the cash flow
of small businesses, such as accelerated depreciation or the
domestic manufacturing deduction, in order to finance a
corporate tax reduction, pass-through entities will not benefit
from a reduction in the corporate rate. Pass-throughs also
would not benefit from some of the international changes that
the committee has discussed.
One area where I think most of us agree where we can help
small business is complexity. In reading through your testimony
and the excellent Joint Committee pamphlet, I think there is
plenty of complexity for us to explore. I look forward,
therefore, and all of my colleagues on the Democratic side do,
to your testimony. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much.
We are pleased to welcome the excellent panel of experts
assembled before us today. And as we tackle the special
challenges faced by small and closely-held businesses, I
believe their experience and insight will help us to shed some
light on this complex area of the Tax Code.
To introduce our first witness, from Naperville, Illinois,
I yield to the chief deputy whip, Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Chairman, I
want to thank you for extending an invitation at my request to
Mr. Mark Smetana. Mark is the chief financial officer of Eby-
Brown, a 100-year-old family-owned business, that is a
wholesale distributor to the convenience store industry. And
they are located in Naperville, Illinois, and they operate out
of seven locations throughout the United States. They employ
roughly 2500 employees, distribute goods to over 13,000 retail
locations, and have $4.5 billion in annual sales.
Mark previously served as the chairman of the Private
Company Policy Committee of Financial Executives International,
a 15,000-member company organization. And of course, he is a
proud graduate of the University of Notre Dame.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you, Mr. Roskam, and
welcome, Mr. Smetana.
Second, we will hear from Mr. Dewey Martin. Mr. Martin is a
licensed CPA, the sole owner of a public accounting practice,
and the director of the School of Accounting at Husson
University in Maine. He is testifying today on behalf of the
National Federation of Independent Business.
Third, we welcome Mr. Stefan Tucker, a partner at Venable
LLP here in Washington, D.C. Mr. Tucker is a former chair of
the ABA Section of Taxation and has lectured as a professor at
the George Washington University Law School and the Georgetown
University Law Center.
Fourth, I would like to yield to Mr. Gerlach to welcome our
next witness.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very
much. We are pleased to have today Dr. Jeffrey Kwall with us on
the panel. Dr. Kwall is the Kathleen and Bernard Beazley
Professor of Law at the Loyola University School of Law in
Chicago, Illinois. He also teaches at Northwestern University
School of Law.
He specializes in corporate and pass-through taxation, and
has authored many publications on the subject. He is an
undergraduate from Bucknell University in Pennsylvania, as well
as getting his J.D. and his Masters in Business Administration
from the University of Pennsylvania.
But what is extra-special about the opportunity to
introduce Dr. Kwall this morning is that he and I grew up in
the same home town in Western Pennsylvania. We are boyhood
friends. We were in the same Cub Scout troop, and we have many
memories of our childhood. And I have sworn him to secrecy on
any of those stories, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter.]
Mr. GERLACH. But we are really pleased to have Dr. Kwall
with us, and I appreciate the opportunity to introduce him this
morning. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you, Mr. Gerlach. And you come
very well credentialed, Dr. Kwall.
Fifth, we will be hearing from Mr. Thom Nichols. Mr.
Nichols is a shareholder at Meissner Tierney Fisher & Nichols
in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and serves as the vice chair on the
Committee on S Corporations for the ABA Section on Taxation.
And finally, we do like to welcome back Mr. Martin
Sullivan. Mr. Sullivan has served at the Treasury Department,
the Joint Committee on Taxation, and since 1995 has been a
contributing editor for Tax Analysts.
Thank you all again for your time today. Thank you for
being here. The committee has received each of your written
statements and they will be made part of the formal hearing
record. Each of you will be recognized for five minutes, and I
will hold you pretty tightly to those five minutes, for your
oral remarks.
So Mr. Smetana, we will begin with you. You are recognized
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK SMETANA, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, EBY-BROWN
COMPANY, NAPERVILLE, ILLINOIS

Mr. SMETANA. Good morning, Chairman Camp and Ranking Member
Levin and Members of the Committee. It is a privilege to
testify at today's hearing regarding the treatment of
privately-held businesses in the context of tax reform. This
hearing comes at an important time as America's businesses
continue to struggle with lingering economic uncertainty. This
proves especially true for the thousands of privately-held and
family-owned businesses in the United States.
As Mr. Roskam noted, I currently work for a privately-held
company. The current family ownership is in its second
generation, and it employs about 2500 people. The longevity of
the company has largely resulted from the family's reinvestment
of its after-tax earnings and traditional financing.
America's privately-held businesses are the backbone of our
economy. Forbes Magazine estimates that the 441 largest private
companies in the United States employ 6.2 million people and
account for 1.8 trillion in revenue. Recognizing the importance
of private companies is vital since any workable tax reform
must address businesses, regardless of their form of
organization.
All forms of business use GAAP-based financial statements
to measure financial performance and the financial position of
the business. However, there are fundamental differences
between privately-held businesses and corporations.
Owners of privately-held companies are typically limited in
number and have long-term investment horizons, years to
generations, whereas investors in publicly-held corporations
are short-term renters of the securities they own, frequently
trading them for cash. Capital used to finance privately-held
businesses are after-tax cash earnings and transactional forms
of debt financing. Public corporations raise capital via
offerings of debt and equity-traded securities to the public.
The owners of privately-held businesses typically measure
the value of their business in terms of free cash flows the
business generates, EBITDA or earnings before taxes, interest,
depreciation, and amortization, times a market multiple;
whereas public companies measure valuation in terms of market
capitalization, price-to-earnings ratio, and earnings per
share.
Most privately-held companies evaluate investment
opportunities on an after-tax cash flow basis, whereas public
companies evaluate the impact on the price of its stock. Tax
policy plays a material role in evaluating those investment
decisions for privately-held businesses.
The recent framework for business tax reform released
jointly by the Administration and Department of Treasury
strongly implies that those organized as pass-through entities
are advantaged in the current Tax Code over corporations. This
is simply not the case.
According to a report from Robert Carroll and Gerald Prante
of Ernst & Young, America's pass-through businesses reported 36
percent of all business net income but paid 44 percent of all
Federal business income taxes.
Furthermore, the pass-through tax regime recognizes that
there is a fundamental difference between closely-held
businesses enterprises and corporations, especially publicly
traded ones. Among them are:
Owners of pass-through privately-held companies are taxed
on business income, whether distributed or retained in the
business, at one level of taxation, whereas corporations pay
taxes on all income; and their owners pay a second tax on
after-tax earnings that are distributed to its owners, creating
a double-tax event.
Pass-through entities are flexible, allowing a
disproportionate allocation of earnings to its owners based
upon the agreed-upon equity contribution among them.
Corporations are inflexible in the allocation of earnings to
its stakeholders.
In order to fairly treat all businesses and provide a
consistent policy with which business can operate in the U.S.
economy, tax reform must address both forms of organization.
The stated goal of providing a competitive business tax
environment is important. However, it should not result in
discriminating against closely-held businesses by widening the
amount of marginal taxes the pay on business source income,
forcing them into an inappropriate investor/owner relationship
with their business, double-taxing their business income as if
they were merely an investor trader of the business, or forcing
them to pay a second level of tax on the sale of their
business.
Financial professionals are already making decisions based
on increases in marginal rates set for January 2013, expiring
AMT fixes, increases in the tax rate on investment income, and
an increase in death taxes on closely-held companies. Certainly
none of these prospects can be welcome at a time when our
economy desperately needs increased private sector investment.
In closing, it is vital that private companies are
recognized as critical for America's economic future. When tax
reform does take place, we hope that their importance in our
economy is understood and not penalized.
I want to thank the chairman and ranking member for giving
me the opportunity to speak before the committee today. I am
happy to discuss these issues further and answer any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smetana follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Martin, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DEWEY W. MARTIN, CPA, HAMPDEN, MAINE, TESTIFYING
ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS

Mr. MARTIN. Good morning, Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin, and Members of the Committee. I am very pleased to be
here on behalf of NFIB as the committee continues its series of
hearings on tax reform. I appreciate that the committee invited
me here today to discuss tax reform from the perspective of
someone who is a small business owner, a tax advisor to many
closely-held businesses, and a university professor of taxation
for 32 years.
I would like to discuss how taxes affect small business
structure and propose a number of ideas for reform.
Additionally, I will lay out some goals that I believe the
committee should adopt when considering the impact of tax
reform on small businesses.
Nearly 75 percent of small businesses choose the pass-
through business structure. And, by the way, that occurred
because of the Tax Reform Act of 1986; prior to that time, you
could have one level of taxation at the time of liquidation of
a C corporation. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 enforced double
taxation that pushes everybody towards S corporation status.
From a from a tax perspective, the pass-through model makes
sense for the typical small business. But while many small
businesses start as sole proprietors or as partnerships, the
liability protection that a corporation offers is not available
to these business structures. As a small business grows in
size, they are very likely to elect to change to an LLC or a
corporate form.
While there are important liability protections offered to
incorporated businesses, taxation that pushed C corporations
toward ongoing costs associated with that structure versus non-
corporate structures, such as filing articles of incorporation,
paying registration fees with States, drawing up corporate
bylaws, and establishing a board of directors.
Incorporation makes sense for some businesses and would
serve as a barrier to entry for other businesses. The various
models provide the business owner with more flexibility and
choice to organize their business in a way that best suits
their needs.
As I discuss in my written testimony, I believe that three
changes to the current law would provide additional flexibility
to small businesses in choosing that alternative:
First, allow corporations to own shares in S corporations,
or at the very least, allow S corporations to own shares in S
corporations.
Second, allow owners of S corporations to have fringe
benefits, just like employees of C corporations can have fringe
benefits.
And finally, reduce the holding period for built-in gains.
For 2011, it is five years, 2012 going back to 10 years. Reduce
it. Eliminate it. But take care of it. It is a difficult
problem for conversions.
Regarding tax reform, as the committee considers various
proposals, I would encourage you to keep these goals in mind:
Permanent reduction of tax rates. Do not create disparities
between the various forms of entities. Reduce complexity--big
one for me, especially in the classroom. And do not separate
the business owner from the business; they are really one and
the same.
Small businesses need permanency in the Tax Code to make
important business decisions, such as when to hire workers and
when to make capital investments. And one of the main sources
of capital for expanding a business is earnings retained from
business profits.
While small businesses would no doubt welcome the
opportunity to reduce individual income tax rates from their
current levels, at a minimum, NFIB members overwhelmingly
support extending the current tax rates. In addition, NFIB
members strongly support repeal of the AMT and the estate tax.
Pass-through businesses must be included in any reform of
the Internal Revenue Code. If the rates were to go down for C
corporations but remain unchanged for pass-through businesses,
it would put pass-through businesses at a competitive
disadvantage or encourage businesses to change to a less
favorable business structure simply for tax reasons.
Additionally, this could lead to higher taxes for pass-
throughs, perhaps as much as $27 billion a year.
NFIB strongly recommends that tax reform be pursued
comprehensively, addressing both individual and corporate
taxes. The typical small business spends about $18 billion on
tax compliance costs, some of it to me, a small piece. There
are some areas of the tax law that are significantly more
complex than necessary, such as the small business health
insurance credit, which requires me to do a five-page worksheet
in a tax return before I can even tell whether the business
qualifies for the credit or not. Ridiculously complex, in my
opinion.
Additionally, in recent years, the IRS and Congress have
attempted to close the tax gap by forcing small business owners
to become information collectors for the IRS or through
increased withholdings. Two such efforts, the 1099 paperwork
mandate in the health care law and the 3 percent withholding
requirement, were so onerous that they were rightly repealed in
2011 before even going into effect. Both of those requirements
would have significant impact on my clients.
Congress can build on the success of some reforms to the
code that have made tax filing easier for small business. Two
examples are the increased Section 179 deduction to the
$500,000 level, making it permanent, and expanding the use of
cash accounting, making it available to any business with less
than $10 million in sales. That would be a big help to my
clients.
Finally, do not think of the business owner as separate
from the business itself. Attempts to tax small business or
pass-through income and salary income at different tax rates
would have a significant problem for small business owners. The
recordkeeping required to determine qualified income and to
allocate expenses would increase the cost and burden of
compliance for small businesses.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify here
today. I very much appreciate the fact that the Committee on
Ways and Means is taking a serious look at reforming the
Internal Revenue Code, and I urge you to keep in mind the
unique challenges that face small businesses. And I very much
look forward to hearing your questions at the end of our
presentations. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Martin.
Mr. Tucker, you have five minutes, and your written
statement is part of the record.

STATEMENT OF STEFAN F. TUCKER, PARTNER, VENABLE LLC,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. TUCKER. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and
Members of the Committee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to appear before you today to testify in an area to
which I have devoted my professional career for almost five
decades--that is, the legal aches and pains that are facing
closely-held business owners.
I am the senior tax lawyer at the Venable law firm in
Washington, D.C. My practice specializes in closely-held
businesses, from the inception to the end of the business. I
have a teaching career; I have been teaching at law schools for
42 years, since 1969. I am currently an adjunct at the
Georgetown University Law Center and at the University of
Michigan Law School, and I teach business planning at Michigan.
By the way, Chairman Camp and Ranking Member Levin, I am a
Michigan native. I was born in Detroit. (Mr. Levin: You may
remember the Richton and Dexter intersection in Detroit; that
is where I lived.) I grew up in Flint, Michigan. I am a
graduate of Flint Community College, which is now Mott
Community College, the University of Michigan Business School,
and the University of Michigan Law School.
I have absolutely no political agenda today. My purpose is
to share with you the concerns that, in my experience over the
decades, closely-held business owners face on a daily basis,
and suggest Federal tax reform that you should consider to
address these concerns.
In my experience on an everyday basis, closely-held
business owners are particularly concerned with four issues:
first, growing their businesses, specifically capital access
and capital formation; secondly, protecting their personal
assets from business risk; thirdly, protecting the business and
its personnel from adversity; and fourthly, business
succession. And in fact, Federal tax policy impacts on all of
these concerns.
I would suggest that this committee consider four
fundamental reforms of the tax system that would enable owners
of closely-held businesses to concentrate on what they do best,
which is actually running their businesses. And these are: a
single-tax regime for all electing entities; secondly, an
entity-level tax for non-electing entities, with dividends paid
deduction; thirdly, simplify compensation rules; and fourthly,
tax rate parity. And everything else is detail. Let me amplify.
Okay?
First, on the single-tax regime, I would make this elective
integration. I would have it apply to any entity, whether a
corporation, a limited liability company, or a partnership. And
I would leave the choice of entity to be determined by the
business owner based on non-tax considerations such as State
law issues. Effectively, we would have a check-the-box. And
this is because many of them are concerned about State law
concerns, and should not be concerned about tax law concerns.
The guidance for all of these pass-through entities would
be the partnership rules under subchapter K. And in fact, I
would eliminate subchapter S altogether and, therefore,
eliminate all the traps under subchapter S of the Internal
Revenue Code.
I believe that anyone who works for the entity and is an
owner of an interest in the entity, irrespective of the size of
the ownership, should be subject to withholding, FICA and FUTA,
and receive a W-2 and not a 1099. And of course there would
need to be a transition period to move from that taxable
corporation into the single-tax entity.
Secondly, on the entity-level tax for non-electing entities
with a dividends paid deduction, I would let every entity
decide not to elect affirmatively to be a single-tax entity but
to be a taxable entity. But I would give them a dividends paid
deduction for dividends passed through to shareholders, which
is effectively what REITs do today but with special rules
governing REITs.
It would apply only to dividends paid out of the current
year's income. To the extent income is retained, I believe the
following should occur. If it is retained to acquire assets,
tangible assets to be used in the trade or business within the
United States, I believe that they should have a fast write-off
on those assets, no more than five years or the current useful
life, if shorter, thus giving them an inducement to grow their
business within the U.S., not outside of the U.S.
If the retained income is used to acquire tangible assets
in the trade or business outside the U.S., let them use the
longer current useful lives. And if it is later distributed,
there would be no dividends paid deduction, and it would be
taxed to the shareholders at their level.
I think there should be simplified compensation rules. I
think you should not have to worry about reasonable
compensation because, in a pass-through entity, you would not
have that issue. It would be a single-tax entity, and in big
entity. And, in big double tax entities, golden parachutes and
the like could be eliminated because that should be a
shareholders concern, not a tax/IRS concern.
Finally, there should be tax rate parity. The top rate for
corporations that are taxed and for pass-through entity owners
should be exactly the same. You should not have a gaming issue
as to where you are and come up with deductions that you do not
need.
Thank you very much for your time, and I am glad to answer
questions at any point.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tucker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you, Mr. Tucker. And I think
your personal background might even trump Dr. Kwall's.
Dr. Kwall, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY L. KWALL, KATHLEEN AND BERNARD BEAZLEY
PROFESSOR OF LAW, LOYOLA UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW, CHICAGO,
ILLINOIS

Mr. KWALL. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting
me to testify at this hearing. I would like to make a couple of
suggestions today, with a goal of trying to reduce the extent
to which the tax law distorts business decisions, and to
simplify the law.
As you are aware, there are three principal closely-held
business entities, corporations, partnerships, and limited
liability companies. In addition, there are three alternative
tax regimes that these enterprises can select from--two pass-
through regimes, subchapter S, the S regime, and subchapter K,
sometimes known as the partnership regime. I am going to call
it the K regime.
And pass-through entity treatment, of course, means that
the business does not pay tax. Instead, the income of the
business is allocated among the individual owners. Each owner
reports his or her share and pays tax at his or her marginal
rate.
In addition to the two pass-through regimes, we also have a
separate entity regime, the C corporation regime, that publicly
traded companies are taxed under. But in addition, closely-held
enterprises can also elect that regime, whereby there is a
corporate-level tax, an entity-level tax on the business when
it earns its income, and then a second tax on the owners of the
business when profits are distributed.
I want to focus on the two pass-through systems, the S
regime and the K regime. They both impose a single owner-level
tax, but accessibility and the operation of the two systems are
very different.
The S regime is a very restrictive regime. It only
accommodates businesses where the owners agree to share
economic profits consistently. In other words, each ownership
interest has to have identical economic rights, meaning
identical rights to distributions as well as liquidation
proceeds. As a consequence, it is relatively easy to allocate
the income of an S corporation among the owners. It is just a
straight proportionate allocation. Everybody picks up their
percentage share.
By contrast, the K regime, the partnership regime,
accommodates any economic arrangement regardless of what the
owners agree to. The owners can agree to splice and dice
profits and losses however they want to do it. As a
consequence, the K regime imposes on the tax law the burden of
unraveling the economic arrangement of the owners to figure out
what the proper tax reporting should be. That is difficult, if
not impossible, because the partnership does not distribute its
profits each year. You have got to be guessing in terms of how
those profits would get distributed based on difficult
agreements.
The tax rules attempting to ensure that the tax reporting
matches the economic arrangement are complex and difficult to
comply with. So by virtue of this situation, my proposal is
that rather than having two pass-through systems, the tax law
should have a single pass-through regime that applies to what I
call simple enterprises, and a single entity-level tax, imposed
on complex enterprises.
Now, ideally, all business income should be allocated among
the owners and taxed at each owner's individual marginal tax
rate. That ideal can be accomplished for simple enterprises,
meaning a business entity with one class of ownership
interests, regardless of whether that entity is a partnership,
a corporation, or a limited liability company.
In the case of a simple enterprise, all you have to do is
allocate the income and deductions proportionally among the
owners unless the owners elect out; I would allow them to elect
out of that system. And you would implement that system by
simply refining the existing S corporation regime, which works
reasonably well and has a long history.
The ideal of taxing the income to the owners, though,
cannot be accomplished for complex enterprises, meaning any
business entity with more than one class of ownership
interests, regardless, again, of whether the entity is a
corporation, a partnership, or a limited liability company.
In the case of a complex enterprise, my suggestion is that
you tax the income to the entity when it is earned. If you tax
the entity, then the tax law does not have to be concerned with
how the owners are going to split up the profits and losses.
And you can implement that by creating an entity-level tax and
effectively eliminating the partnership regime.
So in conclusion, I would suggest replacing the current
system of three elective alternative regimes with a pass-
through system for simple enterprises and an entity-level tax
on complex enterprises because I believe that would both reduce
the impact of the tax law on the choice of business form
decision--it would make it purely a business decision--and
simplify the law.
Thank you for inviting me to participate in this hearing. I
welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kwall follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much. Appreciate your
testimony.
Mr. Nichols, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS J. NICHOLS, MEISSNER TIERNEY FISHER &
NICHOLS S.C., MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN

Mr. NICHOLS. Thank you. Chairman Camp, Ranking Member
Levin, Members of the Committee, thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify today on the important topic of the
treatment of closely-held businesses in the context of tax
reform. My testimony today reflects the views that I have
developed over 30 years as a tax professional, working with
closely-held business entities, as well as my role as an
advisor to the S Corporation Association.
When I first started practicing law in 1979, the top
individual tax rate was 70 percent and the top income tax rates
for C corporations was only 46 percent. This rate differential
provided a tremendous incentive for successful business owners
to elect C corporation status. The devil's bargain was that
those lower taxed earnings were supposed to be taxed again when
distributed out to the shareholders, resulting in an aggregate
cumulative tax burden of 84 percent.
This tax dynamic set up a cat-and-mouse game between the
IRS and taxpayers, whereby shareholders sought to pull money
out of their corporations in transactions that avoided the
ordinary income tax rates, or to accumulate wealth inside
corporations and indefinitely delay the second layer of tax.
This is described in more detail in my written comments. The
only winner in this struggle was the tax lawyers.
The bipartisan Tax Reform Act of 1986 changed all this. It
altered the relative C corporation and individual rates so that
businesses were no longer forced into C corporation double-tax
status.
This allowed most closely-held business owners to migrate
into the more rational single-tax pass-through system, which
eliminated the need for all of that gaming that I described.
This system has worked well for businesses and the country in
the intervening years, and retaining these benefits will be
critical to the success of any future tax reform efforts.
Unfortunately, this favorable relative rate structure is
now at risk. Right now, the top rate for C corporation and S
corporation retained earnings is 35 percent. However, unless
there is a change in the law, as shown in chart 4 in my
materials, the top rate for pass-throughs will rise to nearly
45 percent next year for partnerships and S corporations in
certain circumstances, while the top rate on C corporations
will remain the same. There are also proposals for a C
corporation-only tax rate reduction, which would make the wedge
between C corporations and pass-through businesses even larger.
Instead, I believe that Congress should build on the
reforms started in 1986, including continuing to move
businesses toward a single-tax system, keeping the top rates
for corporate, pass-through and individual income the same, and
implementing tax reform on a basis that is comprehensive and
not piecemeal.
Focusing merely on the headline C corporation marginal rate
and broadening the tax base for all businesses unavoidably
increases the tax burden for closely-held pass-through
entities. Since pass-through business owners employ over half
the workforce in this country, lowering the marginal rate for
all businesses should be the goal of comprehensive tax reform.
In light of that, it would be appropriate to facilitate the
continued transition away from the C corporation double-tax
system for as many entities as possible, including maintaining
the holding period for the built-in gains tax at five years, as
proposed in H.R. 1478, introduced by Representatives Reichert
and Kind, and several other proposals that are described in my
written testimony. Adopting any or all of these changes would
continue the trend begun with the Tax Reform Act of 1986 toward
a more transparent, less artificial single-tax system for
closely-held business.
A couple of other observations. Probably the most important
reform for closely-held businesses would be the possibility of
extending and/or expanding the option of expensing investments
in capital equipment.
Most closely-held business owners intuitively evaluate
their business on the basis of cash flow rather than financial
statement net income; that is a matter of survival for them.
For companies without access to capital markets, expensing is
important.
Others have suggested forcing the double tax on large pass-
through entities, say, entities with gross receipts over $50
million. My written testimony outlines a whole host of problems
with trying to implement such an arbitrary rule. Here I would
just observe that if the goal of reform is to make American
businesses more competitive, why would you force more employers
into the punitive double-tax regime?
One last tax reform proposal is the possibility of forcing
all pass-through entities into a single, uniform structure. If
I were designing a system from scratch, I would consider doing
this.
However, we already have roughly 4 million S corporations
and 3 million partnerships. Any such proposal would unavoidably
impose substantial additional tax and compliance costs on a
substantial number of ongoing businesses, either the
partnerships or the S corporations. I do not see any benefits
that would necessarily justify such substantial a cost.
That concludes my oral comments. Once again, I would like
to thank the committee, and answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nichols follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you, Mr. Nichols.
Mr. Sullivan, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN A. SULLIVAN, PH.D., CONTRIBUTING EDITOR,
TAX ANALYSTS, ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA

Mr. SULLIVAN. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Levin, Members
of the Committee, thank you for this opportunity to testify. It
is a great honor for me to be here today.
Mr. Chairman, over the last three decades, we have seen a
fundamental transformation in how America does business. Pass-
through businesses have grown rapidly in number and in size.
This growth is almost entirely due to an exploration in the use
of limited liability companies and subchapter S corporations.
Here are the facts.
In 1992, LLCs were virtually nonexistent. By 2008, there
are 1.9 million of them. Between 1980 and 2008, partnership
revenue grew from 4 to 14 percent of all business revenue, and
over the same period, the share of total business revenue
claimed by S corporations grew six-fold, from 3 to 18 percent.
The United States has an unusually large non-corporate
sector compared to other countries. A recent study found that
the United States ranks second only to Mexico in the size of
its non-corporate sector.
On April 1st, when Japan cuts its corporate tax rate, the
United States will have the highest statutory corporate rate in
the world. There is widespread agreement that we should lower
our rate; the issue is how to pay for it.
One approach would be to eliminate some or all business tax
expenditures. This approach, however, would hurt pass-through
businesses that would lose their tax breaks and not receive any
benefit from the rate cut.
Pass-throughs depend most on two tax expenditures:
accelerated depreciation, worth about 8 billion a year, and the
Section 199 manufacturing deduction, worth about 4\1/2\
billion. Eliminating these tax benefits would be particularly
harmful to smaller pass-throughs for which cash flow is
critically important.
Many pass-through businesses are large businesses. Here are
the facts. In 2009, there were 14,000 S corporations with more
than 50 million in sales. They accounted for 29 percent of all
S corporation profit. There were 18,000 partnerships with more
than 100 million in assets. They accounted for 64 percent of
all partnership profit. Clearly, we can no longer equate pass-
through businesses with small businesses.
As the search continues for revenue to pay for lower
corporate rates, we should consider extending corporate
taxation to large pass-throughs. It is really no different than
any other base-broadening option. It would level the playing
field and raise revenue that we could use to lower the
corporate rate.
Now, some tax experts worry about the effect on small
business job creation if current rates are not extended for the
top two brackets at the end of 2012. I believe, however, that
the question of extending high-end rate cuts should not pivot
on the effect they will have on small business owners, but on
larger issues such as the need for deficit reduction, the
effect on tax fairness, and their effect on the overall
economy.
If I could call your attention to the screen. Well, I am
sorry, we are having technical difficulties. But the chart I am
referring to is on page--oh, thank you. Thank you very much.
Sorry about that.
The figure on the screen shows a box. The box represents
all the income affected by a rate change on the top two
brackets. Only 30 percent is pass-through income. Only 21
percent is related to pass-through employers. And only 8
percent is related to small business employers.
If we want to promote small business job creation,
providing tax relief to all income in that big box is a very
inefficient way to do it. By targeting tax relief to pass-
through employers, we can promote small business job creation
at a lower cost.
Now, to this end, Majority Leader Cantor is proposing a 20
percent cut for pass-through businesses with fewer than 500
employees. Unfortunately, this proposal has some serious
technical shortcomings, as I explain in my written testimony. A
better way to spur small business job creation would be to
provide a permanent tax credit equal to a percentage of wages
with a cap on the number of employees who can qualify. That
would create more small business jobs than a rate cut for high
bracket taxpayers at a fraction of the cost.
Finally, a recent IRS study confirms what most of us
already know: Small businesses are subject to a massively
disproportionate compliance burden. I think all of us on this
panel agree that Congress should aggressively modify provisions
of the code that impose a large compliance burden on small
business. That would provide significant tax relief, with
little impact on the budget deficit. And I believe the
proposals by Professors Kwall and Tucker on my right, about
choice of entity, would be an excellent place to start.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, for
allowing me this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much. And again, thank you
all for being here and for your testimony.
With most active business income and most of the private
sector jobs coming from pass-through entities, it seems clear
to me--and some of you articulated this--that for reasons of
competitiveness and fairness, that tax reform should connect
the corporate rate with the individual rate, that reduction.
And I think somebody used the words ``tax parity.''
We did that in the House-passed budget last year, and I
know that the President's tax reform framework that he released
recently, when connected with his budget, would raise marginal
rates on pass-through entities to 40 percent while cutting the
rate on corporations to 28 percent, as I said in my opening
statement, which is a spread of 12 points.
I would ask each of you to respond. Do you think it is good
economics to try to keep the top corporate rate and the top
individual rate as close together as possible? And what are the
risks of having a spread between those two? And I will start
with you, Mr. Smetana.
Mr. SMETANA. Thank you. I think that we need to recognize,
in the pass-through regime, you have got two sources of income
on the tax report. You have the earned income, wages, and then
you have the business income. And I think the big distinction
in terms of pass-throughs is that that earned income is
different.
It is taken out. It is used. The business-sourced income is
kept in the business, typically. And, as I mentioned in my
comments, it is the primary source of capital to sustain the
business and to grow the business along with traditional
financing.
So I think it is vitally important that whatever policy
that we adopt in terms of marginal rates, we try to retain as
much of the capital in the businesses to sustain and grow as we
possibly can.
So therefore, any rate regime which causes an increase in
the amount of taxation paid on that business source income will
retard growth, and it will retard the ability for those pass-
through entities to be competitive in an international and even
a national scene. So therefore, I believe that one of the
things we should try to make a distinction on is not where the
income shows up on a tax return, but what the source of that
income is. And I think that is very important.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. Well, I think it would increase my fees a lot
of they did that. I would make a lot of money because I would
be involved in the very difficult tax planning arena of helping
my clients pay the least amount of taxes. And it would really
harm the form of business that they wanted to operate in.
By the way, I played golf at Oakland Hills and the country
club at Detroit and couple other courses, but that is the best
I can do on this.
[Laughter.]
Mr. MARTIN. I think it would be very harmful to force small
businesses to operate in a form that saves them the most tax
liability when it is not the form they really should be
operating in. So I think that would be a huge mistake.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. I think one of the things we need to be aware
of is that small business pays an enormous amount of fees to
accountants and lawyers to deal with the complexities that they
have to deal with--the discrepancies in the law, deductions
versus capitalization, and the like.
I think a tax parity--and I am the one that used the words
tax parity--would help immensely. I think the top rate for
corporations that are not pass-through entities and for
individuals should be the same top rate.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Kwall.
Mr. KWALL. Chairman Camp, clearly, under existing law, I
would agree that it is very important that there be a balance
between the maximum individual rate and the maximum corporate
tax rate or else, we have seen in the past, when corporate
rates were much lower than individual rates, there is pressure
to use a corporation as a tax shelter.
However, under my proposal, I would not allow closely-held
businesses access to the C corporation regime. I do not think
they belong in that regime. And if they are outside of that
regime, then there are two independent regimes and it would not
be a problem.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. I would certainly endorse the whole tax parity
approach that I think everybody is advocating soon here. I do
not think there is any question that if you change the rates to
be significantly different for C corporations and for pass-
through entities, you are going to go back to the game-playing
that I did experience at the beginning of my career between the
lower C corporation tax rate, and the devil's bargain of trying
to get that money out in some form or another without paying
the nasty double tax.
Any system that enhances the gaming is--at the end of the
day it is going to start a dynamic between the IRS and
taxpayers that, frankly, just benefits the people sitting at
this table but does not benefit the country.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. SULLIVAN. As Professor Kwall pointed out, the gaming is
mainly a result of the ability of small businesses to use C
corporation status. And that should be eliminated. I look at it
from a different perspective.
In the rest of the world, the clear trend is to reduce
corporate tax rates to improve competitiveness; and then
because there are tight budget deficits everywhere in the
world, they have to make up the revenues somewhere else. And
where they are making up the revenue is increasing rates on
individuals.
S I think we have to look at this more broadly. We have
budget deficit problems. We have competitiveness problems. And
the rest of the world, when they have had this problem, what
they have done is lowered their corporate rate and increased
their individual rates. And I believe those problems can be--
the borderline can be policed with effective anti-abuse rules,
and very simple rules.
Chairman CAMP. Okay. I just have one other question. We
have had suggested by some, and I think it is in the
President's tax framework, that certain large, closely-held
entities should be subject to a corporate tax rate or the
double tax that comes with that. And they use the threshold, I
believe, of gross receipts.
My question is for Mr. Martin and for Mr. Nichols. Is it
not better to have fewer business entities subject to double
taxation than more? And if we cannot eliminate the corporate
income tax, would it not be better to determine who can get
pass-through treatment by using a business distinction, I think
such as Dr. Kwall described, whether the entity is complex or
whether it is publicly traded. And I would like to get your
thoughts on that.
Mr. MARTIN. Well, to me, the elimination of double taxation
would be an answer to all kinds of simplification problems. If
we allowed corporations to liquidate with one level of taxation
and made dividends deductible, as has been mentioned here,
many, many S corporations would go away because that is why
they were created to begin with.
And certainly I do not think that we should be using the
Internal Revenue Code to decide, based on a level of revenues,
who should be a C corp and who should not be. As long as the
tax rates have parity, I do not see any reason to have a
forceful choice of an entity for anybody.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. I would have a couple of comments on that, and
my written testimony deals with that in more detail. The $50
million test, for example, is extremely arbitrary.
Theoretically, you could have one dollar of additional gross
receipts that could trigger literally millions of dollars of
additional tax because you are in the C corporation system
rather than the S corporation system.
And as I go into more detail in my written testimony, you
are going to have to have numerous rules to deal with
simultaneous where there are multiple entities. We have
something like 440 pages of regulations of consolidated return
rules to deal with corporations that voluntarily group together
to treat themselves as one entity.
But you would effectively have to come up with--if there
were, let's say, two dozen affiliated entities in this
structure you would have to come up with rules that were at
least as complicated and probably many times more complicated
in order to deal with that situation. That's on top of the fact
that double-tax C corporation treatment is not the preferred
alternative, I think, on the part of anybody here.
So I think it would turn out to be much more unworkable
than it may appear on its face. And I would be happy to follow
up with more detail on that.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Levin may inquire.
Mr. LEVIN. Again, welcome. And Mr. Tucker, we will not do
it here, but let's compare notes; where we grew up, it was
pretty close, including some of the markets we went to.
Mr. Kwall, congratulations. Your five minutes was very
succinct, really, very much so. In fact, all of you have been.
And I think as we proceed with tax reform, which we must, I
think it is useful to have a discussion like we are having
here.
I went back and looked at some of the Joint Tax materials
that we received earlier, and it was really interesting. Some
of it was a bit surprising. For example, on the distribution of
these various entities by asset size, for C corporations, 97
percent of assets are held by those with over 100 million. So
we are dealing mostly with C corporations that are rather
large.
And it was interesting, that was more mixed as to S
corporations, quite a bit more mixed. But as to partnerships,
75 percent of assets are held by those with over 100 million in
assets. So I think we need to look at facts like that.
In terms of business shares, it was also interesting that
now pass-throughs, this is, I think, given to us by Joint Tax,
have 49 percent of the net income and C corporations 51
percent. And of that, the partnerships have the larger part,
though not a vastly larger part, of the business shares.
Also, there was a recent article in the New York Times,
based on figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics that I
think all of us should look at that. In terms of job growth,
between April 1990 through March 2011, it said that over that
period, employment at larger companies rose 29 percent while
employment at smaller companies rose by less than half as much.
But also, and the data will become, I think, clearer, they
said, later this year, that small companies seem to be more
nimble when it comes to various economic impacts. So I think as
we go forth and talk about tax reform, that all of us should
look at the materials from Joint Tax and the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.
Let me just ask you, Mr. Martin, in terms of the position
of NFIB, whose members overwhelmingly support permanently
extending the current 2001 and 2003 tax rates, has the
organization spelled out how it would pay for that extension?
Mr. MARTIN. If they have, they have not told me.
Mr. LEVIN. We are talking about trillions.
Mr. MARTIN. I understand that.
Mr. LEVIN. When they tell you, let us know. No, seriously,
it is a major, major issue, and I think everybody has the
responsibility of indicating how they would pay for these items
in view of our deficit challenge. So maybe you could ask them
to be in touch.
Mr. MARTIN. I will ask them to get in touch with you.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Mr. Sullivan, just quickly, I just want you to emphasize
this. On page 9, and your chart shows this, you say, ``Only
about 8 percent of ordinary, high-bracket income is generated
by small business employers. The bottom line is that most
income affected by the rate change has nothing to do with small
business employment. If the goal is to promote employment at
small businesses, providing tax relief to all income in high
brackets is an extremely inefficient way of achieving that
objective.''
Could you elaborate?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Yes. This data is actually--as people who
work through pass-through data know, it is very hard to work
with. It is very hard to interpret. There has been a new study
that came out in August of last summer, a technical study from
the Treasury Department, that made this type of linkage between
small businesses and small business owners possible. And so we
really weren't able to--this is new data. You have not seen
anything like this before.
And one thing that comes out of it is wealthy, high-income
households, most of their income has nothing to do with--it is
wages. It is interest income. Most of it has nothing to do with
small business. And that is what comes out clearly in this
data.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Herger is recognized.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Martin and Mr. Nichols, both of you mentioned in your
written testimony the importance of Section 179 expensing rules
for small businesses. Coming from a small business background,
I have long supported the expansion of Section 179 so small
business owners can write off their investment in the current
tax year rather than depreciating them over an extended period
of time.
Could you comment further on why this policy is important
and how small businesses would be affected if the expensing
allowance were reduced to 25,000, as is currently scheduled to
occur next year?
Mr. MARTIN. Well, I can address it from the perspective of
my client base. I think 500,000 is high enough. I don't think
it needs to be raised, even though I think NFIB would support,
I think, would support an increase in that expensing election.
500,000 is high enough in my tax base.
It is not just the complexity issue. The complexity of
keeping depreciation records is not a big deal. I don't have
one client that knows how to calculate depreciation; I do it
for every one of them. So putting it into software, it is not
really a complexity issue for me, although that is argued by a
lot of people.
It is the availability of capital. If you can get a
deduction for equipment that you are buying, you are much more
apt to buy it, for one thing. You are more apt to be more
efficient in your business, generate more profits, put
investment in the capital equipment industries. There are just
a tremendous number of benefits to increasing that expensing
election. I would be very much in favor of maintaining it at
$500,000.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. I think that is a critical provision. Frankly,
it was brought home to me early in my practice. A client called
me up. He had just made his first million bucks, and he had
quickly invested that million bucks buying capital equipment
and all sorts of other things he needed in his business. He
called me up and said, ``We have got a problem. My accountant
tells me I owe taxes.''
And I started to explain to him all of the depreciation
rules and that he does not get an immediate deduction for all
of that.
Well, he did not let me finish. He said, ``Tom, you do not
understand. I have no cash,'' and that, frankly, is for a lot
of closely held business how they look at things. That is a
matter of survival for them. That is what they look at. That is
how they analyze their business. That is how they analyze the
success of their business.
So obviously, having the expensing rules available at the
current levels or maybe even increased is very important, I
think, for closely held business.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
That is certainly my experience, and as I talk to small
businesses I do not think that these points can be emphasized
enough.
In looking at the data on privately held companies, one
thing I found somewhat surprising is the number of very small
companies that are organized as C corporations and subject to
the entity level tax despite the apparent advantages of pass-
through status. According to the Joint Committee on Taxation,
about one in four C corporations had less than 25,000 in total
receipts in 2009. My sense is that many of these companies may
be trapped in C corporation status by overly restrictive tax
rules for companies who want to convert to S corporations.
I would like to get your thoughts on why so many small
businesses are organized as C corporations. As part of tax
reform, should we look for ways to make it easier for closely
held C corporations to transition into a pass-through regime?
And starting with you, Mr. Smetana.
Mr. SMETANA. My opinion is that the fundamental reason you
see so many of them is that they are not getting good tax
advice. Really for an entity, especially a small receipts
entity, the double level taxation and the marginal rates of
approximately 60 percent really are inappropriate for
reinvestment.
The other cause that we typically see is just longstanding
small companies that were originally formed as Cs before they
had options typically do not switch. Built in gains
considerations are certainly a factor if they are on the LIFO
method of accounting. They have a catch-up tax payment due. So
there are economic reasons as well that I believe prevent them
from converting to a more appropriate tax regime for their
business.
Mr. HERGER. Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. Since the Tax Reform Act of 1986, I think I
have only had two clients come to me where I advised them to be
C corporations, and that was because of fringe benefit reasons.
There are some fringe benefits only available to C corporate
level employees, not to S corporate level employees, and that
was going to be a significant benefit to them.
Other than that, they have all elected to be S
corporations. There was a forgiveness year when the Reform Act
of 1986 was passed, which allowed people to convert without
built-in gains. The built-in gains burden is significant. My
policy is to ask my client are you going to retire within ten
years. If they expect to retire within ten years, we try to
elect S corporation and get out of it.
There are some cases, like a cash basis business, you
really cannot elect to be an S corporation from being a C
corporation because you have to pay tax on all of the
receivables in the next year. You really cannot do it. So they
are locked into that position.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. The time has expired.
Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Martin, you testified that an important simplification
measure for small business would be to increase the threshold
for cash accounting from five million to ten million in
revenue. Can you explain how doing so would ease the
administrative burden for small business?
Mr. MARTIN. Accrued income and accrued payables could just
be completely ignored. Calculation of the wages that are due
for vacation pay payable or sick pay payable, it takes me an
hour at least at the end of the year to do that for a client if
they are on full accrual method. If they are on cash method, we
just ignore it, do not have to deal with it at all.
So simplicity-wise it is a great benefit. The IRS has been
pretty, I guess, accepting of small businesses because they
passed revenue procedures for one million dollar levels for all
businesses and $10 million levels for some businesses. I would
like to make that $10 million for all businesses. It would save
my clients a lot of cash flow.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes. Would it require some other changes to
the code or just that?
Mr. MARTIN. No, all you would have to do is just that. The
phase-in last year, the last time they did it, they were very
accepting in terms of how the phase-in was done. It was very
easy to do, and if they did the same thing again, it would be a
huge benefit to small business.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Now, Mr. Nichols, you testified the proposal in the
President's corporate tax reform framework to increase the
threshold for small business to use cash rather than accrual
accounting from five million to ten million in revenue would
not benefit the vast majority of closely held businesses. Can
you elaborate on why you think that is the case?
Mr. NICHOLS. I must admit that I am not as familiar with
the President's proposal.
Mr. JOHNSON. Neither am I. Do not worry about it.
Mr. NICHOLS. But just to be honest, I think there are a lot
of closely held businesses that for banking and other reasons,
end up using generally accepted accounting principles anyway,
and they get used to using the generally accepted accounting
principles in terms of analyzing their business and their
profits and losses.
I would not want to say that it would not help anybody,
because there are no doubt situations where it would. On the
other hand, there are many businesses for whom I do not think
it would make a great deal of difference, and there are some
that will actually affirmatively elect accrual basis treatment
simply because it is easier to keep both their tax accounting
and their regular books on the same basis.
So in terms of the list of things that would be useful and
helpful for closely held business, I cannot say that this would
have no value, but I do not think it would be at the top of my
list.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since 1986, the number of corporations has dropped 28
percent while the number of pass-throughs has grown by 102
percent. The 1986 pass-throughs earned 40 percent of all
business income. Today they account for nearly 60 percent of
the income earned by all businesses.
Some have suggested that this change is in large part due
to tax considerations, as Mr. Herger noted, and others have
taken a different position, indicating that multiple reasons
exist for this shift, including the growth of the service
sector, ease of administration, and the fact that you can get
limited liability and still get pass-through treatment.
To the witnesses here, what are your views on the reasons
behind this shift? Mr. Sullivan, you touched upon this. And
what do you think about the trend and whether or not it is a
problem?
What implications does the increasing proportion of
business income that is being taxed as individual income have
for an issue that is close to all of us, and that is the issue
of tax reform?
We will perhaps start with you, Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. SULLIVAN. The invention of the limited liability
company was in the mid-1990s or the early 1990s, and that after
the 1986 Act just made it open season for larger businesses to
have the advantages of limited liability and the exemption from
the corporate income tax. The problem that this causes, it is a
benefit for these companies, but there is a disparity. Some
large businesses pay corporate tax. Some do not, and that is an
arbitrary distinction with no economic basis.
Mr. NEAL. The other members of the panel? Yes, please, Mr.
Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. I think the treatment of closely held
businesses is a matter of critical importance, but if we start
to focus on having different systems for the two, that is
problematic.
And I would want to respond to something that was said
earlier. If we start to focus and we essentially allow publicly
held and larger corporations to essentially retain earnings at
a lower rate, which is what I think has been suggested, and we
do not allow pass-through entities to retain their earnings at
that same lower rate, that to me is an arbitrary advantage that
you are giving to the larger corporations, and I see no reason
to do that.
Another thing is the pass-through system itself: it is the
most logical one I have seen. I have seen business owners
convert especially around the Tax Reform Act of 1986 convert
from a double tax system to a single tax system, and they
literally stopped spending as much time worrying about taxes
because they paid taxes once. They pay them right away. They
reserve for them, and then they are done. And then they think
in terms of their business.
So from the standpoint of moving forward on tax reform,
pushing toward a single tax system is very beneficial and at
the end of the day constructive in my opinion.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Kwall.
Mr. KWALL. In terms of the shift, I think a large part of
it was attributable to the 1986 tax reform and two changes that
occurred at that time. One was the parity between individual
and corporate tax rates that was created because prior to 1986,
corporate tax rates were much lower. It was aspirational to use
the C corporation regime to get the advantage of those lower
corporate tax rates.
Secondly, after 1986, you could no longer sell a C
corporation business without the imposition of a heavy
corporate tax on the gain. It used to be just one shareholder
level tax on the gain when you sold a C corporation business,
but now there is a big tax at the corporate level. It is a
capital gain, but there is no reduced capital gains rate for
corporations. So it is a prohibitive cost on any business that
thinks it is going to be successful.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. I think you are seeing two things. Number one,
the Internal Revenue Service recognizes the limited liability
company would be taxable as a partnership, not a corporation.
It started in Wyoming in 1977, but it wasn't until the late
1980s that the Revenue Service allowed it. That enabled your
client to have a shield from liability as a limited liability
company, even if they were managers, even if they were the
business people running the business.
Corporations have enormous risk of complexity, equity
versus debt, reasonable compensation, audits on a continuing
basis, and you need simplicity, lack of complexity and the
ability to run the business, not to be afraid of taxes at all
times.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Smetana, you had your hand up and then we
will come back to Mr. Martin. Just a few seconds.
Mr. SMETANA. Quickly, again, it goes back to the
fundamental economic principle of business. Privately held
companies, closely held companies elect this form and it is
increasingly so because they get to retain more cash in the
business. That is a fundamental economic driver of growth and
maintenance and jobs and economic activity at these
corporations.
I would also make a comment that whether you are in a pass-
through regime or a corporation, the entity is still covering
the tax. So I think it is an important distinction to make that
that cash does still come out of the business regardless of
which regime you are taxed on.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. The time has expired.
Mr. Brady is recognized.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
I would like to follow up with Chairman Camp's questioning
in favor of taxing income of closely held businesses only once.
The White House often speaks of the pass-through business form
as if it is some type of loophole that is used to avoid the
double taxation business income that applies to C corporations.
In fact, in the corporate tax reform framework, the
President recently proposes to double tax the income of certain
unspecified large pass-throughs. So my question: in this
struggling economy, as we look for companies to invest and
create jobs, what would the President's proposal do by
proposing double taxing some of our pass-throughs?
Mr. Smetana, and we will run down the row.
Mr. SMETANA. Sure. We actually did an analysis of the
President's proposal. First of all, the increase in the
marginal tax rates would cause our company to only retain
approximately 40 cents of every dollar of profit we earned
versus 60. That would certainly decrease our opportunities in
terms of reinvestment and growth.
Secondly, the provisions related to lengthening out the
depreciation schedules also moving us to the corporate regime
and the elimination of the last in, first out accounting method
for companies that hold inventory would create an additional
five to $6 million a year in taxes to our corporation, again,
reducing our ability to fund the business and invest in the
business.
And certainly the LIFO impact on us, on a business that
holds inventories in an inflationary environment over the last
three decades would cause roughly an $18 million tax burden on
our company that we would have to pay over some amount of time,
again, money that we would have to find either out of future
earnings or borrow against, which again would limit our ability
to grow and maintain the company.
Mr. BRADY. The President or at least the White House views
LIFO as some type of accounting gimmick, some type of subsidy
loophole that businesses apply to. It is a traditional form of
accounting, and that change would, in my understanding, hit
companies with inventories in a major way.
Your thoughts? Is that a loophole?
Mr. SMETANA. I believe that is a sound economic principle
if our objective is for companies to maintain a sustained
inventory investment, and simply put, the LIFO method of
accounting allows a company to reinvest every dollar of profit
on the increase in that inventory cost back into inventories.
Otherwise companies would have to find either 40 or 60
cents, depending on which tax regime they are, in our case 40
cents of every dollar of profit. We would have to either borrow
or take out of other economic activity just to maintain the
same amount of inventory investment.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Martin, on the original issue of taxing pass-throughs
in a double sense.
Mr. MARTIN. I have already expressed that I am very much
opposed to double taxation. I like to think of the word
``fairness,'' and when I stand up in front of my classroom and
I am teaching 30 students about the tax law, I am very quick to
tell them that certain things in the law are fair. Some of them
have no equity at all and it does not make any sense, but are
there maybe for social reasons or whatever. There have been
allusions today to generally accepted accounting principles.
Generally accepted accounting principles recognize what is
known as the matching principle. LIFO very much adopts the
matching principle which says that we match current cost with
current revenues. The non-LIFO methods of accounting do not,
and they are very expensive for companies to adopt. LIFO has
not been a big deal because inflation has not been rampant over
the last ten years or so, but there are some heavy industrial
companies that have been using LIFO for a long time. If LIFO
were disallowed, they would pay a heavy penalty.
Mr. BRADY. That is what I understand. Thank you.
Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. I think one thing that people forget is in a
pass-through entity, the owners are taxed irrespective of
whether they receive distributions and, therefore, very often
they are being taxed without receiving the cash, as somebody
noted before, but the cash is being used for the business. They
have elected to do that. They are willing to do that.
To penalize them either because they are bigger or to
penalize them because of some other reason would result in
double taxation, and they are already paying the taxes on the
income. But taxing the companies that grow these businesses
because the growth has been in pass-through entities is wrong.
It is just erroneous.
Mr. BRADY. At the end of the day the economy suffers.
Mr. TUCKER. Everybody suffers, the economy and workers.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Kwall.
Mr. KWALL. You really need a rationale for double taxation,
and under current law, the rationale seems to be public
trading. If you are publicly traded, you are subject to double
taxation.
So if the line is to be moved, there should be a rationale
for the movement, and you also want a line that is going to
work well and work as a good division.
I think public trading historically has worked reasonably
well. So if you are going to substitute some other standard,
you need to make sure that it is going to do the job and
actually----
Mr. BRADY. Rationale is not necessarily a prerequisite to
policy changes as you know in Washington.
Thank you all very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just two questions if the panelists could answer them
quickly, and some of you talk about them in your testimony, the
two questions. The Chairman has been quite clear that he
believes that we should provide comprehensive tax reform or go
in that direction. Some in this town believe that we could just
do corporate only and that would be fine.
If we could start from the left and go to my right, what
would your opinion on that be?
Mr. SMETANA. We need to have comprehensive reform, period.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. I agree we need comprehensive reform as well.
We cannot have divergence of tax systems. You just add
tremendous burden on small business.
Mr. TUCKER. I like being in the center. I am neither on the
left nor the right. On the other hand, I truly believe we need
comprehensive tax reform. It is time for it. It is really time.
Mr. TIBERI. Thanks.
Mr. KWALL. I would agree with my colleagues. We are
definitely in need of comprehensive reform.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. My guess is we are going to have unanimity on
this one. I do not think there is any question that
comprehensive tax reform makes sense. Comprehensive tax reform
makes sense, and anything other than that essentially risks us
going back to the game playing that we had before the Tax
Reform Act of 1986. There is no need to go backwards.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Let me put it even a little more strongly
than the panel has put it. I believe you should start with
small businesses and then move to the larger businesses because
I have been around a few years. There is a tendency to forget
small businesses once the big issues come up. To prevent that
bias from occurring, start with the small and the large will
take care of itself.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
I met with a group of farmers from Ohio yesterday. In your
testimony, Mr. Smetana, you mention about privately held
companies and their need for planning, long-term planning, and
these farmers were talking about that. In fact, as you probably
know, farmers sometimes plan not only decades but generations,
and one farmer in particular was distressed over the Tax Code
and how complicated it had become to him and his family.
Can you talk about the differences in comprehensive tax
reform--we can start again from my life--and how we should
apply the differences between closely held family enterprises
versus publicly held companies and the differences between
long-term planning versus short-term planning?
Mr. SMETANA. Sure. I think it is a very important
distinction because, as I said in my testimony, most privately
held or closely held companies have time frames that are years
or even generations, and so, therefore, there are several
considerations.
One is certainly the sustainability of the business, and
that is largely based on the amount of cash flow that the
company can generate on an annual basis and over a period of
time and retain in the business to sustain itself.
On the longer term basis, the shift in generation to
generation is extremely important, and you need closely held
companies, particularly family owned ones. Because of the
onerous level of taxation at the time of death of an owner, we
have created a situation in this country where the mere form of
organization creates a distortion between a company that is one
owned by a closely held family versus one that is owned in a
different form of structure to the point where the family owned
business, in effect, has to have enough liquidity or try to
plan if they possibly can for enough liquidity to pay the tax
at the time of death of one of the owners.
What typically results is that, as some of my colleagues in
FEI have said, we end up doing unnatural acts to try to prevent
a catastrophe at the time of death and the loss of jobs and
economic activity, and that typically results in diverting
economic activity away from the business to try to preserve
that.
It just do not seem to make sense to me that at a time when
we are trying to preserve jobs and trying to preserve economic
activity that the death of an owner should cause some
interruption in that activity, especially on a going concern.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. I think most of you received a copy of a study
by Mr. Carroll who basically identified the agricultural
industry as the hardest hit industry in this country if we had
different tax rates for businesses whether they are owned as C
corporations or are owned as pass-through entities, so a very,
very unfair result I think.
My clients operate from the checkbook. Small businesses
want to know if they have enough money to pay the payroll every
week. They are only thinking about succession if I force them
to or if they get to the age where they really have to or if
they have children who are kind of pushing the issue on them to
deal with it. They do not want to talk about it. They do not
want to deal with it. It is a closely held situation with
families.
Small businesses are on a short-run decision making
process. They fire people last. They hold onto them because
they believe in them. They trust them. When they hire them,
they have longevity. If you work for a small business, even
though there is very rarely a union, you have longevity with
that business. They support you in that position.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to follow along a little on that line of
questioning, just having worked in the manufacturing world and
its various tiers before coming to the Congress. I think that
the underlying premise in this discussion is we want to address
the rate issue, which is very real, but there is another other
tier of issues underlying that. I have an example I want to put
out and seek some comment on how we harmonize this, knowing
that our premise for discussion is a revenue neutral reform.
And it is very exciting to be part of the dialogue to try
to change the underlying process to stimulate the creation of
job, especially encouraging small business owners.
Let's look at the automotive industry as an example. The
OEM or their Tier 1 suppliers invariably are international
businesses. They will be located in multiple sites, integrated
information and financial systems, supply chains that transcend
the borders. Rates become a big issue. Those companies are
operating on an accrual basis by and large. They are dealing
with capital investment in a different way than, say, the Tier
2 or Tier 3 suppliers might be addressing the issues, to Mr.
Martin's point, functioning from the checkbook.
I have worked with a lot of suppliers that, in fact, did
that, very successful businesses, but they were much more cash
oriented. They were often cash basis accounting. They did not
like the idea of rates, but for the most part, they were pass-
through entities for all practical purposes because you
typically had a family or a collection of families that had
started this business and grew it, where LIFO is a huge issue.
Capital investment for machine tools, I watched a number of
businesses, two in particular, that walked away from, say,
purchasing five axis vertical mill technology because they were
uncertain about what their depreciation schedules were going to
be, you know, dealing with that aspect.
England has tried some interesting approaches in
harmonizing these issues at some various reforms. There is a
lot of talk around the world about different schedules, you
know, and how to deal with these issues. I am going to premise
my question as someone who wants to see us go got a territorial
system, have the ability of this rate issue to be addressed,
but what I would like you to comment on in terms of reducing
complexity, especially for small business: how do we address
this issue of maybe giving the smaller businesses some options
to address the issues like LIFO, to address the issues like
depreciation, to encourage capital investment when they are
functioning on the checkbook or cash basis and still hit
revenue neutrality?
Maybe start with Mr. Smetana first and then open it up to
the panel.
Mr. SMETANA. Sure. A couple of quick comments. First of
all, I think there are a lot of allusions to the size of the
corporation, and I will just say I think in the case of
deciding policy, in this case size does not matter. It is
really the form of organization and what we are trying to do
with the economic activity within that business.
You know, me and my colleagues compete with companies of
different sizes. So I think the level playing field is to
create all businesses, regardless of their form or size to be
able to have the same advantage.
With respect to simplicity though, I do think that we can
recognize that smaller formed companies do have some more
complexities than larger ones in terms of maintaining current
Tax Code and compliance, and I do think that it would be
appropriate to look at levels and limits that are appropriate
and typically used by smaller entities to have access to
quicker deductions than perhaps larger companies with respect
to recognizing that fact without changing the fundamental text
related to the form of the organization.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you.
Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. I would say that I do not know how to make it
revenue neutral, but for a small business to have----
Mr. DAVIS. Let's imagine CBO actually has formularies that
reflect the way you actually do business for a moment.
Mr. MARTIN. Okay. When I was a representative to the White
House Conference on Small Business in 1986, the number one
issue voted by the representatives there was to have no changes
in the tax laws for two years. Small businesses would love to
have no changes in the tax law for two years or more in terms
of managing their business. That just gets it out of their mind
completely. They do not have to worry about it. They do not
have to call me once a month to ask me what the issues are.
I would say adopt the changes you are going to adopt, and
then somehow put limitations on some future Congress. I know
that is not something that is done, but small business would
love to have that fixed right.
Mr. DAVIS. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. I would like to concur with what was just said.
One of the worst things that we face every single day is not
knowing what the law is going to be next year or the year
after, and therefore, are you embarrassed because you made an
investment this year and only got to write off 25,000, but if
you had just waited until next year, it would have been 100,000
or 500,000?
You need to bring stability into the Internal Revenue Code
for all business.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
We do have the prospect that we are facing of all tax
policy expiring at the end of this year. So we really do not
have the option of not doing anything.
Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So-called flow-through entities or those businesses that
pay taxes through individual codes play a huge role in our
economy, as you all know. Fifty-six percent of the jobs in
Washington State where I am from are sustained and created by
these businesses, and they account for 69 million people across
the United States, and they cannot be neglected in the tax
reform effort that we are involved in here.
So, Mr. Nichols, first I want to thank you for your
comments supporting the extension of the five-year built in
gains holding period. This shorter, more reasonable holding
period unfortunately expired along with other tax extenders at
the end of last year, and as you mentioned, I have introduced
bipartisan legislation, H.R. 1478, with Mr. Kind from
Wisconsin, to improve many of the rules governing S
corporations, including making permanent an extension of the
five-year built in gains holding period.
And, Mr. Martin, you mentioned this is one of the issues
that you pointed out would be very important for us to address
going forward also.
The IRS statistics suggest that thousands of U.S.
businesses should be sitting on appreciated assets that could
be put to better use. In an economy short of capital, it just
makes sense to allow these businesses increased access to their
own capital.
Mr. Nichols, can you explain the purpose of the built in
gains tax and why the five-year holding period is more
reasonable than the ten-year holding period?
Mr. NICHOLS. Well, the built-in gains tax was originally
adopted primarily to prevent people in C corporation status to
convert and avoid essentially the double tax on the sale of the
business, and I have never been convinced that paying only one
tax is a tax loophole and paying two taxes is appropriate
policy, but that was the policy, it seems, behind the built-in
gains tax.
In terms of how the built-in gains tax works to free up
capital, essentially I have got a situation. Fortunately it is
a client who has already been an S corporation for a while, but
they have got a piece of property, and they want to buy a new,
bigger piece of property, expand their business, hire more
employees. If they were subject to the built-in gains tax, what
they would have to do is sell their old property, pay double
tax on that property, and then essentially turn around and
invest those proceeds in the new property.
Now, they cannot qualify for Section 1031, the like-kind
exchange rules, because they have got to operate their old
facility for a period of time before they can move into the new
facility. And so as a consequence, if they were seriously
considering doing exactly that, but if they were in a position
where they would have to pay double tax, which is what the
built in gains tax regime is, they would essentially be trapped
into that for five years or ten years.
Obviously, five years is a heck of a lot better than ten
years in terms of waiting to utilize this capital.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you.
Mr. Martin, would you like to comment?
Mr. MARTIN. I had a client that I asked when he was going
to plan to retire at age 50 and he said age 60, and then at age
55, he decided that he had had enough. He had converted on my
advice at age 50 to be an S corporation, and I said to him at
the time, ``You know, when you convert, you cannot sell your
principal piece of real estate here which is fully depreciated
and worth a lot of money for ten years.''
And that is what happened. He sold the rest of his
business. He did not sell the real estate until the ten-year
time frame was up. That was not good for him. That was not good
for the economy. It was not good for the buyer who bought the
piece of property, but here was the tax law dictating what
would happen in his operation of his business. It was kind of
crazy.
You know, five years is a whole lot better than ten years.
Five years kind of takes into account unusual things that
happen unbeknownst to all of us.
Mr. REICHERT. Well, thank you, gentlemen, for your answers,
and I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Roskam is recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, Mr. Smetana, thank you for coming at our
invitation to give a perspective.
In our district in suburban Chicago, we have got a
tremendous amount of pass-through entities who are job creators
and employers and just a tremendous amount. I was at a company
not long ago touring the plant floor, and the owner said to me,
``Congressman, the smart move is for me to put three-quarters
of a million dollars into this production line, but I am not
going to do it, and one of the reasons, not the only reason,
but one of the reasons,'' he said, ``was Washington tells me I
am rich, and I am not going to do it.''
You mentioned sort of the long-term planning in terms of
the pass-throughs. You mentioned the generational aspect. Could
you reflect on that, just be a little bit more expansive on it?
What is the impact when Washington tells Eby-Brown you are
rich?
You know, Congressional Research Service a couple of weeks
ago reported that nearly 60 percent of all business income is
reported through the individual income tax system, and 62
percent of that amount is reported by those that the President
calls wealthy.
Can you give us the lay of the land on how that has an
impact at your end of the rainbow?
Mr. SMETANA. Sure. As I said, you know, we were a family
owned company for, you know, decades, and we were not big at
one time, but we became big, and the reason we became big is
because the family was able to reinvest its after-tax cash
flows back into the business, with a little help from the banks
from time to time to finance the business to grow.
So you know, the fact that we are big and the fact that the
family has been able to commit to the business and grow its
employee base, grow its asset base, grow economic activity, you
know, is really the fundamental point about it. The fact that
we are large should not really dictate whether the family can
keep 40 cents or 60 cents of its profits. In fact, I would
clearly tell you that if the family only got to keep 40 cents
of its profits, we would be a smaller business than we are
today with less employees, less assets, less economic activity.
I also think that fundamentally, as Mr. Kwall talked about,
there is an important distinction between the double taxation
regime over corporations which is mostly public formed
corporation. An investor in a public corporation is really a
trader of securities, and if the government wants to tax that
trading activity as a separate economic activity, I suppose it
can decide to do so.
But to try to equate that with the income derived out of a
closely held business which is left in the business; closely
held owners do not actively trade the business as a holder of a
C corporation stock does, a publicly held C stock; so,
therefore, I think you have to make that distinction in tax
policy, and I think that distinction helps those privately and
closely held investors make decisions to reinvest in their
business.
Clearly, from our perspective as we look at our business
planning, the most important things to us are the ability to
retain as much cash as we can in the business on an after-tax
basis and the certainty which we have when looking out forward
when we make decisions. And our investment decisions in
business are not typically a quarter at a time or a year at a
time, but multi-year in nature.
It has been very difficult over the last several years to
make those decisions, and I would submit to you that many
investment decisions are not being made because the fear of the
marginal rate increase, which has been delayed from time to
time, but only at the last minute, which has really put a crimp
in making good economic decisions for the long term.
Mr. ROSKAM. This Committee and this Congress in the coming
months are going to have decisions to make as it relates to the
extension of the 2001 and the 2003 tax cuts and those rates.
What is the impact on your business if those individual rates
go up?
Mr. SMETANA. As I mentioned before, Mr. Roskam, we are
facing an increase in our marginal rates of four or five
percent. Certainly under the President's proposal, if we lose
AMT preferences, it could go higher, especially with sourced
income from higher taxed States.
We have been able to take advantage of the faster
depreciation rules over the last few years, and our owners have
invested tens of millions of dollars back in the business
because the after-tax cash flows of those investment decisions
have been aided.
So from our perspective it would reduce our after-tax cash
flows, and it would certainly make an impact on the kinds of
investment decisions that we make going forward.
Mr. ROSKAM. And the employee opportunities, I would assume?
Mr. SMETANA. Absolutely. We have been fortunate that we
have been able to grow our business. We are in a relatively
stable industry, and our business has been successful. We have
been able to add jobs over the last several years and increase
that economic activity accordingly.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you for waving the Sixth District flag. I
yield back.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Gerlach is recognized.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question really is sort of a follow-up to what Mr.
Roskam just asked. If I heard correctly from the panel a number
of minutes ago, there seemed to be some general consensus that
in our tax reform efforts we ought to sort of try to align the
maximum marginal rate for corporations and individuals and make
that as consistent and comparable as possible so that you do
not have an inappropriate shift of entities.
If that is the case, there seems to be a developing
consensus in Congress and within the Administration that
perhaps the maximum tax rate for corporations ought to be
around 25 percent.
The House passed a budget last spring calling for a maximum
rate of 25 percent. I think just looking out ahead, perhaps we
will do the same again this spring. The President just put
forward a corporate reform proposal which I think is a maximum
rate of 28 percent with maybe on manufacturers of 25 percent,
so clearly within the same ballpark of discussion.
So based upon that, if we can have all the panelists answer
the question, would you agree then that the maximum individual
rate of taxation under any tax reform proposal ought to be 25
percent?
And just start maybe with Mr. Sullivan. You are the
closest, and then just work up the panel.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Well, I think I am going to be the contrarian
here. I think this line-up of the rates, which my attorney and
CPA friends obsess on, is the tail wagging the dog. We have
larger considerations: deficit reduction and competitiveness.
We need to lower our corporate rate. When we do that, we have
to find revenue elsewhere.
One place that you may have to look is at raising taxes on
individuals to make up that difference. We do not want to do
it, but there are not many options.
Mr. NICHOLS. I would go in the other direction. It is
absolutely critical on a marginal basis that we have a low
marginal rate, and I think we proved up until the Tax Reform
Act of 1986 that if you have varying rates for varying types of
income, that it is going to essentially cause tax lawyers and
tax accountants to intermediate between those two rates to
prevent the government from essentially getting the full
benefits of the various differing rates that it wants to
achieve.
The simpler the tax system you have the better. I would
make one other important point, and this is virtually universal
for the taxpayers that I represent. Their biggest fear is that
there is going to be an attempt to essentially solve all of our
fiscal problems and, frankly, many of the world's problems, by
essentially, quote, taxing the rich and they today worry about
how much their marginal income tax rates are going to go up.
What you need to have is a system whereby everybody is
paying taxes. Everybody is paying taxes maybe not at the same
rate, but at similar rates, and everybody is benefitting from
government so that essentially there is buy-in both as far as
revenue and also as far as expenses so that people are
similarly motivated.
Mr. KWALL. I do not really have a view as to what the rate
should be, but if current law continues, it is clearly
destabilizing to have a corporate rate that is significantly
lower than the individual tax rate. We have been there before,
and what happens is it puts a heavy burden on the government to
preclude taxpayers from trying to shift income to corporations
and to resurrect penalty taxes that require the business to
justify its needs for its earnings. The Government has to find
these cases and try to pursue them to avoid the tax avoidance.
Again, in my view the better solution is to keep closely
held businesses out of the C corporation form. If you do that,
then you have really got two separate systems, but if you are
not going to do that, then I would agree that you want to
maintain that parity.
Mr. TUCKER. I am an advocate of parity. I would also like
to remind everyone that we also have an estate and gift tax.
Whatever these people have earned and have left after taxes is
going to be subject to an estate or gift tax, and you go back,
unless the law is changed rather quickly for next year, to
about a million dollar exemption and a 55 percent estate tax
rate, and I think you need to take that into account as well
for small businesses and small business owners.
They are not rich at that kind of level. They are simply
not.
Mr. MARTIN. Well, we have expressed several times that
parity is important. I do not know what the rate should be
either, but as close as it can possibly be I think is better
for business planning, and let's have some permanency, like the
extenders that we deal with every year or every two years.
Let's do some things on a permanent basis so small businesses
can plan.
Mr. SMETANA. I think you are in an unenviable position of
having to try to correct a fiscal situation with only working
at one side of the equation. As financial professionals, we can
hardly ever turn around our companies and improve them if we
are only dealing with revenue and not dealing with spending.
But to your point, I think the policy and goal of our
Government should be to take the least amount of taxes from its
people to sustain the Government for the spending that it feels
it is required to do. So whether that is 25, 28, 15 percent, I
think you have got to look at it on balance with the total
expenditures of this Government and what we should be providing
to our citizens.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our witnesses today.
As a guy that has been in business 35 years and started in
1976, I remember my first entity was a C corporation, and then
they came to me, the tax professionals, in the 1980s with an S
corporation because it gave you the liability protection, and
then they came to me and all of our entities lately have been
LLCs because it gives you flexibility and distributions and all
of the other things.
But I want to make one point that Mr. Smetana mentioned.
Let's just take a bank or a lot of times you have got a lot of
people who are franchisors or they are dealers, and the
factories or the banks require even if you made 500 and even if
you want to take it out, you cannot take it out.
Now, many people believe that in the end they might make
500, and they have got 100 employees. That is a lot of exposure
and risk, but they might take 100 out and leave 400 in, but
many times my experience has been that people require you to
keep the capital in. So it is almost like a C corporation.
Now, all of that being said, I hear up here that, you know,
all we talk about, even the White House and the Administration
talk about lowering the corporate income tax to 27 percent or,
our thoughts here in terms of the corporate to be more
competitive in the world 25, but again, I want to get back to
the point. I do not know how you can lower the taxes for
corporate entities without dealing with Sub S and LLCs because
of their growth. Because people will go back and the tax
professionals will come back in and tell you to be a C
corporation.
So we have got all of this discussion about raising taxes,
but all of these pass-through entities are going to be tied to
the tax rate. So you have got them going down to 25, and you
have got the guy who is running the company going up to 39,
many times in the same entities.
So I guess, Mr. Martin, I will start with you. Dealing with
a lot of businesses, do you see under any circumstances where
you could lower C corporations without really lowering it for
small businesses and medium size businesses that are pass-
through entities?
Mr. MARTIN. Well, I think the lowest C corporation rate, a
huge company, multinational level, probably brings more taxable
income back to this country because right now big companies do
their planning to ship business overseas where tax rates are
lower. So hopefully that increased revenue would somehow offset
that.
What we need to keep in mind is the point that was made
earlier. The typical pass-through entity takes out their salary
at a reasonable level; takes out of that pass-through entity
the amount of money they need to pay their taxes; and leaves
the rest of it in there. Sometimes that is because creditors
require it. Most of the time it is because that is the only way
that growth is going to come about.
If you think about an accrual basis entity, you are
required to use the accrual method. You cannot grow if you do
not have cash because you have got to invest in receivables and
inventory. One of the biggest problems small businesses have is
growing too fast. If you grow too fast, you cannot find the
increased receivables in inventory and you can go out of
business.
Mr. BUCHANAN. I have one thing to add to that. In today's
environment, in the last three or four years a lot of banks--I
am from Florida--especially in Florida, but in other parts of
the country, are not lending. So they have to leave the money
in there.
Mr. Tucker, anything you want to add to that?
Mr. TUCKER. Two things. One is my clients are all small
business people. They all leave money in the entity even though
they are taxed on the money.
The second thing is a lot of them have debt that is being
paid down, and when you pay down debt, because my clients do
not like to be in debt, you get no deduction. So you are doing
it with after-tax dollars. To keep taxes for entrepreneurs up
here and to have C corporations' taxes down here without parity
is truly inequitable.
Mr. BUCHANAN. I want to add a second question. I know a lot
of these guys that are in the top tax brackets. Most of them I
know, most of them I have known for 30-some years. They are
usually the job providers in the community. So really what are
we doing if we want to grow?
The talk up here is three things: jobs, jobs, and jobs.
Well, who provides those jobs? Most of the folks that, you
know, have 25 to 200 employees are these pass-through entities.
So if we are going to have them pay more in taxes, all we are
going to do, in my opinion, is hurt more jobs.
Mr. Kwall, do you have any thought on that? Yes, go ahead.
Mr. KWALL. In evaluating the consequences of creating a
system where the corporate rate is lower than the individual
rate, you really have to take account of in terms of estimating
revenue, the potential fleeing from pass-through entities in
that situation. In 1986 what ended up happening is everybody
fled from the corporate tax when individual rates came down and
heavier burdens were put on the corporate tax. So that has just
got to be done.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. Nichols, anything?
Mr. NICHOLS. Just a quick point, and that is there is a
temptation, of course, to not essentially tax everybody all at
the same rate. If you are going to raise rates, raise rates on
some and not necessarily on others, but frankly, that is what
got us into the hodge-podge that we have got in the Tax Code
now. I think it is much better to take the courageous approach
and essentially face the revenue needs we have and get a system
that works over the long term.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. McDermott is recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I could not help it. I was watching this down in my office,
and I came up because I wanted to ask a question. I felt like
Russell Long had come out. I was looking around for his
picture, but I think he is over in the Senate. His theory of
taxation, as you know, was do not tax you; do not tax me; tax
that guy behind the tree.
And I have a feeling that we are sitting here talking about
where the guy behind the tree is. Then I thought about the fact
that former Ways and Means member, who must have learned
something on this Committee; I mean, I cannot assume that he
sat here and did not learn a thing, Mr. Cantor, presented an
interesting tax proposal that he hopes to jumpstart the
economy. He says the provision would provide a 20 percent
reduction on small business income.
But then I read what is going on in the press, and the
Small Business Association and the independent business people,
they are not throwing their arms around this proposal and
saying it is a good idea.
So tell me about Mr. Cantor's proposal. Why is the small
business community not just in here beating down our doors to
have that happen?
Anybody can answer that.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Well, I do not have any idea why because it
seems like a proposal which would be highly beneficial to them.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Does anybody else have anything? Why are the
small business organizations not endorsing this?
Mr. MARTIN. I think primarily because of--nobody has told
me this--but added complexity in the tax law and how you define
what that number is going to be that they get to deduct. I just
do not know how that number is calculated. I have not even seen
the proposed legislation. So I do not know what he is putting
through.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You took the words out of the mouth of Chris
Waters. He said, ``Just for our members, the top two important
issues are keeping the marginal rates low and reducing the
complexity.'' That is NFIB, right?
And what you are saying is the Majority Leader of the House
has introduced a bill that is making people more anxious
because it introduces more complexity. That is his solution to
this problem it sounds to me like.
I mean, I was here under Clinton when we set the Clinton
rates. Okay? I was here in 1993 when we did that vote, 1994,
and the country was booming, and so now everybody says we have
got to reduce the rate somehow because that is the only way we
can get the country going again, and what I hear also is from
Mr. Buchanan and others, the banks are not lending.
I mean, let's talk about what the real problem here is.
Small business people's problem is the banks will not lend to
them unless they have got--I just tried to get my loan
refinanced on my house because I thought a 3.9 percent interest
rate was pretty interesting. They wanted to have my pay stubs
for the last three months, and they wanted to have proof that I
had--you know, I can see why a small businessman would go crazy
dealing with this, and I do not understand why the Minority
Leader would put one out to make it more complex.
I mean, what would be the purpose of that? Has anybody got
an answer?
[No response.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Smith is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Certainly I can appreciate this discussion about the
complexity of the Tax Code and adding new preferences in the
Tax Code. The last I checked, there has been more than one bill
introduced or suggestions for our Tax Code that would add more
complexity, which certainly does concern me.
But in a broad sense, I mean, we talk about confusion and
frustration and instability of the Tax Code, but for the CPAs
here on the panel, how often do you encounter someone, aside
from the instability and the short-term nature of a lot of
these tax policies; how often do you encounter a client who
would say, ``Gosh, in going back I wish I could go back and
redo some planning perhaps''? But how many of them think
retroactively and then would apply that moving forward?
Mr. TUCKER. I am not a CPA, but I can tell you that in my
practice my clients both look back and look forward. The
problem with looking forward is you cannot assure the client of
any stability looking forward. It is not just complexity. It is
stability, and they do not understand what is going to happen
next year, for example, extenders, non-extenders, tax rates,
and everything else.
So they look back and they say, ``If I had done this at
that time, I could have saved taxes. I could have done
something different. I could have paid less taxes in the long
run.''
It is a balancing act, and very often my clients, being
entrepreneurs, are, frankly, upset with planning we did before
because the law changed, and they did not know it was going to
change and we did not know it was going to change. So I think
stability has to be part of focusing on complexity. You need to
provide stability for the people in this country and the
entities in this country.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Anyone else? Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. I would say that my client base does not look
back. It is not profitable to look back. You cannot change
things that have already happened. If they ask me about some
advice that I gave them before, it is always on the basis of
what we knew at the time.
It is a struggle enough to get my clients to look forward
far enough to make huge business decisions that will affect
them in the long run. They are operating today. Do not look
back. It is fruitless to look back.
Mr. SMITH. Mr. Smetana.
Mr. SMETANA. I would concur. We are forward looking. You
need to be in your business. I would say that over the last
several years we have tried to make behavior by the tax
policies we have instituted particularly around depreciable
lives and fast expensing, and I think what we run the risk of
is similar to a shopper in a retail store. They keep looking
for the sale. So they defer their purchases until that sale
occurs, and I have a feeling that we continue down this path of
just short-term policy fixes and short-term incentives to try
to change behavior and what we are really deferring are the
kind of long-term investments that are necessary for business
to thrive and survive and grow.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. And I would certainly concur in everything
that was said on the subject before. I would add one other
thing, and that is clients, good clients that are running
successful business, do not want to do tax planning. They would
be very comfortable and would be delighted to have a stable
system and, frankly, they want to work on that next sale. They
want to get sales to go up. They want to figure out that new
technique that is going to reduce cost. That is what they want
to focus on, and they resist the idea of, frankly, paying
people like us and others because of the complexity or the
uncertainty of where things are going to be.
They want to do their business, and if we could just let
them do that, we would all benefit.
Mr. SMITH. Now, I guess in light of this topic though, you
know, we know that the Tax Code has so many tax preferences,
hundreds, many of which are temporary in nature, and there are
more proposed as we have heard several times this season.
Obviously, the beauty of a tax preference is always going to be
in the eyes of the beholder, aside from the rate, but perhaps a
rate can impact that a little bit.
How high of a priority should reducing preferences in the
Tax Code be as we tackle tax reform? Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Thank you.
Well, it should be an extremely high priority. It
simplifies the Tax Code, and it will allow much lower rates,
make the system fairer and promote economic growth. As you say,
the benefit is in the eyes of the beholder. The hard part is
the politics. The economics are very simple.
Mr. SMITH. Mr. Kwall.
Mr. KWALL. The most stable tax would be a low rate, broad
based tax. So to the extent that preferences can be reduced and
rates can be brought down, that approach is the ideal.
Mr. SMITH. Perhaps we should resist adding further
preferences in our Tax Code.
Mr. KWALL. Definitely.
Mr. SMITH. Okay, and Mr.----
Chairman CAMP. I think we are out of time.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the panel
for being here today. This has been very interesting.
Mr. Kwall, your testimony calls for requiring all complex
businesses, those with one or more class of stock to be taxed
at the entity level potentially, stating this would eliminate
their ability to pass losses through to their shareholders.
This would limit the ability of start-up businesses to raise
capital.
I am concerned with this rule that only the simplest of
businesses be allowed to pass their income and losses through
to their owners would make it harder for start-up businesses to
raise capital since they can only pass the losses they incur in
the early years through to their investors if they have the
simplest of capital structures.
So, Mr. Kwall, I guess for you might be: Do you share this
concern and could your proposal be modified to allow real
economic losses to be used currently by those start-ups that
are in a loss position in their early years?
And then I would be interested if anyone else would like to
comment.
Mr. KWALL. Thank you, Congresswoman Jenkins.
That is actually a very good question. When I talk about
simple enterprises my assumption is that system really govern
the majority of closely held enterprises. In other words, a
simple enterprise basically would mean that they are not going
to have preferences with respect to distributions or economic
preferences with respect to issuing different types of stock or
membership interests so that some interests would be preferred
and others would not be.
So first of all, hopefully the bulk of new enterprises
would fit under that simple regime and losses would pass
through.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay.
Mr. KWALL. To the extent that a more complicated ownership
structure was used under my system, it is true the losses would
not pass through, but that is a default regime. I guess that is
a cost of choosing a more complicated economic arrangement.
So the real question would be how necessary a more complex
arrangement would be to a business that thought it was in that
situation.
But it is clearly something that needs to be thought
through. I agree with you completely.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. I really disagree. I think the concept of two
classes of ownership creating a complex business rather than a
simple business is not focusing on the entrepreneur. Most of my
entrepreneurial clients are very concerned about capital
formation and capital access, about protecting their personal
assets from the business risk, and business succession.
All of that goes to two classes of something. I would
rather bring in equity than debt because I will have somebody
who will have a share of the ownership, but will not have an
obligation on my part to pay them. With business succession, I
may have family members who are going to run the business, and
they would have a voting class of stock, and I might have
people who are going to be in the business and have a non-
voting class. I think the great bulk of my entrepreneurial
clients would be caught under the definition of ``complexity,''
not ``simplicity,'' and I think we need to move away from that.
We need to have pass-through entities.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Sure.
Mr. KWALL. One point of clarification. A simple enterprise
could have voting and non-voting stock. It cannot have
different kinds of economic interests, but you could have stock
that was voting and stock that was non-voting.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. That helps.
Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. I would second Mr. Tucker's comments, but I
guess I would have a more fundamental comment, and that is I
think we are clearly in a situation where we need to have rate
parity. I think everybody agrees on that, and so as a
consequence, that is something that we should not avoid by
doing this and we should not try to avoid it by doing this.
The other principle I would apply here is ``if it is not
broke, don't fix it.'' At the end of the day I am not quite
sure there is something that would be so bad policy-wise or
even at all bad policy-wise, frankly, that would cause us to
disrupt what people are doing today in order to get to
something that might theoretically be better on the basis of
theory; I am not sure how much policy consideration is behind
it.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Mr. Sullivan, I know you made note of
this in a recent Tax Notes article. Do you have any thoughts on
this?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Well, I think the details need to be worked
out, but the theme keeps coming up over and over again. If you
are starting up a business, all you want to do is your
business. These entity choices are way too complex, and
Professor Kwall is offering an easy alternative for a start-up
business that does not want to be concerned about taxes.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Paulsen is recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to raise a couple of points because it seems
like there is pretty much unanimous agreement that parity is
important in terms of comprehensive approach to tax reform for
both large and small businesses. You know, we are not going to
pass one bill that is going to address one side of it and then
you can count on us passing another bill that is going to catch
up with it, right? That is just not going to happen.
We talked a little bit about family ownership, but we have
not talked much about employee ownership, and I just think it
is important, too, that we make sure that employee ownership is
also remembered as a key component of existing tax law, and I
think it is important that we keep employee ownership actually
in mind as we move forward through larger comprehensive tax
reform because there are huge benefits to employee owned
companies.
And I know that there are some of my colleagues that go
back to 1994 when the rates were raised. You know, this is 18,
20 years ago. The world has changed. It is a lot more
competitive. It is a lot flatter. Small businesses, in
particular, have to compete on a global scale that they have
never had to compete on before as well.
But let me ask you this question. I will start with Mr.
Nichols. Can you highlight some of the restrictions on S
corporations? And could we consider updating some of those
restrictions?
It was mentioned, I think, a little bit earlier about the
importance of a five-year built in gains period, for instance,
but are there any other proposals that could be considered
outside of the context of larger comprehensive tax reform, such
as the limits on the types of shareholders allowed for an S
corporation to help open up opportunities for any businesses
that are, for instance, trapped in that C corporation area?
Mr. NICHOLS. There are a number of things that could be
done, and I think they could be done without dramatic, perhaps
not even significant, losses of revenue. A lot of the
restrictions on S corporation status, such as on the nature of
shareholders and actually even the types of entities that can
elect S corporation status and various other things, have been
in the code for some time, but they do not really need to be
policy-based and do not need to be retained.
Let me give you an example. Nonresident aliens were
excluded because, when it was originally enacted, people were
worried that the nonresident aliens would not pay tax. So were
partnerships and corporations and various other ineligible
entities.
What we have done or what Congress has done for several of
those is it has essentially said, okay, we are going to let a
certain type of trust, an electing small business trust, or we
are going to let certain tax exempt organizations, we are going
to let you be a shareholder, but in return for that what we are
going to do is we are going to tax you effectively at the top
rate.
So is the same is done for these other restrictions, the
Government gets its revenue, but essentially the corporation is
enabled to have a partnership as a shareholder or a nonresident
alien as a shareholder. I am not quite sure there is any loser
in that transaction. It just essentially gives more flexibility
to closely held business, and I do not think it would lose a
lot of revenue.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay. Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. What I teach my students is that there are five
things you could do to reconcile S corporations with
partnerships within the S corporation regime. Number one, you
could take out any limit on the number of shareholders.
Number two, you could let anybody be a shareholder,
including not just the nonresident alien, but a partnership or
a C corporation or an S corporation could be a shareholder.
Number three is you could reconcile inside basis and
outside basis. Right now in a partnership, partners share
inside basis for debt, but in an S corporation you only get
basis if you put money in or lend money to the S corporation.
Number four, we have something in the partnership regime
which says if you die and get a step up in basis on your
partnership interest, there is an election to reconcile inside
basis with outside basis, and we could do that for the S
corporation as well.
And finally, we could allow any kind of stockholder,
preferred, non-preferred or anything, without having an issue
if you wanted to do it. My proposal would be, fine, let's
eliminate S corporations and let them use the partnership
regime, which would be the simpler way of doing it.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Martin, let me just ask this before time
runs out. You represent a large stakeholder group from a small
business perspective. How much time do your members spend
navigating the Tax Code?
I mean, you know, what is the best story, the best anecdote
that really just paints the best picture of why this is so
critical to address?
Mr. MARTIN. They do not spend a lot of time because they
call me on the phone.
[Laughter.]
Mr. MARTIN. And, yes, I bill them for it, but what is
stressful to them is the changing tax laws. I get numerous
calls in November every year about Section 179. What is it this
year? Is it likely to change before December 31, because they
are thinking about capital investments now for things that they
need to operate their business? Should they do them now or do
them in the next six months? That is a huge issue for them, is
just the stability.
My clients wrestle with payroll taxes like crazy because it
is an abomination of the Small Business Administration. It is a
huge cost to administering payroll taxes, but not the income
tax law.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. HERGER [presiding]. Mrs. Black is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There I think has been a really great discussion here and a
lot of good questions that were asked. When you come down to
the end of us last members all of the questions have just about
been asked, but I want to follow up on what my colleague was
just saying about how much time this takes, and, Mr. Martin,
you said the timing is not really the biggest issue with the
employer. It is more just the stress.
Obviously, we have talked a lot about complexity and the
fairness and the uncertainty, but I do want to go to what is
the actual cost. Can you determine the actual cost of this kind
of complexity and what these businesses need to go through with
the complication of the Tax Code?
Can you give me an idea of what this actually costs the
business, a percentage of what it might cost them?
Is there a way to be able to evaluate that?
We can just go right down the line, whoever would like to
answer that question.
Mr. SMETANA. I can just speak for our situation. So we are
family owned. We have two shareholders, brothers, that own the
company. We operate in seven states. We are U.S. domestic only.
So we are not as complex as most larger businesses, but we
spend hundreds of thousands of dollars a year on federal and
State tax compliance. We do it both with internal staff people
and as well as hiring experts from tax accounting firms to help
us deal with all of the complexities.
In addition, there is a cost to compliance and
recordkeeping by deploying sophisticated accounting systems,
particularly those that have to track three or four different
types of depreciation, records given the various regimes that
are out there.
So in our case it is a big dollar, and that is money coming
out of the business in reinvestment. My colleagues at FEI have
similar experiences.
Mrs. BLACK. And let me just follow up on that for just a
second. Then I do want to hear from the rest of you, but just
to draw to that conclusion, I think, down the line, would you
be able to hire more people and expand your business?
Then ultimately I think at the end of the day what we have
to consider on all of this is that the cost to the consumer of
the product on the other end, and as we talk about this, I
think so many times that is forgotten, that the cost of
whatever the service of that product is is increased, and it is
really harder for those at the lower income because the end
result really impacts those at the very lowest income in
purchasing that good or that service.
So would you say if you did not have this kind of
complexity you could make things a little easier and you could
use those dollars to grow your business and, therefore, grow
jobs?
Mr. SMETANA. Absolutely. As we said, the key to business
economic growth is after-tax cash flows, and whether you spend
it on income taxes directly or on the cost of preparing those
taxes, it reduces the amount of money you have to sustain the
business.
Mrs. BLACK. Others? Mr. Martin.
Mr. MARTIN. It is difficult for me to estimate what it
would cost, but there are a couple of provisions. One I
mentioned, the health care credit. It is crazy for me to have
to spend the time that I do because the law is so complex I
cannot figure out whether I need a benefit without spending the
time.
The domestic production activity deduction is another one
that the guidelines that we follow are extremely loose. Again,
I feel like it is malpractice if I do not get my client the
$300 deduction they should be entitled to. So I have to go
through the calculations for it, incredibly complex, all of the
job credits that are out there. I do not have any small
business clients that hire people because they are going to get
a job credit. They hire someone because they need someone to
help run the business.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you. Thank you.
Others? Mr. Tucker.
Mr. TUCKER. I think there are two costs. One is the cost of
planning, which takes both financial resources and human
capital, which is often not measured, but two is for the
clients who do not come in advance on planning. The cost of
some foot fault is even much more expensive, and I think they
do not realize that a lot of times until the foot fault occurs.
And we need simplicity.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. I had really only two points. I know there is
limited time, but, number one, in terms of complexity, there is
no question on several of the things that have been raised. The
items that actually on an ongoing basis affect how closely held
business calculate their taxes and things like that, there is
no question that that complexity could be improved upon, and in
particular, it would be best in terms of tax reform to resist
the temptation to micromanage and to have more global rules
that are essentially applicable and rely on the economy to weed
things out rather than to micromanage.
The only other thing that I would say with respect to
complexity is we have talked about choice of entity and forcing
people, let's say, to a single pass-through regime. I am not as
worried about complexity there because essentially once a
business has elected a particular pass-through regime, that is
its entity. It has got its entity, and you are actually adding
to their complexity if you force them into a new entity.
There is complexity, but it is complexity for the law
students. It is complexity for the tax advisors, but you are
not helping closely held business if you force a disruption on
their tax planning.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you.
And I think I am out of time, and I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. HERGER. Mr. Berg is recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I really appreciate the panel being here. I started a small
business from the ground up, and we worked our way through a
lot of these things. The comments that we have heard today are
really right on.
You have a small start-up business. I mean, you do not have
an accountant full time. You do not have an attorney that is
looking at the regulations, looking at the rules, and quite
frankly, a lot of the decisions on what type of organization
you are going to be as a tax entity kind of are made at the
last minute with some advice.
And talking about those people who went through a C
corporation and for tax reasons cannot get out of it and have
struggled and every year the tax liability gets more and more
severe, you know, as I approach tax policy for business, my
goal is to say that people will make business decisions based
on business principles. And very secondarily or third they
would say, ``What are the tax implications?''
Instead I think we have reversed that where people are
saying, ``Before we make this business decision, what are the
tax implications?'' So it is almost backwards in terms of if
you want to build a better mousetrap, beat the competition to
do these things. There are all kinds of barriers within the Tax
Code.
The least amount or I should not say the least, but one of
the biggest is the uncertainty in the Tax Code. I mean, who
knows what is going to be our tax come January 1 of 2013? You
know, no one.
So I do not know where we are going or where I am going
with my questioning, but there is a lot of frustration I have.
I think probably the first thing would be to, you know, really
look at the President's budget and what kind of an impact that
is going to have on business. Probably specifically is where we
have a corporate rate that is lowered and a personal rate that
is increased.
I would just like the panel to respond to how do you see
that impacting the small business that we are talking about.
Mr. SMETANA. Sure. As I mentioned earlier in my statements,
we analyzed the President's and the Treasury's proposal, and
the impact of not bifurcating, you know, business source income
out of closely held from the individual regime would cost our
company literally millions of dollars both in terms of the loss
of certain of the current tax preferences around capital and
inventory investment as well as the material increase in the
marginal rates that our businesses would pay in taxes in the
pass-through regime.
So it would certainly have a dampening effect with respect
to the economic activity that we could plan going forward by
having less capital with which to work.
Mr. MARTIN. We are talking about less job creation. We
cannot afford it.
Mr. TUCKER. We are talking about more complex here. We are
going to go back to the personal holding company, accumulated
earnings tax, and all the other things that are done to offset
this, and it is just the wrong direction to go, sir.
Mr. KWALL. I would start with an ideal income tax that
would tax income to the owners at the owner's marginal rate. So
whenever you are trying to duplicate like that, it is just
really inconsistent with the ideal.
Mr. NICHOLS. To a great extent I am going to reiterate.
When you stray from rate parity and the single-tax rate,
corporate owners will respond to the incentives. They may not
like them, but they will respond to the incentives, and at the
end of the day if the next change incentivizes it, either as a
result of complexity or otherwise, they will move to C
corporation or other status just on a temporary basis. Then
there is a lot of lawyer work to get them out, and if the tax
rates are too high or they are different for other people, they
will respond. They will adjust, and the people that will be
hurt, I think, are the new entrants into the labor market or
the newly unemployed, who are the last people that at the end
of the day businesses would be hiring if things went well.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Well, I am going to be the contrarian again.
Again, that is the tail wagging the dog. We need a competitive
tax system. We need to raise revenue. We have to lower our
corporate taxes because those larger corporations are
internationally competitive.
If there is not enough revenue, you may have to consider
raising taxes on individuals. These rules are anti-abuse rules.
If businesses are not pushing the envelope, they do not have to
deal with these anti-abuse rules. There is no reason for a new
business to seek C corporation status. So I have no sympathy
for a corporation that goes in that direction.
Mr. BERG. Clearly, in my mind if there is a 40 percent tax
rate and a 28 percent tax rate, people are going to go to the
28 percent tax rate, which from my perspective, the way I
started this is exactly opposite to what we want people to be
doing.
I mean, I think if we want to raise revenue, we have got to
grow jobs, period. And that is my concern with the President's
proposal on taxes. It creates more uncertainty, and it is not
growing jobs.
I have got one more question.
Chairman CAMP [presiding]. Well, your time has expired, and
we have got one more person.
I would just say that lowering rates is not the same as
lowering taxes. There is a difference there, and so you do not
necessarily have to go somewhere else in the economy to raise
taxes.
Mr. Reed is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am the last one.
So that always brings a smile to the panel's face whenever I
get to ask the questions.
[Laughter.]
Mr. REED. Going last here, I will say I echo the sentiments
of my colleagues, and also being one of the colleagues that
started a small business like myself, and we talked a lot about
the time pressures, obligations of starting a business and then
having to deal with these issues. I can vividly remember in the
beginning when my CPA called me and asked me to get a document,
and it took me two days to find the document. I was so
frustrated, and he actually did not need the document at the
end of the time. So I was almost firing him on the spot, but
you know, the bottom line is I have been there, and small
business owners across America are frustrated with this Tax
Code, and I am so glad to be part of an effort to try to reform
it, and we will do our part on that.
What I am hearing is a general theme from each and every
one of you that we should be focusing on the certainty and the
stability in the code, looking at the rates to make them
competitive, and combining the individual and corporate rate.
One thing that I do not know if we spent enough time on and
I am interested in exploring and going down further is does
anyone feel that the underlying business activity of the
taxpayer, is that something that should be taken into
consideration when we are setting tax policy.
And the reason I bring that up is as a new member down here
in Washington, D.C., I hear a lot of politicians talk about bad
guys, oil and gas industry, and there are provisions in the
code that treat folks differently just because of the business
activity upon which they are engaged when it comes to their tax
burden.
Can anyone tell me is that something that is good policy to
advance as we go through comprehensive tax reform, or is my gut
telling me the right thing and that we should avoid looking at
business activity as a reason why tax policy should be set?
Mr. Tucker, please.
Mr. TUCKER. Are we not really trying to look at the ability
to create jobs? Do service businesses noted create jobs just as
manufacturing businesses create jobs, just as real estate
creates jobs?
If that is what we are looking at, I think the type of
activity is totally irrelevant. Our objective should be to
create jobs, be able to collect tax from the people who are
earning money and go forward.
Mr. REED. I appreciate that. Anyone else? Mr. Nichols.
Mr. NICHOLS. Well, I would say, and corresponding to and
following up on that and certainly not disagreeing with it, and
that is the trick, you need to be careful, but the trick is to
treat all businesses, I think, comparably. Obviously they
differ, but at the end of the day, there are certain
fundamental principles.
If you follow the cash, people are making money. Then that
is a good time and an appropriate measure of whether or not
taxation is appropriate. Now, I realize that is an
oversimplification, but in general, you should not favor, you
know, insurance company taxation versus oil and gas taxation
versus manufacturing.
I represent some of those. I do not represent all of them.
Essentially the goal should be not favoring one industry over
another, not picking winners and losers, and not micromanaging.
The more simple, straightforward, then the economy, the
capitalistic system, will figure out who is going to invest in
what industry based on actual profits rather than tax
considerations.
Mr. REED. I appreciate it.
Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Well, I know you have been lobbied, and when
I was on staff, I was lobbied, and every lobbyist comes in and
tells you, ``How can you raise my taxes when I am creating
jobs?'' And everybody says that. It is jobs, jobs, jobs.
We have to have the discipline to understand that when we
help one person, we are taking something away from another, and
that is just the balance sheet. It is just the math, and what
we want to do is not provide anybody with special privileges
because in the long run what you do not see is most job
creation will be created by not giving that lobbyist the
special tax break.
Mr. REED. I appreciate that.
With that I will yield back, Mr. Chairman. I have got a
couple of seconds left and I will let you enjoy them.
Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Well, thank you.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses. This was an
excellent hearing.
I appreciate your time and your testimony today.
And with that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Public Submissions for the Record follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


