- PHYSICIAN ORGANIZATION EFFORTS TO PROMOTE HIGH QUALITY CARE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MEDICARE PHYSICIAN PAYMENT REFORM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PHYSICIAN ORGANIZATION EFFORTS TO

PROMOTE HIGH QUALITY CARE AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MEDICARE PHYSICIAN

PAYMENT REFORM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 24, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-HL13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
80-505                  WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

WALLY HERGER, California, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of July 24, 2012 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Colonel (Retired) Lawrence Riddles, M.D., President of the Board,
American College of Physician Executives, Testimony............     9
David L. Bronson, M.D., President, American College of
Physicians, Testimony..........................................    22
Michael L. Weinstein, M.D., Chair, Registry Board, American
Gastroenterological Association, Testimony.....................    38
Peter J. Mandell, M.D., Chair, American Academy of Orthopaedic
Surgeons Council on Advocacy, Testimony........................    49
Aric R. Sharp, FACHE, CMPE, CEO, Quincy Medical Group, Testimony.    64
John Jenrette, M.D., CEO, Sharp Community Medical Group,
Testimony......................................................    76

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, statement.......   110
Gundersen Lutheran Health System, statement......................   115
The American College of Gastroenterology, statement..............   119
The Center for Fiscal Equity, statement..........................   124

HEARING ON PHYSICIAN ORGANIZATION

EFFORTS TO PROMOTE HIGH QUALITY CARE

AND IMPLICATIONS FOR MEDICARE

PHYSICIAN PAYMENT REFORM

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 24, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m. in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Wally
Herger [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairman Herger Announces Hearing on

Physician Organization Efforts to Promote High

Quality Care and Implications for Medicare

Physician Payment Reform

Washington, July 24, 2012

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Wally Herger (R-
CA) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
to explore physician organization efforts to promote high quality
patient care. Understanding these initiatives will inform the
Subcommittee as it continues to examine how to reform the Medicare
physician payment system. The Subcommittee will hear from organizations
representing the physicians who are at the forefront of patient care
and therefore most knowledgeable about what may be needed to optimize
care for Medicare quality and beneficiary health outcomes. The hearing
will take place on Tuesday, July 24, 2012, in 1100 Longworth House
Office Building, beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of witnesses
will follow.

BACKGROUND:

Medicare currently reimburses nearly every physician on a fee-for-
service (FFS) basis. While the physician fee schedule generally takes
into account the work, time, and effort associated with each service,
it does not account for the quality and efficiency of the care
provided. Furthermore, the mechanism used to annually update the fee
schedule--the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) formula--limits spending
growth to growth in the economy but does not recognize value or
quality. There is broad acknowledgement of the shortcomings of the
current payment system, including the disruptive role of the SGR, and
the growing importance of incentivizing patient-centered, high-quality,
and outcomes-oriented care.

Physician organizations generally support the notion of
incorporating quality, efficiency, and patient outcomes into the
Medicare physician payment system. Many physician organizations,
especially those representing the various specialty disciplines, are
involved in a range of activities that increase the likelihood that
these aims can be accomplished in a meaningful way. Examples of these
physician-led activities include establishing evidence-based guidelines
for treating common conditions, using information on actual patient
encounters to measure health outcomes, and helping physicians organize
their practices to be more responsive to patient needs.

In this third in a series of hearings on Medicare physician payment
reform, the Subcommittee will learn more about physician-led quality
initiatives such as those described above. In previous hearings, the
Subcommittee heard about innovative private sector delivery models and
payment reform initiatives payers are using to reward high quality and
efficient care. Specialty-specific initiatives designed to support
practices that are testing different payment models in the private
sector can also provide a foundation from which to reform Medicare FFS
payments. Recognizing that physician input is key to successfully
incorporating quality and efficiency, the Subcommittee seeks to
understand what physicians believe is meaningful to measure, what
constitutes good practice in the care of patients, and what changes are
needed to improve their practice environment.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Herger stated ``The
Subcommittee is committed to reforming the Medicare payment system so
that it brings more value to beneficiaries while remaining viable for
physicians. I am pleased that many organizations representing different
physician specialties are far along in establishing quality improvement
programs including measures of quality that are important to
beneficiaries and fair to physicians. Understanding what physicians
have already accomplished in this area, what is underway, and what is
on the near horizon will be helpful as we explore how to ensure the
Medicare physician payment system incentivizes and rewards the care
that results in optimal beneficiary outcomes.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on how physician organization efforts to
promote quality and efficiency can inform Medicare physician payment
reform.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Wednesday, August 8, 2012. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman HERGER. The Subcommittee will come to order. We
are meeting today to hear from physician organizations who are
working to improve the quality of care delivered to patients.
These initiatives have been shown to be successful and may
hold promise as we seek to reform and update the Medicare
Physician Payment Formula.
For the past 18 months, we have been seeking both formal
and informal input on physician payment reform from the
physician community and other relevant stakeholders.
At our last hearing on this topic, we heard about private
sector approaches to reforming payments.
Today's hearing is a third in a series on reforming the
flawed SGR and focuses on quality improvement activities
developed by medical societies and the practical implications
of these activities across physician practice settings.
We will hear shortly from physician executives, physician
organizations representing both primary and procedural care,
and the leaders of two group practices, all of whom are engaged
in efforts that focus on improving the quality of care
delivered to patients.
A common theme will be that providing optimal quality and
outcomes requires setting appropriate standards, building the
right infrastructure, and using the right data to measure
performance.
Our intent is to hear from the physician community about
how to reform the Physician Payment System so that quality,
efficiency, and patient outcomes are accounted for in a fair
and fiscally responsible manner.
As I have noted before, merely averting sustainable growth
rate cuts each year is not a fix. A permanent solution has been
elusive in large part because of the substantial costs
associated with repealing SGR, currently estimated at nearly
$300 billion over ten years.
However, this Committee must do more than just simply
repeal the SGR. We must also determine how to improve the
existing Medicare payment system and work with physicians to
develop other payment models that preserve and promote the
physician-patient relationship and reward physicians who
provide high quality and efficient care.
Many are concerned about the lack of alignment among
Medicare's current incentive programs to enhance quality, such
as e-prescribing, meaningful use of electronic health records,
and the so-called ``value based modifier.''
Such programs were not developed nor led by the physician
community. While some feel these programs are a step in the
right direction, I am concerned about taking a top down
Government centered approach to defining and rewarding quality
of care.
Physician organizations have been working with their
members for many years to build a solid foundation for defining
and operationalizing high quality care.
For example, many groups are actively developing evidence
based guidelines, quality performance measures, data collection
tools, and clinical improvement activities.
It is my hope we can learn from and build upon these
efforts as we work with the physician community to develop a
21st Century payment system.
Before I recognize Ranking Member Stark for the purposes of
an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that all members'
written statements be included in the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
Chairman HERGER. I now recognize Ranking Member Stark for
five minutes for the purpose of his opening statement.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today and exploring ways that we can promote high
quality patient care.
As we try to replace the SGR Medicare Formula, it is
important that we understand what is happening in the private
sector and learn how to incorporate that into any Medicare
Formula change.
I look forward to hearing the suggestions of our witnesses
today.
We have avoided replacing the SGR in favor of easier
reforms, and if we do not fix it, we are going to find that
many of our outstanding physicians will begin to turn away from
Medicare.
We have tried to reform SGR for over a decade. You are
quite right, 200 to $300 billion to pay for it is tough. We do
have an opportunity to pay for it, the Overseas Contingency
Operations Fund, basically war spending, could be used this
year for a permanent SGR fix.
There is a good deal of bipartisan support for the idea,
and I would like to insert without objection a letter signed by
America's physician professional societies supporting the use
of these OCO funds to permanently resolve the SGR problem.
Three of the organizations are represented by today's
witnesses, the American College of Physicians, the American
Gastroenterological Association, the American Association of
Orthopedic Surgeons, who have joined in signing this letter.
[The information referred to follows: The Honorable Pete
Stark]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Mr. STARK. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses,
and the discussion that follows, and I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Stark. Today we are joined
by six witnesses.
Dr. Lawrence Riddles, who is a recently retired Command
Surgeon for the U.S. Air Force and current President of the
Board for the American College of Physician Executives.
Dr. David Bronson is President of Cleveland Clinic Regional
Hospitals, and serves as the President of the American College
of Physicians.
Dr. Michael Weinstein, a practicing gastroenterologist in
the D.C. metro area, and Chair of the American
Gastroenterological Association's Registry Board.
Dr. Peter Mandell, who is a practicing orthopedic surgeon,
and Chair of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons
Council on Advocacy.
Mr. Aric Sharp, CEO of Quincy Medical Group in Quincy,
Illinois.
Dr. John Jenrette, the CEO of Sharp Community Medical Group
in San Diego, California.
You will each have five minutes to present your oral
testimony. Your entire written statement will be made a part of
the record.
Dr. Riddles, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. LAWRENCE RIDDLES, PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD,
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF PHYSICIAN EXECUTIVES

Dr. RIDDLES. Good morning, Chairman Herger, Ranking Member
Stark, and members of the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on
Health.
I am Dr. Larry Riddles, a retired military surgeon and
President for the American College of Physician Executives,
commonly known as ACPE, the nation's largest health care
organization for educating physician leaders.
It is my privilege to share some of ACPE's thoughts on
Medicare physician reimbursement challenges which you and your
colleagues are wrestling with.
We are not here to make an argument to preserve physician
income, rather, we are here to move towards a desired end point
that must to achieve timely and equitable access to high
quality health care that is physician led and reimbursed
fairly.
Thousands of ACPE physician leaders are implementing
innovative cost saving initiatives. Based on these experiences,
ACPE proposes nine essential elements that we believe must be
part of any successful future physician payment system.
First, the reimbursement system must be quality centered.
Any new reimbursement system must include compensation
strategies providing high quality care.
ACPE believes that there should be ongoing efforts to drive
quality improvement that occurs in part through physician
reimbursement reform.
Current fee for service systems are based primarily on
volumes of patients seen and number of procedures completed.
This prevents achieving higher quality health care.
Second, health care must be safe for all. ACPE believes
physicians should be rewarded for making safety a priority.
Examples of safety improvements led by physicians can be found
in many hospitals and health systems. These initiatives,
however, have largely been un-reimbursed.
A new payment system should take into account reductions in
adverse events and reward for successes with a range of other
relevant patient safety indicators and clinical measures.
Third, a streamlined system, strive for simplicity. We
frequently hear from the ACPE members about the burden of
reporting requirements for Medicare payments.
Efforts toward common measures, common data elements, and
common reporting requirements are underway and should be
encouraged.
Simplified measurements and reporting allows for
transferability and scalability of information so that local,
state, and national data collection analysis can occur more
rapidly.
Four, the system must be measurement based. As a science,
health care measurement is immature. Measures endorsed by the
National Quality Forum should be refined and publicly reported.
Measurements directly related to physicians is highly
complex, but ACPE encourages ongoing development of physician
focused measurement and public reporting.
Efforts to interpret outcomes must be clinically relevant,
balanced, and realistic, and must not create unfounded negative
connotations.
Five, the system must be based on evidence based medicine.
Physicians are much more likely to comply with guidelines if
strong data are available. Many professional societies are
generating evidence based guidelines and there is a Federal
clearinghouse of guidelines, but utilization remains low.
While evidence based medicine is an emerging field,
physicians should be rewarded for improving and following
guidelines and clinical pathways that are proven to provide
safe and reliable care.
Six, value based care. Value equals quality over cost.
Reimbursements must be focused on value based care. The Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services have already established
pilot projects exploring value based purchasing and other
public and private entities also have projects underway.
ACPE believes any new reimbursement system should
compliment these programs.
Seven, innovation. Instilling a culture of innovation not
creative billing within physician practices should be a
priority. The payment system should encourage physicians to
implement processes that save money and contribute to safer
care.
There are a variety of successful innovative programs in
hospitals and health care systems at the local level. There
needs to be a mechanism to raise them up to the national level
so that innovative ideas can become best practices.
Number eight, the system should be fair and equitable. The
payment system must not create conflict between the primary
care physicians and cognitive and procedural specialists. Each
member of the health care team must be fairly remunerated for
their overall long term care of patients and not just focused
on individual episodes of care.
Finally, the ninth element is the system should be
physician led. Physicians are much more likely to accept a
revised reimbursement plan if it is developed with physician
input.
The most progressive health care organizations tend to be
physician led and physician leaders not only have a strong
understanding of the health care on the clinical side but they
also know how to lead and run successful enterprises.
ACPE recommends the creation of a new independent
commission composed of physicians, health care providers,
experts in finance and quality, business leaders and patient
representatives to study Medicare's funding dilemma and analyze
the best practices and bring them to you for consideration.
ACPE strongly believes that our nine essential elements in
the next payment system will be critical to a successful
outcome.
Thank you for inviting us here today to provide testimony.

[The statement of Dr. Lawrence Riddles follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Bronson, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID BRONSON, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
PHYSICIANS

Dr. BRONSON. I am President of the American College of
Physicians, the nation's largest medical specialty organization
representing 133,000 internists, internal medicine
subspecialists, and medical students pursuing careers in
internal medicine.
I am a Board certified practicing internist, a Professor of
Medicine at the Lerner College of Medicine at Case Western
Reserve University, and President of the Cleveland Clinic
Regional Hospitals.
Repeal of Medicare's sustainable growth rate is essential,
but repeal by itself will not move Medicare to better ways to
deliver care. We need to transition from a fundamentally broken
payment system to one that is based on value of services to
patients.
We recommend the following steps to start such a
transition. First, Congress should establish a transitional
value based payment initiative where physicians who voluntarily
participate in physician led programs to improve quality and
value will be eligible for higher Medicare updates.
Second, this transitional initiative specifically should
provide higher updates to physicians and recognize patient
centered medical homes and patient centered medical home
neighborhood practices.
The patient centered medical home, or PCMH, has several
important features described in the joint principles of the
patient centered medical home adopted by ACP, the American
Academy of Family Physicians, the American Academy of
Pediatrics, and the American Osteopathic Association.
These features include a personal physician for each
patient who is leading a team of individuals trained to provide
comprehensive care that work together to ensure quality,
safety, and enhanced access to care, while arranging all the
patient's health care needs and coordinating care across all
elements of a complex health system.
Many insurers are now offering PCMH practices to tens of
millions of patients, achieving major quality improvements and
cost savings. It is time to make them more available to
Medicare patients by providing higher updates to physicians,
independently certified practices that are PCMH practices.
Third, Medicare should support the contributions of
subspecialists and ensure high quality coordinated care through
collaborative arrangements with PCMH practices.
This concept called the PCMH neighborhood, offers financial
and non-financial support to specialty practices that have
demonstrated that they have the information systems, formal
arrangements, and other practice capabilities needed to share
information and coordinate treatment decisions with their
primary care medical home.
Congress should facilitate rapid expansion of this model by
providing higher updates to recognize PCMH neighborhood
practices.
At least one major health care accreditation group is now
in the process of establishing a PCMH neighborhood recognition
program.
Fourth, Medicare payment policies should support efforts by
the medical profession to encourage high value cost conscious
care.
For example, ACP's high value cost conscious care
initiatives help physicians and patients understand the
benefits, harms and costs of intervention and whether it
provides good value to patients.
Through this program, ACP has released clinical advice
focused on three areas, low back pain, oral pharmacologic
treatments of Type II diabetes, and colorectal cancer.
Using a consensus based process, ACP has also identified 37
common clinical situations in which screening and diagnostic
tests are used in ways that do not reflect high value care.
To get the information to patients, ACP and Consumer
Reports have agreed to a series of high value care resources to
help patients understand the benefits, harms and costs of tests
and treatments for common clinical issues.
Medicare payment policies could support the professional
societies' efforts to educate and engage clinicians in high
value cost conscious care by number one, reimbursing physicians
appropriately for spending time with patients, to engage them
in shared decision making, and number two, develop ways to
recognize with higher payment updates physicians who can
demonstrate they are incorporating advice from their
professional societies' programs into their practices and
engaging in the shared decision making with their patients.
Fifth, Congress should improve Medicare's existing quality
improvement programs, including the meaningful use standards,
physician quality reporting system, and e-prescribing.
The measures, incentives and reporting requirements for
these programs should be harmonized to the extent possible.
CMS needs to do a better job in providing timely
performance data to physicians participating in these programs.
In addition, these programs should be aligned with the
regular practice assessment, reporting, and quality improvement
activities required by a physician specialty board's
Maintenance of Certification process.
In conclusion, ACP believes that fundamental reform of the
Medicare payment system should build upon effective, physician
led efforts to improve quality.
The PCMH and PCMH neighborhood practices exemplify this
approach.
I would be pleased to answer your questions.

[The statement of Dr. David Bronson follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Weinstein, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. MICHAEL WEINSTEIN, CHAIR, REGISTRY BOARD,
AMERICAN GASTROENTEROLOGICAL ASSOCIATION

Dr. WEINSTEIN. Chairman Herger, Ranking Member Stark, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
soliciting input from the physician community as you craft the
Medicare physician payment reform proposal.
Reforming the broken Medicare physician reimbursement
system and giving gastroenterologists the tools to help them to
provide high quality patient care are top priorities of the
American Gastroenterological Association.
My name is Dr. Michael Weinstein. I am here today as
representative of the 16,000 physicians and scientists who are
members of AGA, the largest organization representing
gastroenterologists.
AGA helped found the Alliance of Specialty Medicine, which
shares our goals of delivering high quality patient care.
My medical training is as a gastroenterologist. I am the
Vice President of Capital Digestive Care, a 56 physician
practice here in the D.C. area. I have also received on-the-job
training as a businessman and it seems in recent years as a
health policy analyst.
In my brief remarks, I will focus on AGA programs and
partnerships that could be instructive as Government considers
how to reform the Medicare physician reimbursement system.
I must first note that any quality based reimbursement
system must be based on clinical guidelines and patient outcome
measures that are developed with physician input and based on
scientific evidence.
I refer you to AGA's written testimony for more on our
approach.
In 2010, AGA created the Digestive Health Outcomes
Registry. I currently chair its Management Board. The AGA
Registry helps users optimize quality of care by giving them a
secure and scientifically valid way to collect, analyze and
report clinically relevant data related to inflammatory bowel
disease and colorectal cancer prevention.
Payers have shown an interest in using the AGA Registry and
our newly launched Digestive Health Recognition Program to
acknowledge and possibly financially reward high quality
providers.
We recently launched a program with United Healthcare and
expect other payers to follow suit.
AGA advocates that a reformed Medicare reimbursement system
provide incentives for physicians who report on quality
measures through outcomes based registries.
As the health system changes, we see that quality and
efficiency go hand in hand. Patients and physicians need to be
wise stewards of health care dollars and ensure that care is
given to the right patient at the right time.
To that end, AGA is part of the Choosing Wisely campaign,
and has identified five common G.I. tests, medications and
procedures whose necessity should be questioned and discussed
between physician and patient.
This program will help physicians be better stewards of
finite health care resources.
AGA recognizes that private payers are moving toward
population based reimbursement. In response, we are developing
alternative payment models.
For instance, AGA is working with a claims case logic
company to develop a colonoscopy bundled fee. AGA physicians
are developing components of the bundle including screening,
diagnostic and therapeutic colonoscopy, time frames,
complications, and associated carve out's.
This will help physicians to demonstrate value and
negotiate for the services they provide to a population of
patients.
AGA is also developing clinical service lines to help
physicians with population management. Our vision is to collect
guidelines, measures, payment bundles, and other resources to
create a ``how-to manual'' for common G.I. diseases.
Bundles will sync with electronic medical records,
registries, PQRS, and other systems, providing physicians tools
to show how coordinated care can be delivered, measured and
improved.
In closing, AGA applauds your efforts to move physicians to
a more viable reimbursement system that rewards physicians for
improving the quality of care they provide to their patients.
AGA shares this goal and stands ready to work with you.
Thank you.

[The statement of Dr. Michael Weinstein follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Mandell is recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. PETER MANDELL, CHAIR, AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
ORTHOPAEDIC SURGEONS COUNCIL ON
ADVOCACY

Dr. MANDELL. Good morning, Chairman Herger and Ranking
Member Stark. Nice seeing both of you again, and good morning
to the rest of the distinguished panel.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the
American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons, which represents
over 18,000 actively practicing Board certified orthopaedic
surgeons nationwide.
I am Pete Mandell, Chair of the AAOS Council on Advocacy,
and our organization is very much appreciative of the
opportunity to offer our ideas on how Medicare physician
payment reform can be carried out.
As the Committee knows very well, finding a long term
sustainable solution for the Medicare physician payment system
is a huge undertaking. We believe that a commitment to the
development and adoption of best practices that provide high
quality care for musculoskeletal patients while remaining cost
effective is the best way to achieve that solution.
We are already involved in several quality initiatives that
can be used by Congress as a model for future payment reforms.
These initiatives include the development of clinical
practice guidelines, appropriate use criteria, a joint registry
program, greater patient participation in their own health care
decisions.
We believe the current fee for service system, although
appropriate for certain types of health care services, is not
the most efficient system for many services and procedures.
We also believe that policy reforms that provide incentives
for the delivery of high quality health care should be coupled
with payment reforms that include greater patient involvement.
There is no one size fits all when it comes to creating new
payment models for Medicare. Each of the following types of
payment systems has merit: capitation, episodes of care, tier
based payment systems, and the traditional fee for service
model.
Whatever methods Congress chooses, we strongly support
efforts to incorporate quality, efficiency, and payment
outcomes into the Medicare physician payment system.
Congress should provide financial incentives that reward
higher quality care based on appropriately risk adjusted
patient centered measures of health care outcomes. Risk
adjustment is essential to account for medical and social
problems, other patient co-morbidities, that are beyond the
provider's control.
These would include obesity, non-compliance with treatment
recommendations, tobacco and alcohol use, to name just a few.
Also, quality measures should be utilized to develop a new
physician payment model but only if it is developed with the
advice of specialty specific input from all physician
specialties who are impacted by the payment system.
The payment system should reward physicians for developing
medically innovative treatments that increase quality and
reduce costs.
An orthopaedic example is orthoscopic surgery, which in the
past had required open procedures and several days in the
hospital. Tying payment to quality and to the savings generated
by medical innovation will reduce overall Medicare costs and
drive the innovation.
Coordinated care models offer another approach for payment
and delivery reform. An example is the episode of care where a
single payment covers all involved providers, but such
arrangements may carry unintended consequences including
denying care to higher risk patients.
The AOS helped form the American Joint Replacement Registry
for total hip and knee data collection and quality improvement.
Its goals include collecting device information and monitoring
outcomes of total joint replacements throughout the U.S.,
creating real time survivorship curves to serve as trip wires
that detect poorly performing implants and providing regular
feedback to surgeons, hospitals, and implant manufacturers
concerning their relative performance compared to peers.
All of the above quality improvement activities have been
developed and/or supported by the AOS, and are changing the
face of orthopaedic practice nationwide.
Patients can become more involved with seeking out
appropriate high value care. First, in the absence of true SGR
reform, Congress should permit the private contracting between
patients and providers. This will help providers close the gap
between inadequate Medicare payments and the ever increasing
costs of providing services to seniors.
Second, Congress should consider enabling Medicare
beneficiaries to assume greater responsibility by cost sharing
for the Medicare program with protections for low income
beneficiaries.
There is a broad range of options that policy makers can
use and consider for enhancing benefit sharing.
We believe the Medicare system needs to be transformed from
its current emphasis on paying for services regardless of
quality or cost to a system that provides meaningful and
sustained incentives for high quality, innovative and cost
effective care.
Accomplishing this goal will require the cooperation of
Congress, CMS, physicians, and patients.
However, we believe that it can be accomplished and that
now more than ever is the right time to concentrate our efforts
in this direction.
Thank you for allowing me to participate in the hearing
today, and we look forward to working with all of you in the
future.
[The statement of Dr. Peter Mandell follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Sharp, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF ARIC SHARP, CEO, QUINCY MEDICAL GROUP

Mr. SHARP. Thank you, Chairman Herger, Ranking Member
Stark, and Members of the Committee.
My name is Aric Sharp, Chief Executive Officer at Quincy
Medical Group.
The need for an SGR solution cannot be stressed enough.
Every year physicians face uncertainty, an inability to budget,
and at times having to spend significant resources to address
retrospective patches.
As the Committee works on the SGR issue, we believe
incentivizing high performance can and should be a part of the
solution. At a minimum this would include measuring and
improving quality, improving care coordination, utilizing
information technology, and demonstrating the efficient
provision of services.
These four attributes guide much of the activity at Quincy
Medical Group and other multi-specialty groups and systems
throughout the country.
In Quincy, we participate in the PQRS program and the e-
prescribing incentive program. We actively measure patient
satisfaction through a standardized CG cap survey, as well as
through opinion metered Kiosk devices in our offices.
However, we are not just measuring quality. We are also
aligning it with our revenue streams. We work with Humana on a
Medicare Advantage product that provides reimbursement for our
patient centered medical home, for 12 quality metrics, and for
shared savings.
Through the Iowa Health System, Quincy participates in the
Medicare shared savings program. That program's 32 quality
measures introduce an even higher level of rigor.
We are also nearing completion of an intensive medical home
contract with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois.
Altogether our combined efforts across all payers will link
over 75 percent of our revenues to both quality and cost
savings.
Quincy's medical multi-specialty medical group model
utilizes physician led committees and work groups so that we
can leverage good care coordination into quality.
For example, Quincy holds the highest patient centered
medical home recognition from NCQA, Level 3. We also have the
largest number of patient centered medical home providers in
the State of Illinois.
We believe there is strong merit to follow the lead of
commercial insurers by incentivizing this type of care
coordination.
Quincy is also on track to meet EHR meaningful use criteria
for all of its physicians. However, only half of our physicians
are even able to receive the intended meaningful use incentive
as well as PQRS and e-prescribing incentives due to a technical
oversight.
H.R. 3458 would fix that issue, and it would end that type
of discrimination in quality programs against rural physicians.
That bill has bipartisan support, and is strongly supported
from medical and hospital associations, providers, and leaders
across the country.
Therefore, we respectfully urge swift passage of H.R. 3458.
You see, the reason it is so critical to have all
physicians in both urban and rural areas on EHRs is because it
is a prerequisite to advanced solutions, like patient
registries, patient portals, tele-health solutions, and
predictive analytics, through products like Explorus and
Anseta.
At Quincy, we are already using or preparing to launch
initiatives in each of those advanced areas.
Finally, we believe high performance includes demonstrating
the efficient provision of services through cost reduction.
However, it is important to keep in mind there are geographic
differences in measuring baseline cost efficiency across our
country, and that fact cannot be overlooked within any
successful SGR solution.
In conclusion, solutions must work for all physicians and
all specialties and in all parts of the country. We believe
taking an approach of shaping the path could be the most
successful, and that shaping can begin with appropriate
incentives centered around quality and technology for high
performing multi-specialty groups and systems.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Aric Sharp follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Jenrette is recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN JENRETTE, CEO, SHARP COMMUNITY MEDICAL
GROUP

Dr. JENRETTE. Thank you, Chairman Herger, Ranking Member
Stark, and members of the Health Subcommittee for inviting me
today to testify regarding physician organizations' efforts to
promote high quality care.
I am pleased to testify today as Chief Executive Officer of
Sharp Community Medical Group and as a physician myself trained
in family medicine and geriatrics.
By the way of background, Sharp Community Medical Group is
the largest IPA in San Diego County. We have a network of more
than 200 primary care physicians and over 500 specialists, and
we care for more than 170,000 patients, both HMO and Medicare
Advantage, as well as commercial HMO, our new commercial ACO
products, and we are one of the six pioneer ACOs in the State
of California.
I also address you today as Chairman of the Board of
Directors for the California Association of Physician Groups,
CAPG, that represents over 150 physician multi-specialty
medical groups and independent practice associations.
Our members serve over 15 million Californians,
approximately one-half of the state's insured population.
What are the most important efforts to promote high quality
care for the patients we serve at Sharp Community Medical Group
as well as the 150 medical groups and IPAs at CAPG?
I must begin as many of the other speakers have with the
certainly known to you, move away from payment systems that
reward volume rather than value, and that is much of the fee
for service system that we currently live under.
Groups like Sharp Community Medical Group have moved to
global payment methods that allow services and systems of care
to be established and built so that we are accountable for a
population of patients, for quality, outcome, and excellence in
care.
We have learned that taking care of patients at the right
time and at the right setting and utilizing team based
approaches to care, examples of which I could offer you now and
later, results in better health and prevention, improved
management of chronic disease, and also ultimately lowers
costs.
Payment methodologies that incentivize physicians and other
health care workers to provide the coordinated, accountable
care should be forward in your thinking.
The second effort to promote quality is the alignment of
incentives at the physician level that results in the quality
outcomes or value that we are seeking.
Sharp Community Medical Group has developed programs and
incentives to support and improve quality for our patients for
over 20 years, and it has not always been easy.
We are focused through efforts like the California
Integrated Healthcare Association, IHA, which is a
collaborative pay for performance program in California, multi-
stakeholders, including plans and medical groups, that promotes
quality improvement, accountability, and affordability of
health care in the state.
Sharp Community Medical Group is also focused on the five
star quality metrics of our Medicare Advantage patients, the 33
quality measurements of our pioneer ACOs, and similar metrics
and goals of our commercial ACOs.
Over the years, Sharp Community Medical Group has expanded,
evolved and gained sophistication in data collection and
aggregation to create useful reports and registries that assist
our physicians in improvement efforts in prevention, management
of chronic disease, recognizing gaps in care, and in
controlling overall costs.
In addition, our doctors have supported transparency and
sharing their results with each other on physician specific
report cards. How do they compare with each other on
prevention, like mammography or colon cancer screening, or how
well they manage their patients with diabetes.
This has enhanced their work together, to learn from each
other, and to continue to improve their performance.
Physicians value accurate, comparable and reliable
information to help them improve. The final effort to promote
high quality care, on which I will close, is that of health
information technology.
Electronic health records, health information exchanges,
HIEs, meaningful use are all steps in the right direction to
collect, aggregate and share information across and among
providers of care. They are, however, only beginning to reach a
level of usefulness for physicians to be better and to care for
patients.
Many physicians still see EHR as fancy paper records
containing volumes of information that is hard to digest and
use successfully.
They will continue to struggle with this until such time as
we can easily share information across a common platform and
the electronic systems develop the intelligence or active
clinical decision support that helps doctors, nurses,
pharmacists and other health care providers use the information
wisely.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to weigh in on this
very important topic this morning and look forward to your
further questions and dialogue. Thank you.

[The statement of Dr. John Jenrette follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Dr. Jenrette. I want to thank
each of our panelists for your testimony.
My first question is for the entire panel. The efforts of
each of your organizations to use the evidence as to what works
to develop and disseminate quality standards that physicians
can put into practice is commendable.
Do you believe that it is appropriate to incorporate
quality and efficiency into the Medicare payment system if
physicians play an integral role in determining the metrics and
the process?
Dr. Riddles.
Dr. RIDDLES. Yes, sir, I certainly do. That is the only way
that we are going to be able to incent and work towards value,
that the whole system has to move that way.
As we talked about initially, coming up with common data
elements, common information, and a way to process that and tie
that together, as my colleagues here have mentioned, is
critical, so that it is going to be seen at not only the local
and regional but national level so we can understand the
patients and how best to apply the medical knowledge that we
have in the way of evidence based things to help that out. Yes,
sir.
Dr. BRONSON. Again, yes, sir, I agree with Dr. Riddles, but
would add the importance of physician leadership and the
leadership of the professional organizations in helping the
penetration of these ideas out to the medical community in an
effective manner.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. As well, certainly agree. The AGA has worked
closely with NQF and the other AQA in developing scientifically
based, evidence based guidelines. I think it certainly helps
with physician acceptance of guidelines, and physician
acceptance of measures to control costs and improve quality are
far more accepted when they are developed by their colleagues
and peers using a process that involves evidence based
medicine.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. MANDELL. Mr. Chairman, the answer is definitely yes. In
addition to clinical practice guidelines, we do not have a lot
of information and it is certainly very important sometimes in
very expensive areas, so we are also developing appropriate use
criteria for that. They take the data that is there and then
combine that with what is called an ``expert opinion'' to come
up with the best available recommendations, and that would go a
long way towards increasing value as well.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. SHARP. I would simply echo the ``yes'' with all of
these folks for the same reasons. I think it needs to be
physician led.
Dr. JENRETTE. It sounds like you have consensus here, as I
would also support and as I have mentioned, I think physicians
when they have an opportunity to weigh in on the data, on the
guidelines, and have input, you will get the buy in that we are
all looking for and move us in the right direction.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Dr. Mandell, your organization
supports tier payments so that physicians who provide higher
quality care receive higher payments.
Do you believe the evidence and methods exist to make
determinations that condition payments on outcomes?
Dr. MANDELL. In certain areas, there is a lot of good
evidence to that, to support that concept. As I mentioned a
minute ago, in areas where we do not have high quality evidence
to provide clinical practice guidelines, the use of appropriate
use criteria could be used for the tiering process, and
basically as I am sure you understand, the tiering process
would say for example, if you did not report to the registry,
if you did not follow the appropriate use criteria for whatever
reason, you get paid at a certain level. If you do support and
utilize these things, you get paid at a higher level.
There may be reasons why individual physicians would not
want to do that at first. I would suspect that over time
everybody would follow all the guidelines and go to the higher
payment level.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Dr. Weinstein, your
organization generally supports incorporating quality and
outcomes into the Medicare payment system. To that end, you
have developed robust quality measures.
Should these measures differentiate among physicians based
on their geographical location?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I think at the beginning of the development
of guidelines, the issues that we are tackling are relatively
universal and do not really depend upon the geography.
If you get deeper into nuances, that might change, but I
think in general, the quality guidelines that are established
should be applied throughout all areas, rural, urban, whatever.
To that end, development of a registry allows small groups
and large groups to participate with any web access, either
entering information in manually or through electronic data
interchanges.
We do not really see any difference in the geography,
particularly if the guidelines are developed with input from a
wide range of physicians.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Stark is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panel for
participating with us today.
Dr. Bronson, you mentioned medical home, and I think that
is an interesting concept that people are talking about. What I
am wondering, I am aware that the thoracic surgeons over the
past five or ten years have collected information on virtually
every thoracic surgical procedure done by the members of that
organization.
It has resulted in a best practices recommendation
generated by the specialty so that if somebody has to have a
heart transplant or something else, they can look up and see
what all their colleagues feel are the best practices.
Do any of you represent a specialty that does a similar
collection of data?
Dr. MANDELL. We are talking about the joint registry, and
in that sense, we are collecting data for total joint
replacements.
Mr. STARK. We think it would be a good idea that every
physician be required to keep electronic medical records.
Arguably, they will have to be reimbursed for the cost of the
equipment, programming and learning.
New medical students will not have that problem. It will be
taught to them.
We would then probably end up hopefully with a program like
VISTA, which I think is universally acclaimed as the finest
existing medical record program in the country.
It is astounding to me, and we are trying, Dr. Riddles, to
see if we can straighten this out, but VISTA cannot talk to the
Department of Defense. You go figure. If you are on active
duty, you cannot get the information, but as soon as you
retire, it is plugged in.
Maybe that is just bureaucracy that does not want to do it.
It does not make any sense at least to me that these records
cannot be incorporated, and further, that any of us ending up
in an emergency room 1,000 miles from home, if we have our
password or some way of identifying ourselves, it would seem to
me it would be valuable in terms of outcome and costs for the
emergency room people to punch in and get medical records as we
get in VISTA.
Is there anybody who thinks we should not have a system
like that?
Dr. RIDDLES. If I could offer just a comment, sir. I think
you are spot on, there is nothing magic with electronic things,
and that would really disappoint my children, but there is not.
The big piece is how you use it. It is a tool. If it is not
interconnected and it is not integrated, it is not of any value
to you. That is again part of what we and I think all the
members here have been saying, we have to have the registers,
we have to have the common databases, so we have the ability to
use it. It is huge when you have that capability.
Mr. STARK. We are the only industrialization in the world
that does not have it, I might add. I look to Canada, for
instance, and let's use pharmaceuticals. That is pretty easy.
Aspirin is aspirin. Tylenol is Tylenol. You do not get into a
question of professional differences.
Would it not be helpful, it certainly would to me when I go
to see my ortho whether I get a needle in the back or Tylenol,
I know what I want, but it would be helpful to see what the
results were without regard to cost and without cost to
recommendation, but to see what happens to a group of people
with problems or any other specialties that you all may
represent. I just hope we can get there.
Dr. Weinstein.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I will make a point. We practice different
medicine. The way we record data, the efficiency of our medical
records obviously very much depends on what specialty we are
in, the amount of information we want to record.
The important thing that would help us is the glue that
allows all of our systems to talk to each other. That is where
the standards have not been set and should be part of----
Mr. STARK. It is one of the areas that some of you, more
than just a couple of you is out of medical school, are going
to have to re-learn. Kids in medical school will learn it. That
will be the inconvenience. You are going to have to figure out
if there is an universal system how to enter my weight and
blood pressure, what line you put it on, a pain in the
sacroiliac, but a pain.
Eventually, it would seem to me, and I think in less than
ten years, we will have those records for you all to use at
your convenience.
I appreciate the interest that many of you have in that
field and letting us know about anything we can do to promote
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Drs. Riddles,
Bronson, Weinstein and Mandell, although we have discussed the
fact that reforming the current payment system cannot be an one
size fits all endeavor, we still have to ensure that reform
payment systems work in various physician's practice
arrangements and in geographic regions.
It seems to me there are a lot of differences just among
you guys, notwithstanding all over the country.
What are your organizations doing to support small
practices including those in rural areas?
Dr. BRONSON. The College is very active in working to
support small practices. Almost 50 percent of our members
practice in small practices. We have developed programs to help
small practices become patient centered medical homes, to go
through that process, and the tools and other products to help
them with the HR choice and utilization.
We have a wide variety of educational programs to help
staffs get better at supporting the practices.
Mr. JOHNSON. Have you seen any improvement? I know a couple
of doc's in our area that do not want to use the system. They
would rather use handwritten records.
Dr. BRONSON. Certainly, there is a generation of physicians
that will probably--I am probably one of them--I have been
using electronic medical records for ten years. I learned how
to do it.
As Congressman Stark mentioned, the younger generation will
be using electronic medical records. We have to prepare for the
transition over that time and increasingly practices will
become electronic, and the electronic systems will become more
user friendly as well.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I would add one of the main reasons that our
group got together, 56 physicians, was the cost of information
technology, to be able to share the cost of the start up of
information technology. That is a hindrance for a small group.
The high tech stimulus money may be fine for a group of 56,
but it does not work for a group of two or three. The cost
certainly of implementing IT far surpassed the stimulus dollars
for small groups.
Mr. JOHNSON. I have seen it not work in hospital systems
either. Right in our area, Methodist and Baylor do not talk to
each other. Their machines do not talk to each other. They have
different systems.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. That is the standards I was talking about,
the standards that allow different systems to talk. Where there
are no standards, then systems are not required to----
Mr. JOHNSON. Are you saying the United States Government
ought to demand that they all have the same standards?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. That the communication standards between
information systems should be defined by the United States
Government so any provider of IT services, be it a hospital,
office or whatever, have to be required to have the standard to
talk to each other. If they cannot talk to each other, they
should not receive certification.
Mr. JOHNSON. You like Government control of your practice?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I did not say Government control. I said----
Mr. JOHNSON. That is what it is if we advance something
like that.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I do not want to argue. We all submit claims
the same way. The way we submit claims to Medicare has been
defined by CMS. The only way we can all submit claims to one
entity is if somebody defines the way the data is transmitted.
Mr. JOHNSON. Dr. Mandell.
Dr. MANDELL. I just wanted to point out that the market so
far has sort of decided what the basic electronic medical
record was going to look like, and because there are not too
many orthopaedic surgeons, I mentioned 18,000, a little more
than that, to practice, the systems out there now are not very
friendly to what we do.
We do not take blood pressures very often. We do not check
for blood glucose and things like that, which are some of the
things that may be required.
Standards would be a nice idea but hopefully when they are
developed, they should be developed, they will take into
account the input of all the specialty societies as well, and
to that end, we have our own committee at the American Academy
of Orthopaedic Surgeons that has been working with the
regulators to try to get them to understand all this.
Mr. JOHNSON. You guys are making a lot of progress. You
still going to use Titanium in knees and hips?
Dr. MANDELL. When it is appropriate, yes, sir.
Mr. JOHNSON. I have a couple. Thank you. Dr. Weinstein and
Dr. Mandell, it is encouraging that both your groups recognize
the need to address all types of practices in developing your
clinical registries.
Given the value of such data and quality improvement and
performance, how can we incentivize more physicians to
participate in these efforts?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I think as we talk about reforming the
payment system, basing payment on larger and larger amounts of
the payment on participating in quality measures and achieving
levels of value and quality, we will get more and more people
to participate.
Dr. MANDELL. I mentioned earlier the tier payment model,
which is one of the possibilities here, requiring folks to do
that, to report to registries in order to get the higher levels
would be appropriate.
I think as time goes on, as some of these websites that
rate doctors in the Internet now become more popular, patients
will ask their doctors, are you reporting your results to the
registry, can I see those results, all that sort of thing. It
is just going to be what the market wants.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We talk about
rewarding physicians who deliver high quality care. The health
care reform bill is already actually testing new payment and
delivery systems. I think each of you are aware of that.
I have said many times health care reform is entitlement
reform, and it will help us to transform the health care
system.
Today we are here to specifically focus on physician led
quality initiatives.
My first question is to you, Dr. Mandell. Many of you may
know that in the last Congress we introduced legislation to
create a national knee and hip registry. The intention of the
legislation was not only to focus on improving patient
outcomes, but to address issues within the industry itself.
In 2007, five of the nation's biggest makers of artificial
hips and knees agreed to pay $311 million in penalties to
settle Federal accusations that they used so-called
``consulting agreements,'' better known as ``bribery,'' and
other tactics to get surgeons to use their products, regardless
of their effectiveness.
It was part of a deferred agreement with the U.S.
Attorneys, not unlike the deferred prosecution agreements with
the Wall Street folks, Enron, and all those people, AIG. Nobody
ever brought to trial. No charges ever made. The cost of doing
business, the penalty they paid. That is it.
Let me be clear. These five companies make a majority of
the artificial hips and limbs here in America. Obviously, when
a majority industry is accused of wrong doing, we need to hold
that industry accountable.
Right, Mr. Chairman?
Dr. Mandell, I understand that the American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons is currently launching a joint replacement
registry to promote patient safety and hold the industry
accountable.
Originally, the goal of your organization was to recruit 90
percent of all the hospitals conducting knee and hip implant
procedures to participate in the registry by the end of 2015,
if I am not mistaken.
Dr. Mandell, can you speak to the development of the
registry, tell me if it is on track to meet its current
registration goals, and then can you expand on the importance
of registries for our health outcomes that most of you talked
about today?
Dr. MANDELL. Let me take the second part first. It is very
important for health care outcomes to have registries. The rest
of the industrialized world has such registries. They have
proven very useful in finding products that were not working as
well as originally designed or hoped.
We have been a little bit slow in this country to get on
that band wagon. It took us something like ten years to get to
the point where we are now with the American Joint Replacement
Registry.
We have gotten the infrastructure in place. We have gotten
some hospitals signed up. I am not on the Board of the AJR, so
I do not know exactly what their projections were as to when
they would get to 90 percent of the hospitals. I am sure
eventually they would like to get 100 percent of the hospitals.
We are working towards that. We have not detected any
problems, if that is one of the questions you are asking so far
with the products that have been registered.
We had some difficulty getting some hospitals to put some
of the data in, things as simple as laterality. You might ask
why it matters whether it is a left total hip replacement or
right total hip replacement that is done.
And the answer is, when you look at the data, that a second
surgery has been done. If it is done on the same hip that the
first surgery was on, that is a completely different issue than
if it was done on the opposite hip, obviously. Folks often have
bilateral hip replacements.
So little things like that that you think would be fairly
easy to enter in the data bank are proving somewhat difficult.
We also had a problem with getting folks to agree on bar coding
of various devices so that it could be scanned into the
electronic records.
For reasons that I do not understand, the folks here in
D.C. who were supposed to come up with those guidelines for
using the bar codes had a lot of trouble doing it. I think they
just recently came out with at least some proposals along those
lines, so that is going to help out a lot as well.
So we are working hard. We may be a little bit behind in
achieving our goals. But we believe we can get there.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Reichert is recognized.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have heard a lot of phrases and words used--physician-
led, patient-centered, quality care, streamlined, values-based,
performance-based, performance measures. All of these things, I
think, everyone on the committee agrees with, and everyone on
the panel. This should be easy. It is certainly not.
I have only been on this Committee four years, and we have
been talking about this, and I know you have been involved and
engaged in this in your entire career, most likely. These are
things that the patients out there--all of us at some time or
another are a patient--understand, grab onto, all agree with,
and want to hear the discussion on. But the devil is in the
details, as they always say.
So from the world I come from, trying to evaluate--I was a
police officer for 33 years; trying to evaluate cops is like
trying to evaluate doctors and teachers--when you are dealing
with people, it is not widgets and medical devices and those
sorts of things. I hear you saying that. Hard to put
performance measures on cops. But some of the things that we
would look at is kids going back to school. Are they staying in
school? Are the streets clean? Graffiti? You know, those sorts
of things.
And Dr. Weinstein, in your testimony you mentioned that
physicians are more comfortable being measured on things they
know are important to their patients. And you mentioned that
your organization is developing a quality measure set that
currently includes 24 measures.
Would it be beneficial for Medicare and other payors, if
they use this uniform set of measures established by the
professionals providing the care, would they include some of
those hard-to-grab-onto sort of things that I described in
other worlds when you are trying to evaluate people working
with people?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. The AGA's measures that we have worked on,
the guidelines that we have worked on, have tended to be in
those areas where there are large amounts of scientific data
and agreement about what is best practices. Obviously, we
cannot tackle everything. But if you look at where most of the
dollars are spent, we can define in colorectal cancer care
within inflammatory bowel disease those high-dollar, high-
volume areas where there is a sufficient amount of scientific
data and agreement amongst everybody as to what would be best
practices and what would be a good outcome.
I can get you other information about the other measures we
are developing.
Mr. REICHERT. So is your answer yes? Would it be beneficial
to Medicare?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I think it would be very beneficial to
Medicare, yes.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you. Well, there are some terms that I
have heard for the first time in this testimony, and one of
them particularly caught my attention, by Dr. Mandell. It is a
phrased you used, ``appropriately risk-adjusted.'' What does
that really mean, appropriately risk-adjusted? I think that if
you use your imagination a little bit, that can be sort of a
scary thought in some minds of some patients.
Dr. MANDELL. Well, patients come in all sizes and shapes
and statuses of health. And the treatment is different for each
of these groups. We talk about clinical practice guidelines
based on high-quality evidence. To get the high-quality
evidence, you have to control for everything except a
particular variable that you are looking at.
So let's say if you are studying hip replacements and
comparing two different types, you want to know whether
everybody is a smoker or is not a smoker; otherwise, that could
be a variable. You want to know whether or not everybody has
diabetes or does not have diabetes; that could be another
variable.
Mr. REICHERT. I think one of the things that sort of,
maybe, is the kind of scary thought here is the older you get,
how does that play into adjusting risk?
Dr. MANDELL. Well, if you are on the mean, this big bell-
shaped curve that most biological systems, including human
beings, usually fit on, we take that into account when we
develop our processes in the first place. If you are out at the
tail ends of the bell-shaped curve, at the margin, so to speak,
that is where we get into trouble in terms of trying to cost
out, let's say, and resource out how we can treat those folks.
If you are old and you have heart disease and you have
cancer, it is a different surgical procedure than if you are
just old, things of that sort. So trying to risk-adjust for all
of this is an important thing to do if you are going to give a
certain amount of money for a certain procedure.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I will make a point that the danger in not
risk-adjusting is the feeling that if you pay the same amount
for every patient, there will be cherry-picking. Why would a
physician want to take care of a patient who is more sick when
he can get paid the same amount for taking care of a patient
who is less sick? So the need for some sort of risk adjustment
has to be down to the individual basis.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Gerlach is recognized.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Riddles, in your written testimony, page 8, under the
category of innovative approaches to dealing with these issues,
you state that the payment system should take innovative
practice strategies into account and encourage physicians and
health care organizations to implement new processes and
procedures that create cost savings while simultaneously
improving quality and keeping patients safe.
One of the things that the Government Accounting Office,
GAO, put forward about a year ago was that in the Medicare
program, which is about, what, $540 billion a year in
expenditure, in that year of 2010 there were $48 billion of
improper patients in the system.
Could be erroneous and mistaken payments. Could be phantom
billing. Could be identity theft of UPIN numbers for physicians
and Social Security numbers of patients. Could be fraudulent
durable medical equipment billing, et cetera, et cetera. But 48
billion, almost 50 billion a year, in improper payments times
10 is 500, half a trillion dollars, over a 10-year period,
money that could obviously be used for much better purposes,
including dealing with physician reimbursements.
So my question to you, as representatives of different
physicians' groups, have you thought about other approaches
from a technological standpoint to deal effectively with
phantom billing, identity theft of physicians and patients? And
in particular, have you thought about utilizing what in the
Department of Defense they are using, a common access card, a
smart card, that from a technological standpoint better
identifies the provider and the user or the purchaser of a
certain kind of service to cut down on these kinds of
fraudulent or improper patients within the system?
Are you, individually or collectively, looking specifically
at technologies that can help do that so that, in turn, the
savings generated from that can certainly be utilized to make
sure physicians get the kind of reimbursements they deserve to
care for our Medicare seniors?
So I will start with Dr. Riddles, but would then like to
have any of the other gentlemen provide input as well on that
question.
Dr. RIDDLES. Sir, the simple answer is yes. And that all
lies in innovation. We have to come up with things that we do
not do today that are possible and apply those to the system
because, as you quite rightly point out, there is a lot of
opportunity to save cost and expense here.
So those type of things is what we are talking about, to
support innovation, doing things differently, not just doing a
little more or a little less of what we are doing now. We have
to considerably change it, whether it be smart cards or it
could be something DNA-based identification.
I think we have talked a little bit here about the need for
information management systems that not only exist in
individual little islands, if you will, but are tied together
so that you see that if somebody billed for a certain
procedure, that that patient was in fact seen at that location
and those diagnoses matched--so that yes, sir, the answer is
yes.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. Great. Any other gentlemen on that
question? Nobody?
Dr. BRONSON. I would answer. We are very supportive of
using innovation to make sure that payments are appropriate and
payments are fair and payments are actually honest. And we have
no disagreement with that. We do not have a robust program to
get there, but we would be supportive of looking at that.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. Thank you.
Sir?
Dr. MANDELL. Yes. I do not think we have thought about this
very much. It sounds like a very interesting idea. I think if
we did consider this concept, it was probably in the context of
electronic medical records, with the thought that having
everything in the system, so to speak, would make it easier to
tell who was doing what.
Mr. GERLACH. Well, right now, as you know, we have a pay-
and-chase kind of system. A payment is made, a reimbursement is
made, and then go back and chase after that payment if CMS
decides that somehow it was improperly issued.
Whereas you can, through a smart card or common access card
system, prevent that kind of thing very significantly by
verifying the appropriateness of that physician providing the
care up front through a biometric component to a card as well
as the proper identification of the senior through that access
card, particularly where the senior does not have his or her
Social Security number on the card, which is then subject to
identity theft, which then complicates and creates all sorts of
problems, too.
So it is technology being used in many other places around
the world, including even here in the United States with the
Department of Defense. And yet we cannot seem to take what is
out there from a technological standpoint and employ it in a
very realistic way to cut down on very significant loss of
expenditures in the program.
Anybody else on the point?
[No response.]
Mr. GERLACH. If not, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Kind is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank our
panelists for your testimony here today. I really think this is
the Holy Grail of what we need to be focused on when it comes
to health care reform and how successful we ultimately are in
reforming the system that has been in desperate need. So we
appreciate your insight and help with this matter. I think it
is going to require a true partnership to make this work well.
I, along with Senators Klobuchar and Cantwell, got included
under the Affordable Care Act the value-based payment modifier
that many of you may be aware of. It is going to start being
implemented in 2015 for physician payments, fully implemented
in 2017. CMS came out with a proposed rule in early July of
this year.
So any ideas or thoughts or concerns that you might have or
your membership might have in regards to that value payment
modifier, my office will certainly be interested in hearing
back from you. We do not have to get into it in any detail
today. But it is out there, and it is happening, and it is
going to have an effect as far as driving to a more value-based
reimbursement system.
Obviously, the Institute of Medicine, the National Academy,
again under the Affordable Care Act, has been tasked to change
the fee-for-service system in Medicare to a fee-for-value
payment system. This is meant to build upon the seminal work
that they did, especially in 2004 and 2005, on how best to do
that.
But they are being asked this time to produce an actionable
plan of what that would look like. So I would certainly
encourage your groups, too, to be in touch with the Institute
of Medicine panel. It is a very distinguished panel that has
been comprised to do this, to give them some feedback. And I
know some of you have already.
But I think there are three great revolutions happening in
health care reform that need to be sustained and that momentum
carried forward. One is the build-out of the HIT system that
many of you have talked about to increase the efficiency of
care, reduce medical errors, and, most importantly, start
collecting the data that our doctors and patients need to make
good decisions with.
Secondly, the transformation on how health care is
delivered, so it is more integrated, coordinated, patient-
centered. I have got models of care in my back yard in
Wisconsin that are showing the way, from the Mayo system to
Gundersen to Marshfield to Aurora to Theta Care. I mean, you go
right through the list throughout the Upper Midwest, and they
have shown very good models that do work.
And then finally is the payment reform so we are rewarding
good value, quality care. And what I want to ask you today, and
anyone can take this up, and I want you to think about it for a
second, is we are asking your members to do more, get better
results, but for a lower cost. Can we do that without
jeopardizing the compensation system that physicians are
receiving today? That is going to be my question.
But I also want to share a story with you because I spoke
to a CEO of one of my major health care providers back home who
invested in the Epic system, software system, a couple of years
ago, the HIT system. And when he did, he was warned at the time
by Judy Faulkner, the owner of Epic, that what will probably
happen is you are going to end up ordering less tests, doing
less imaging, less scanning, as a result of implementing this
system.
Two years later, I asked him what he found out. And he
said, she was exactly right. We are doing less. We are not
ordering as many scans. We are not ordering as much imaging as
we did in the past. But that is affecting our bottom line
because the incentives are not created to reward those types of
decision-making to get better results; in fact, you are
penalized by doing less.
And I asked him, well, what are you going to do as a
consequence? He says, we are going to continue to do the right
thing. I mean, if the data does not show that we should be
doing certain things or ordering certain scans or imaging, we
are not going to do it, even though it is affecting the line.
And I guess that is what you guys are all testifying about
today is can we ask you to produce better results, good quality
outcomes, and save money in the process, but without it
jeopardizing the compensation system and therefore the
incentives that exist in the system today?
Dr. JENRETTE. I really appreciate your comments about both
the HIT and the care coordination because I think that really
is the key effort or direction in order to preserve, as you
say, the compensation but do the right thing at the right time.
And so there are going to be winners and losers as we
control costs. But many of the costly elements--and hospitals
are one of those areas of high cost; some of the use of
technology, and you have already mentioned now we are using
them more appropriately in the right setting for the right
patient, are really the direction we need to go.
The coordination of care, as you are referring to the
ability to keep patients from being admitted in the first place
or readmitted to the hospital--in our organizations in
California, our bed-day performance is half of what it is in
the hospital as compared to the rest of the country because of
the efforts that are being made to manage the patients at home,
to coordinate services with case management, pharmaceutical,
medication reconciliation at discharge, those things that
create the readmission and the cost of care.
Our physicians being under a global payment system actually
see better reimbursement than they do on their fee-for-service
because they are able to use that money correctly and wisely to
create the programs that are really necessary to really make a
difference to the patients' lives and the amount of dollars
that we spend. So yes, I believe it can be done.
Mr. KIND. Mr. Chairman, I see we have run out of time. So
if anyone else wants to, they can do it outside of this
hearing, I guess. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Anyone else that would like to respond by
letter, we would appreciate it. The gentleman's time is
expired.
Dr. Price is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank you
for holding this hearing on this remarkably important issue
that, when you get right down to it, is all about patients. And
sometimes we lose sight of that. This is about individual
patients and the care that they receive.
For at least five of the six of you, I understand that we
make your job more difficult here in Washington in caring for
patients. And for that, I think we all ought to take note and
try to figure out a system that allows patients and families
and physicians to be making medical decisions and not well-
intentioned, wonderful people here in this town who cannot know
the individual aspects of one patient's care. It is impossible.
That is what risk adjustment is all about. We try to figure
out how one patient is different than another, even with the
same diagnosis. For example, Dr. Mandell, a 65-year-old woman
who is out playing tennis falls and breaks her hip is
different, is she not, in terms of the treatment that she
requires from an individual in your specialty than the 85-year-
old gentleman who is bedridden who rolls over and breaks his
hip. Yet the code is exactly the same, is it not?
Dr. MANDELL. That is correct.
Mr. PRICE. And so how do we get to the recognition under a
payment system that recognizes those two different patients
with exactly the same diagnosis?
Dr. MANDELL. Well, there are a number of different options,
as you know, Congressman Price. My thought, off the top of my
head here, would be to have some additional codes to document
the fact that the 85-year-old had advanced osteoporosis and
perhaps other diagnoses which qualified for additional
resources in order to treat all the other conditions that would
be concomitant to treating his or her hip fracture.
Mr. PRICE. Would you not agree that the quality that we
talk about for those two individuals, the quality result, are
two different things, are they not?
Dr. MANDELL. Yes. You are not going to get the 85-year-old
to perform like a 65-year-old any more, especially after a
fractured hip. That is true.
Mr. PRICE. And so the quality definition that we seek--
people have tossed around this value equals quality over cost
equation all the time--the quality that we seek is defined by a
patient. Right?
Dr. MANDELL. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. So if it is defined by the patient, then who
ought to be in charge of the system that we are talking about?
Dr. MANDELL. Well, doctors should be in charge, in our
opinion.
Mr. PRICE. How about patients?
Dr. MANDELL. In conjunction with patients. Patients do not
always have all the information available, and doctors are the
best folks to give them that information to make appropriate
decisions for their particular case.
Mr. PRICE. As a patient advocate. Which leads me to the
other words that have been put forward here by physician-led
physician input, physician advice. If physicians, as the
patient advocates, have input advice led but do not have the
veto authority over what is right for that given patient, is
that a system that we desire?
Dr. MANDELL. It is not a perfect system by any stretch of
the imagination. The question really is, can we afford to have
each individual person get maximum treatment all the time? If
Ford wanted to build an automobile that never broke down for 20
years, they could probably do that, but it would probably cost
about half a million dollars to do that.
They can build 99.9 percent of cars for what they sell them
for. But to get to that last little bit, as you know, it is
very, very expensive. So that is a decision that Congress needs
to make as to whether or not we can afford to do it for every
individual person.
Mr. PRICE. I would suggest it is a decision the patients
need to make.
But Dr. Riddles, you had a comment?
Dr. RIDDLES. Yes, sir. I think we have talked a lot about
evidence-based and how we come to those, and that is very, very
important. But also, it is a resource base, too, which is a
little bit different discussion.
And that is why we talked about building, if you will, a
new, if you will, group that has in it not only the health care
providers, but then leaders in other fields--the payors,
political--and also to have the patients in that. Because when
it comes down to it, when you are at an individual level, the
physicians will advocate for the patient, as they should.
But again, looking at what is right, it is a needs versus
wants discussion at a certain point, and you need to have the
perspective of all the stakeholders in that discussion. And I
think that may be where we might want to be going.
Mr. PRICE. Dr. Weinstein, you talked about having
guidelines for those things for which there is general
agreement, from a risk-based statement and from an outcome
standpoint. And I see my time has expired. But I think that it
is important for people to respond and recognize that there is
a lot of medicine for which there is not a lot of agreement.
And those decisions then have to be based upon patients and
families and doctors making decisions and not wonderful people
in grand white buildings in this town.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. I think the only point I will add is that
the decision should be between the patient and the physician,
given the amount of information, the scientific literature. How
much a patient wants should be up to the patient.
But I think the question here is, who is going to pay for
it? What is the basic level of care that we can afford to buy?
What can that patient afford to buy? What can we afford for
entitlement in Medicare?
So the decision is between the doctor and the patient. But
I think we have to decide what we can afford.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. [Presiding.] The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Dr. McDermott, you are recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Taking off on that last business about who makes the
decision, I would like to do a pop quiz because you are all
reasonable people. You are all smart. You think. You plan. You
are used to dealing with problems. How many of you have filled
out your final directives and discussed them with your family?
[All witnesses raise their hand.]
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Not bad. Now, how much time do you spend in
your practice working with patients doing their final
directives? I raise this because you know and I know everybody
is going to die. I mean, Woody Allen said it: Nobody gets out
of life alive.
So we are all going to die. And yet those last six months,
we spend the most amount of money, and the most amount of money
that is of no useful purpose, because the patient is in the
last days and for reasons of medical malpractice and families'
disagreement and whatever, care goes on.
And I would like to hear how many, or rather, you in your
practice--I have a medical home. There is a doctor who has my
directives, and I discuss with him everything. But how many of
you have talked with patients about final directives? Is it any
part of your practice at all?
Dr. JENRETTE. I will begin. And my specialty area happened
to be geriatrics, so I actually spent a significant amount of
time talking about end-of-life services for the family and for
the patient. And I would agree it is a role as patient advocate
and trying to give them the best information that you can so
that they and the family understand what the quality of life
will be, depending upon the treatment that we offer. So I have
had years of experience in doing that.
Within our organizations, we actually have metrics that we
measure, and we actually have a goal of what patients have
their final directives completed and are they on all charts.
And we look at those, and we audit for those, because we think
it is such an important piece of how we treat patients and in
their care for the future.
So I believe you are right on target, and I think it is one
of the most important things we could do. In fact, if we were
able to focus there and really not take into account and not
deliver the unnecessary services, as you talk about, at the end
of life, I am not sure we would need to have so many of the
conversations about which hip we might use here or what
procedure we might do there because most of the dollars are
going in end-of-life care when it is unnecessary.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. One of the problems that we ran into in the
Affordable Care Act, we put some money in so that doctors could
be reimbursed to discuss end-of-life questions with patients
and would be paid for it. And it became a lightning rod for an
awful lot of misinformation, I think would be the nicest way to
put it.
Do you force your patients to sit down and write their
final directives?
Dr. JENRETTE. It is not a forced issue. It is----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. No. It is not a forced issue.
Dr. JENRETTE. Not forced.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It is not forced by the government?
Dr. JENRETTE. No.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So how do you bring it up with patients in a
way that makes some sense?
Dr. JENRETTE. Well, it is part of, medically, what you are
doing as you are going through history, as you are looking at
outcomes and what kinds of either prevention or chronic care or
what are we managing here together. It is a conversation that
becomes part of the regular dialogue and can be with any
patient. It does not matter what age group it is.
I mean, to have that conversation, if something
catastrophic happened, if you found yourself in this situation,
we need to have a discussion about what your wishes would be.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. One of the things we did here in this
Committee, and it frustrated me then and it still frustrates
me, Sandy Levin and I put an amendment into a bill in 1990, I
believe it was, that would require Medicare to give final
directive information to patients when they gave them their
beginning of Medicare. And then we went back a year later to
find out how many had filled out those final directives.
Now, this is a country where we do not like to talk about
death. We will do anything to talk about something else besides
death. And so it is not surprising that only 40 percent of the
people in this country have wills; that is, they have decided
how their whatever their wealth is is going to be distributed
when they die.
When we looked in further, we found that only 20 percent of
the people who we had given these forms to had filled them out.
And I am puzzled about how we, as a country, come to grips with
this whole issue because my mother lived to 97 and my father
lived to 93, and my brothers and sister and I have been through
the process on the patient's side of the bed, try to figure out
what we should do.
And my experience with it was, my father said--when we were
doing with him, he said, ``Well, I do not want them paddles. I
have seen them things on TV, and I do not want that, that
jumping on the bed.'' So I went to the doctor who was his
physician, and he said, ``Well, you know, it is really a lot
less traumatic to have that than it is to have some big old
intern pressing on your ribs and breaking all your ribs.'' So
my father said, ``Well, okay. If that is what you suggest, that
is what we will do.''
But those are not easy discussions to have. And I really
think that that is one of the things that we, as a profession--
I am a physician. So we as a profession are going to have to
come to grips with how we deal with this among our patients.
Because a lot of the waste that we are talking about, the costs
are going to come down. How we do that is going to have to be
as humane as possible and with the patient as the center of it,
in my view.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Buchanan, you are recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want
to thank the committee for being here. I am excited we are
talking about quality care. I am from Sarasota, Florida. In
that region, we got rated as the best community, middle-sized
community, in the country for quality of living.
But at the top of the list, best place to live and work,
top of the list was quality health care. So it is obviously
critical, what you guys do every day, and it makes a big
difference. So I appreciate you being here.
Let me mention, as someone new on the panel, I have been in
business for 30-some years--I am all about everybody wants to
be more efficient. But when we talk about quality and
efficiency, looking at that fine line, as I think about it,
meeting with a lot of doctor groups and a lot of doctors
generally in our area, one cardiologist told me, he said, ``The
last 20 years I am working twice as hard and get reimbursed
half.''
I get a sense with a lot of doctors that I hear this, where
maybe they used to see 6 or 10 patients in an hour; now they
are seeing 12 to 15. They have got more staff. So where is that
fine line?
When you talk about quality health care that everybody
wants--I do not think it is just about electronic health
records; I think that helps us be more efficient--that fine
line between that and efficiency, where does that come in?
Because I hear from patients as well, where they are concerned,
where the doctor is under pressure, they feel, has to get in
and out and he has got 10 patients waiting.
So I would just ask the panel, do you want to comment on
that? Where is the fine line between doctors working harder,
making less, in a sense--and I am not sticking up for doctors,
but at the end of the day that is the key to health care, in my
mind--where is that fine line between providing the quality we
all talked about today and the efficiency--and usually it is
with that doctor's time--in terms of patients? Let's start at
the end here with Dr. Riddles.
Dr. RIDDLES. Yes, sir. I agree completely. The issue is,
the fine line is not where we sit down. And this is why we are
talking about value-based and evidence-based, to learn where
that fine line is and then make sure that we line our
reimbursement system up with that.
I think part of the reason that physicians are seeing more,
moving faster, and so forth is again symptomatic of--we are
reimbursed for, again, for the most part, is numbers seen,
procedures done, those type of things. And that is not
necessarily where the best outcomes lie.
So getting back to what we have done before is we need a
system where we can see that, learn where it is, where the
evidence exists, do that, and if not, then coming up with
appropriate use criteria as we do learn more, sir. So that
would be my sense.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Dr. Bronson.
Dr. BRONSON. I could not agree more with you. The current
system of paying just for individual service at a time, and
then with cut payments, leads to almost a mill mentality of
pushing people through. That does not serve the patient well,
it does not satisfy the doctor in their practice, and that is
not the system we should have.
The system we should have is to support comprehensive care
in a way that provides that value. And that is what we are
talking about with the patient-centered medical home concept.
The concept really leads to better care coordination, a more
comprehensive look at problems, and more prevention so that you
are dealing with those issues early on instead of late. There
are lots of opportunities to get better.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Dr. Weinstein? And again, I want to get back
to this idea. Do you sense that in practices where the doctor,
when we talk about efficiency, maybe they used to, on average,
spend 8 minutes and now they are down to 3, is that where a lot
of this efficiency is going?
Dr. WEINSTEIN. Let me try and answer.
Mr. BUCHANAN. That is what I hear.
Dr. WEINSTEIN. Yes. And I think we can define quality. You
know, we all want high quality, be that patient satisfaction,
lower drug costs, less hospitalizations. And I think we can
measure those things and we can report on those things.
As businessmen, our job is to try and deliver that same
level of quality with the right provider in the right location
at the lowest cost. That means right-sizing our offices, maybe
using physician extenders for certain services that do not
necessarily require the highest trained person in your
business.
But yet we have to maintain the quality, the patient
satisfaction, the lower drug costs. And so if we can define
what we want to measure and maintain that quality and then
provide it through a business model that allows us to right-
size the provider to the patient's need, then we can succeed.
I think one of the things that frustrates us in business is
the unknown about where the revenue is coming from, and that is
the broken Medicare system. As we go from 6 months to 9 months
to 12 months not knowing what the revenue is going to be, if
you are in business, I do not think you have that uncertainty.
Mr. BUCHANAN. I cannot imagine what you have got to deal
with, the SGR and everything.
Dr. Mandell, I want to give everybody an opportunity just
to comment.
Dr. MANDELL. Yes. What you talked about, obviously, is a
symptom of fee-for-service medicine. And I can only talk about
orthopedic surgery. Mr. Kind was talking earlier about the fact
that if we do have appropriate use criteria and clinical
practice guidelines, there will be less business, so to speak,
down the line.
We kind of look at it as the appropriate amount of
business. And at least with regard to musculoskeletal problems,
there is a tidal wave of Baby Boomers coming online with
Medicare right now. So I think as we focus on doing things that
really work and avoid doing things that do not work very well,
at least for orthopedic surgeons, there will be the right
amount of folks and the right amount of procedures done, so it
will not be a real issue for us.
Mr. JOHNSON. Mr. Sharp.
Mr. SHARP. Yes. I think you have hit an important point. We
believe, as you look to try to find efficient ways to run
practice, there is a lot to be said for and a lot of
opportunity within the multi-specialty group model.
You have got interdisciplinary teams of physicians, a lot
of different specialties meshed up with primary care. And there
are inherent efficiencies in the business side of the practice
that can afford the physician, perhaps, more time to do more
good with the patient.
And so I think also, and Dr. Bronson hit on this in his
oral statement, a lot about the patient-centered medical home.
And that is a team-based approach using extenders and using
nurse care coordinators that are managing the population health
with a team-based approach, where the physician does not have
to be the one doing everything. And those are things that we
think can be a part of the solution.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Doctor?
Dr. JENRETTE. I think a lot has been said about, again, the
patient-centered medical home. But really, it is about the
team-based approach, people working at what we call the top of
their license. So the physician, rather than seeing 12, 15, 20
patients and increasing what they are doing each day, it is
using other extenders within the offices. It is becoming
creative, new delivery models. It is about group appointments.
It is around social networking for care. It is around using
case manager support. It is around using pharmacists to help
them with their medications. So it is not all on the
physician's desk. And so we needed teams, a multidisciplinary
approach to a different delivery system.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Am I out of time?
Mr. JOHNSON. You are out of time.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you. I want to thank the witnesses and
thank the chairman. Thank you.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes, sir.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony today.
Your organizations are doing promising work to improve the
quality of patient care, and this work is of great interest as
we seek to reform Medicare physician payments. The fact that
physician organizations have developed so many innovative
clinical improvement activities gives me increasing hope that
Medicare can build on these efforts and we can find the long-
term solution that has been so elusive.
I appreciate the physician leadership exemplified by our
witnesses because this reform effort cannot succeed without
active participation by the physician community. Together we
must find a better way, and we are constantly reminded the
current rate of growth in Medicare spending is unsustainable.
While I, along with many of my colleagues on the Republican
side, believe we ultimately need to bring greater competition
and market forces into the Medicare program in order to reduce
costs, we will also continue to move forward on finding the
best way to eliminate the SGR and replace it with responsible
reform that provides certainty for physicians and encourages
optimal patient care and outcomes.
As a reminder, any member who wishes to submit a question
for the record will have 14 days to do so. If any questions are
submitted, I ask that the witnesses respond in a timely manner.
And with that, this Committee stands adjourned. Thank you
all for being here.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]
Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, Statement

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED]


