- INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE OPERATIONS AND THE 2011 TAX RETURN FILING SEASON

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE OPERATIONS
AND THE 2011 TAX RETURN FILING SEASON

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 31, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-OS2

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-878                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

OVERSIGHT SUBCOMMITTEE

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            XAVIER BECERRA, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
KENNY MARCHANT, New York

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of March 31, 2011, announcing the hearing...............     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Douglas Shulman, Commissioner, Internal Revenue
Service........................................................    50

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Chairman Boustany................................................    91
Rep. Diane Black.................................................    95
Rep. Jim Gerlach.................................................    98
Rep. John Lewis..................................................    99
Colleen M. Kelley, National President National Treasury Employees
Union..........................................................   101

INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE OPERATIONS
AND THE 2011 TAX RETURN FILING SEASON

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 31, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable
Charles Boustany [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Boustany Announces Hearing on

Internal Revenue Service Operations and the

2011 Tax Return Filing Season

March 24, 2011

Congressman Charles W. Boustany, Jr., MD, (R-LA), Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee on Ways and Means, today
announced that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on the Internal
Revenue Service (``IRS'') and the 2011 Tax Return Filing Season. The
hearing will take place on Thursday, March 31, 2011, in Room 1100 of
the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 10:00 A.M.

The Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, the Honorable
Douglas Shulman, will be the only witness at the hearing. Any
individual or organization may submit a written statement for
consideration by the Committee and for inclusion in the printed record
of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

In fiscal year 2010, the IRS collected $2.3 trillion in taxes,
processed 141 million individual tax returns, and issued $366 billion
in refunds. As the 2011 tax return filing season is underway, the
Subcommittee will review IRS performance with a focus on taxpayer
service, taxpayer rights, and refund administration.

In conjunction with the review of the current tax return filing
season, the Subcommittee will review IRS operations in general.
Specifically, the Subcommittee will consider: (1) the protection of
taxpayer rights; (2) fairness in examinations and tax administration;
and (3) efforts to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse. As part of its
consideration of IRS operations, the Subcommittee will also review the
Administration's fiscal year 2012 budget proposal for the IRS of $13.3
billion, an increase of $1.1 billion over the fiscal year 2010 enacted
level.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``With so many
struggling through a tough economy, it's important we remember that the
IRS affects every household and business across the country. The
Subcommittee will examine how the IRS is performing this tax season,
with an eye toward taxpayer rights and the fair collection of federal
taxes. We will also review the Administration's new IRS budget request,
an increase of more than 9% from 2010 levels, and the Commissioner's
justification for this increase.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the 2011 tax return filing season, the
IRS' budget, and IRS operations generally.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. ATTACH your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Wednesday, April
14, 2011. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail
policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries
to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-5522.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. The subcommittee will come to order.
Good morning. I would like to welcome everyone to today's
hearing on the Internal Revenue Service and the 2011 tax return
filing season.
Today's conversation about the IRS should begin with a
topic too often ignored, and that is the taxpayer. The National
Taxpayer Advocate's recent report to Congress provided some
alarming facts on what the federal Tax Code has become, and how
it affects the average taxpayer.
Every year taxpayers face a Tax Code of growing complexity.
For instance, there have been nearly 5,000 changes to the Tax
Code in the past 10 years. Between the period of 1975 and 2005,
the code tripled in size. As a result of the growing length and
complexity of the Tax Code, individual taxpayers and businesses
spend an estimated 6.1 billion hours and $163 billion every
single year complying with the tax filing requirements. The
cost of compliance for your average individual taxpayer was
over $250 in 2007.
So, as we meet today, we are in the middle of the 2011 tax
return filing season. And millions of individuals and
businesses are working to meet their annual tax return filing
obligations. As of March 18th, IRS had processed over 73
million individual tax returns, and issued nearly 65 million
refunds, totaling $193 billion. With 2.5 weeks to go until the
April 18th filing deadline, the subcommittee looks forward to
hearing more about the ongoing tax return season and any
problems the Agency and tax return filers might be
encountering.
The subcommittee would also like to learn more about the
efforts the IRS has undertaken to improve the efficient
processing of returns and refunds, including its eFiling
modernization program.
Charged with administering this growing Tax Code, the IRS
must simultaneously respect the rights of taxpayers, provide
assistance to the millions of taxpayers who have questions
about their taxes, and go after those who cheat the system. And
the Agency has to do this against the backdrop of ever-
increasing responsibilities to administer social policy
programs. The IRS's dual mission to both revenue collector and
social policy program administrator diverts IRS resources from
its core mission, and can diminish taxpayer service.
Among the biggest contributors to this problem is the new
health care law, which gives the IRS a host of new
responsibilities, including the indoor tanning tax, new taxes
and fees on employers and individuals, and a complex small
business tax credit.
For 2011 fiscal year, the IRS has requested nearly $6
billion, an increase of more than 8 percent from the fiscal
year 2011 appropriation. Included in this $6 billion is a
request for nearly a half-a-billion dollars and over 1,200 new
employees to implement the health care law's new provisions.
And the cost of the health care law do not end there. IRS's
implementation of the health care law is estimated to cost
somewhere between $5 billion and $10 billion over the next 10
years. So, in addition to the current tax return filing season
and the IRS budget request, I hope we can take this opportunity
to discuss this dual mission, and whether it is hampering the
IRS's ability and core revenue collection responsibilities.
So, with that, I want to welcome Commissioner Shulman
today, who is here to testify, and look forward to a fruitful
discussion of his agency, its mission, and the ongoing tax
return filing season.
Commissioner, I know you were working under very time-
constrained circumstances with the passage of the law in
December. I know you have scrambled to get things done. And it
seems to me at this stage things are going fairly well with the
filing season, so we look forward to your comments.
Before I yield to Ranking Member Lewis, I ask unanimous
consent that all Members' written statements be included in the
record.
[No response.]
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection, so ordered. I also
ask unanimous consent that the GAO's interim report on the 2011
tax filing season, which is being released today, also be
included in the record.
[No response.]
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows: GAO's Interim Report, 2011]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Now I want to welcome Commissioner
Shulman, and I will yield to the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, I want to thank you for holding this hearing on the
Internal Revenue Service. I am pleased to have the Commissioner
before us today. This hearing is timely. I have serious
concerns about the Republican plans to cut funding for the
agency, and effect that those cuts will have on our taxpayers.
The majority's plan to cut $600 million from the agency budget
this year will result in $4 billion in lost revenue. I do not
understand how this helps the deficit.
The plan also harms taxpayers. An estimated three million
people will not have their telephone calls answered, and one
million people will not receive face-to-face service at an
agency center. This makes no sense.
I look forward to discussing the agency's proposed budget
for next year. Most of the funds requested for the Affordable
Care Act are to assist taxpayers and improve operations, not
for enforcement agents, as charged by some.
Finally, I would like to ensure that the Agency has the
resources it needs to balance taxpayer services and
enforcement. It is important for the agencies to provide
services that help elderly, low income, and working class
Americans fulfill their tax obligations. It is particularly
important that the tax laws are applied fairly to all
taxpayers. I look forward to the Commissioner's testimony on
how to achieve this balance.
And I welcome you also, Mr. Commissioner. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the ranking member. And now I
want to welcome IRS commissioner Douglas Shulman.
Commissioner Shulman has served in this position since his
appointment in 2008. And, sir, we want to thank you for being
here today to testify.
As is customary, you will have the five minutes for your
oral statement, to present your testimony, and your full
written testimony will be submitted for the record. And I now
will yield time to Commissioner Shulman to present your
testimony.
Thank you, sir.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS SHULMAN, COMMISSIONER, INTERNAL REVENUE
SERVICE

Mr. SHULMAN. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis,
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify on the filing season, and to provide you with an
overview of our proposed 2012 budget.
Despite some of the challenges that the chairman mentioned
earlier this year, particularly the late passage of tax law,
the 2011 filing season has proceeded smoothly. As of March 19th
of this year, we have received more than 75 million individual
returns, have issued 65 million refunds, with an average value
of refunds of about $3,000.
Our eFile program continues to grow. This year, so far, our
eFile rate is 6.3 percent higher than last year, and last year
was 5 percent higher than the year before. We also continue to
see people using their home computers and filing continuing to
grow. We have received almost 25 million returns from home
computers, a 9 percent increase over last year. The reason this
is so significant is it is much cheaper for the Federal
Government to process an electronically-filed return. It costs
about $.17, as opposed to $3.66 for a paper return. And people
get their refunds much quicker.
We have also seen an increase in self service options. Our
web traffic has grown eight percent. Our ``Where's My Refund''
tool has grown 19 percent. And automated calls answered have
increased by about 21 percent.
Regarding our answering phone calls, I am pleased to tell
you our level of service, despite a flat budget, remains at 74
percent. And our accuracy remains at 95 percent. And so the
phone operation is going well this year.
Let me also note during this filing season we continue to
try to adjust core programs to meet evolving needs of
taxpayers. And a good example of this is what I call our fresh
start program, which is focused on our collection area. We
announced that we were expanding our offer in compromise
program, making the ability for lien withdrawal easier, making
it easier for small businesses to enter an installment plan
with us this year, and changing our criteria for filing liens.
And you are going to see us continue to evolve our programs as
taxpayer needs warrant it.
Let me now turn to the 2012 budget. This budget was crafted
during a time of fiscal austerity. For me, that means
aggressively pursuing savings where we can find savings, but
also investing in strategic priorities that enhance the
nation's tax system.
I think the President made clear in the budget that the IRS
is vital to the functioning of the government, to keeping our
nation strong and our economy strong. Last year, we collected
$2.3 trillion. This translates to every dollar spent on the
IRS, about $200 comes into the Federal Government. I think it
is in recognition of the critical role that we play that this
2012 budget makes judicious investments. It also tries to keep
the balance between taxpayer service, serving honest Americans,
and our enforcement programs, making sure we find people who
aren't paying their fair share of taxes.
It also continues our investment in our core account
database, which is the cornerstone of our modernization effort.
When this is complete in 2012, assuming we get the funding, it
is going to mean faster processing of all returns, faster
refunds to all Americans, and enhanced data security of our
technology systems.
Because of our unique revenue-raising functions, our budget
more than pays for itself, and directly contributes to deficit
reduction. And I will also note this year's budget, as well as
the last several years that I have been here, has significant
savings. We have $190 million of program cuts and savings in
the 2012 budget.
Now, I would be remiss in my responsibilities if I didn't
make a few comments about H.R. 1. Under the House version of
the continuing resolution, the total 2011 funding for the IRS
would be $603 million below the 2010-enacted levels, with
potentially devastating effects to the nation's tax system.
If H.R. 1 were to be enacted, the IRS would have to make
substantial and immediate cuts to all of its programs,
including its enforcement programs. We estimate that this would
reduce enforcement revenue this year by $4 billion. This would
increase the deficit by about seven times the magnitude of the
proposed reduction in the budget.
In addition, such a conspicuous drop in IRS enforcement
activities could have an impact on longer-term voluntary
compliance. We would also be forced to dramatically reduce
resources to taxpayer services, leading to millions of
unanswered phone calls, delayed processing of correspondence,
and potentially delayed refunds.
In conclusion, we are in a very challenging environment
with difficult choices to make. Despite this year's challenges,
the filing season is progressing smoothly. So I look forward to
a constructive dialogue today and over the coming weeks and
months.
And Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Lewis, I also just want
to very much thank you for the support and constructive
dialogue that this committee has had with our agency over the
last several years, and continuing this year. That concludes my
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shulman follows:]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Commissioner. I mentioned to
you before the hearing I appreciated your written testimony and
some of the breakdowns that you gave us. And the information
was very, very helpful.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, too often we all
forget the enormous price in both time and dollars that the
individual taxpayer has to pay to comply with the tax filing
requirement. And, of course, Americans spend a vast amount of
time and resources every year to file their tax returns. The
Tax Code clearly is growing in complexity, and this shifts
enormous cost to the taxpayer, but also makes honest compliance
more difficult. The complexities have added significant burdens
to the IRS.
And just a simple question. Is it your opinion that the Tax
Code is too complex?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. We are going to be going through tax
reform, and this is certainly going to take time. It is going
to be a deliberative process. And so, I think as we go through
that process, clearly with a mind on how to simplify things for
the taxpayer, we also need to keep in mind the burdens that it
places on your agency as well. And I would just like to hear
you expound a little more on that aspect of the complexity.
Mr. SHULMAN. Sure. So my short answer, yes, is what I
believe. The Tax Code is incredibly complex, and unfortunately
has been going in the wrong direction over the last decade.
As I mentioned in my remarks, the vast majority of my
employees' time and resources is spent trying to serve the
American people and help them wade through tax complexity, and
get their refunds quickly. We have a pretty unique view into
what it feels like to be a taxpayer, wrestling with the Tax
Code. We would be happy to engage in whatever dialogue people
would like, just about simplicity.
We also can see where there is either honest mistakes made,
and--because of the complexity, a lot of non-compliance is
honest mistakes by taxpayers, just getting tripped up with the
code. We also see where we have issues in areas of controversy.
A lot of places where we have controversy is where there is
complexity, because there is vagaries in the law we then need
to, with the Treasury Department, promulgate guidance.
And so, anything you can do to simplify the code certainly
helps our agency, because we spend a lot of time answering
questions, providing service, correcting mistakes, and then
having enforcement actions around the complex areas of the law.
My belief is it would certainly help taxpayers.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And I think you bring an important
perspective to this, because I know in our conversations in the
past, you have started businesses, you came from the business
world and had to deal with the Tax Code from the perspective of
a business owner. And now, your position heading the agency,
the Internal Revenue Service.
And I think you told me in the past that you get assistance
when you file. Is that true?
Mr. SHULMAN. I traditionally have, yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Yes. And so, when the IRS commissioner
himself is requiring, you know, professional assistance to deal
with the Tax Code, I think that is a statement in and of
itself, as many of us who serve in Congress probably also--I
know I get professional help with mine. So, again, it is just
an indicator of the complexity of the code.
The new health care law, of course, it is no news that it
has added enormous new duties and responsibilities. I mentioned
an indoor tanning tax, new Medicare Part D rebates, new taxes
on drug makers, insurance subsidies, employer penalties, and of
course, the individual mandate.
The 2012 budget proposal request, nearly half-a-billion
dollars in new funding, and I think we've seen the figure of
1,200 new employees to implement the law for next year. And
much of this in the law isn't implemented until later in the
decade. So I think CBO estimates that the 10-year cost for the
IRS is going to be somewhere in the $5 billion to $10 billion
range. And do you agree with that, as a result of the
Affordable Care Act? Is that----
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Do you agree with----
Mr. SHULMAN. I think the CBO estimates are----
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay.
Mr. SHULMAN [continuing]. In the general direction.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Yes. And for 2012 do you have any
indication--I think we have seen mention of tens of millions of
dollars for infrastructure related to the Affordable Care Act,
and I guess, related staff. Do you have a sense of what kind of
staffing request or build-out you will need for the 2012
budget?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes, the 2012 budget submitted is the 1,200
people. Just a few comments about that. I want to make very
clear that the IRS's role in the Affordable Care Act is to
implement the Tax Code provisions in the act, the movement of
money. It is really HHS's responsibility to be involved in the
health policy issues.
The vast majority of our request--82 percent--is really
around technology and infrastructure to build systems to match
household incomes--because right now we have AGI by individuals
and couples--and build the interfaces with insurance companies
and the state exchanges to administer the refundable credit
portion of that. That is the vast majority of the request.
Chairman BOUSTANY. That is the big part. Have you--do you
have an estimate of how many full-time employees you're going
to need to bring in for the implementation in 2012?
Mr. SHULMAN. So 2012 is the 1,200.
Chairman BOUSTANY. That is the 1,200.
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay. For clarification. Okay, thank
you.
I now yield time to the ranking member.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Commissioner, again
I want to thank you for being here, and I want to thank you for
your years of service.
I noticed that you have a number of open houses this filing
season. I would like to know who attended these open houses,
and what problems are they facing?
Mr. SHULMAN. About two years ago, as we continued to
innovate around service--and two years ago we were still deep
in the nation's worst recession--I really sat down with my
senior team and said, what can we do to help taxpayers? How can
we go the extra mile to help resolve issues?
Last year we actually held 1,000 open houses around the
country. And they were Saturdays, trying to create another
service option so working people who had the weekend off could
do this. It was mainly targeted at individual taxpayers, as
well as small businesses, who had an outstanding issue with the
IRS and wanted to resolve it.
A lot of people, if they get behind on their tax, don't
understand they can come in, and get on an installment plan. If
they really can't pay and their circumstances have changed, we
can put them in currently not collectible status and leave them
alone for a year. And we can also compromise their debt, if
there is no prospect of paying.
So, we--and what we did is we made these available, and we
had everyone from revenue agents, customer service reps,
appeals officers who could settle, so everyone was there that
they could settle their issues.
This year we are repeating it, based on lessons of last
year. I think the main issues--and I can get back to you with a
specific breakdown--is we're trying to target people who have
an outstanding debt, or are wrapped up with us in some way,
either need to get on an installment plan, need to pay, want to
get a lien released, or have simple tax law questions.
We will service anyone from across the board, but we are
really trying to focus on people who got caught up in the
economic downturn, whose circumstances have changed. We can
answer questions and really resolve any situations, once and
for all.
Mr. LEWIS. Has the agency been a little more liberal during
these difficult economic times with taxpayers?
Mr. SHULMAN. The way I would describe it is we always have
the ability to be reasonable with folks, and compromise the
debt, et cetera. I encourage anyone on the subcommittee to come
visit IRS facilities. If you walk around, despite the popular
image of the IRS in people's head, if you walk around and meet
any of our employees, they say ``I am serving the American
people.''
Again, a year-and-a-half ago we did the open houses. I also
announced expedited lien release for people who are refinancing
houses. As I mentioned, this year we increased from $25,000 of
tax debt, where a small business could automatically get on an
installment plan without any questions asked to $50,000 this
year. We basically said we won't file a lien with someone if
they create direct deposits with us this year. People who felt
that their credit scores were being hurt because a lien wasn't
withdrawn after they paid their debt, but rather was released,
we made it so they can automatically get it withdrawn.
And so, absolutely I think my answer is in these tough
economic times I have pushed the agency hard, and the agency
has responded very well, to get creative, to try to make sure
we help out taxpayers where we can, while also trying to make
sure those who can afford to pay, pay their tax bill.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Commissioner, are those that claim the
earned income tax credit more likely to be audited than the
general population?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes, they are. With any large refundable tax
credit there is always the temptation for fraud. It is also a
very complex credit, as I was discussing with the chairman. And
so I think there is a whole set of honest mistakes that happen
in claiming that.
We basically have a two percent audit rate of earned income
tax credit. We have a one percent audit rate for the rest of
the individual taxpayer population. And about 36 percent of our
audits last year were targeted at the earned income tax credit.
What we try to do with that program, like any of our
programs, is have balance. We do a lot of outreach and
education--we've done it with a lot of Members of Congress--to
make sure people who are eligible take advantage of the credit.
And then we have very rigorous enforcement programs to make
sure people who aren't eligible--we try to stop them from
getting the credit.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Commissioner. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the ranking member. The chair
now recognizes Mr. Gerlach for five minutes.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Commissioner, for being here.
Can I follow up on just some of that last commentary you
made on auditing? Does--the auditing work that the IRS does,
does that fall under the enforcement part of your budget
request, for this year, $5.9 billion that you're requesting for
``enforcement?'' Would auditing of individuals and businesses
fall under that category?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes, it would.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. And did I hear you correctly just a
moment ago that, on average, you audit individuals--about one
percent of the individuals that file with the IRS per year?
Mr. SHULMAN. That has been a traditional rate, spread out
across all individuals. It varies by income category, it varies
by, as I said, earned income tax credits, a particular interest
of ours.
Mr. GERLACH. And what percent of business filers do you
audit per year?
Mr. SHULMAN. It depends on the level of income, and also,
the volume of filers that come in. Some quick statistics,
businesses that have assets below 10 million last year, it was
about .94 percent. So just under one----
Mr. GERLACH. Just under one?
Mr. SHULMAN. Just under one percent. And then it goes up.
Businesses that have over $250 million of assets have about a
23 percent audit coverage rate. And then the largest
corporations in the country generally have auditors on site and
have lots of ongoing interactions with us.
Mr. GERLACH. So are the audits--for the business audit, are
they kicked off based upon random selection, or based upon red
flags that come up from the prior filings, or the periodic
filings? What kicks in an audit for particularly a small
business owner?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes. Our audit criteria is based on a number
of factors. We have been, as an agency--and I have been very
focused on--risk-based audits as the most important to us. So
it can be--we have certain geographic coverage. We have certain
risk factors and parameters around data that comes in on
returns.
And we also have certain areas--certain businesses which
are more risky, from a compliance standpoint. Cash businesses,
obviously, have different compliance issues than other----
Mr. GERLACH. And what is the average length of an audit?
How much time does your auditor spend in that business?
And how do you juxtapose that against the amount of time,
therefore, the business has to participate and cooperate with
those auditors, in terms of the time they are then taking their
employees away from their business duties to them comply with
the audit requests that the auditors are making?
What is the ratio of time you are spending in the
businesses auditing them, and what is the amount of time they
are putting in to cooperate and participate and try to satisfy
the auditor's request?
Mr. SHULMAN. I can get back to you with that. I don't have
the ratio off the top of my head.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. But I guess what I am getting at is what
is the loss of productivity and profitability of these
businesses that are taking time to comply with your request,
and have you ever calculated what the impact of the auditing
process is on profitability and productivity of the businesses
that you are involved in?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes, we look at burden and calculate burden
quite a bit. And let me just share with you my approach, and my
philosophy----
Mr. GERLACH. Yes, yes.
Mr. SHULMAN [continuing]. About this. We try to do is do
our job of making sure there is compliance with the law, do a
lot of outreach and education--we've got extensive programs
around small businesses, and making sure we help them comply
with the law--and try to do our job in the least burdensome
manner possible. Obviously, nobody likes to have an audit.
Mr. GERLACH. Yes.
Mr. SHULMAN. And it's going to take some time when someone
does an audit.
We have tried to move more and more, as I mentioned, to
targeting our audits to places where there is potential non-
compliance, and leaving taxpayers who have traditionally been
compliant alone. We have also tried to get better and better at
using data, so that when data comes in, we analyze the data,
and when we go in we spend less time.
Mr. GERLACH. What--of those that are audited on the
business side--and I would be interested on the individual
side, as well--but on the business side, staying with that, how
many are found to be in non-compliance, or to have violated the
code, based upon that audit?
What percentage of those in the total auditing--audited
group there, how many do you find have violated the law and
need to either pay penalties or interest or a combination?
Mr. SHULMAN. We measure something called the no-change
rate, which is what percentage of people do we audit, and there
has been no adjustment made. I will get you the numbers. One of
the measures is--are we doing risk-based audits appropriately?
If we are auditing and there is not much of a no-change rate,
then it means we might be picking the wrong folks.
If--the no-change rates have been moving up, that means our
analytical group has gotten better at risk-based audits. But
we've got to be real careful.
Mr. GERLACH. Is it 50 percent of those businesses audited?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes--it is more than 50 percent.
Mr. GERLACH. Are in violation in some way, shape, or form--
--
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes, have a change in the audit.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay.
Mr. SHULMAN. But just one comment I want to make is I am
always very cognizant--and there is a whole bunch of things in
the law about how we measure our performance. While we want to
go in places that have higher non-compliance in the enforcement
arena, I also don't want to set perverse incentives for my
people to make changes where they won't happen. We are always
trying to get that balance right and have that dialogue.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you. Appreciate it.
Mr. SHULMAN. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Becerra, you
are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. Commissioner, great to see you again.
Thank you for the work you are doing.
By the way, thank you for the work that you have done in
trying to get agents who try to put out their services as
preparers of tax returns for the American public, having them
become registered agents, so that we have a way to track their
record of service.
Because too often I know I have had people come to my
office saying, ``I got swindled by a guy who said he's going to
prepare my taxes, did a terrible job, now I'm being audited, I
had to pay a big amount of money, causing big headaches,'' so
thank you very much for helping us go down the road of making
the realm of tax preparers a professional service.
And I know my own tax preparer has said to me, ``Great work
that the IRS did in trying to help the rest of the guys out
there do what many of us have done for years, and that is
provide a professional service that we are willing to have
audited at any time.''
So thank you for that. I know you are saving the American
public a great deal of money, and probably increasing their tax
refunds, because they are calculating them correctly.
You mentioned something very troubling. The budget bill
that was passed by this House, H.R. 1, by the Republican
majority a few weeks back, would cut $600 million out of your
budget, which you said would cost us in revenues, because of
lower tax collections--proper and legitimate tax collections--
some $4 billion. So, by almost a factor of seven, we would be
increasing the size of the deficit by instituting a cut that
would not allow you to go out and do your collection services
appropriately. And it might also undermine the voluntary system
that we have for tax payment by American taxpayers.
Does that mean that you would actually have to reduce the
number of personnel that are actually working to help process
forms? What actually goes into this $600 million cut that makes
it difficult for the U.S. Treasury to collect the money that is
owed to it, and therefore, makes other taxpayers have to pay
more, because they will have to make up for the $4 billion lost
by those who owe the money?
Mr. SHULMAN. First of all, I am hopeful--at least from my
proprietary perspective, as the IRS Commissioner--that we don't
have those cuts. And I know that all Members of Congress and
the administration are now working to try to get a budget deal
done.
The cuts would be just big, big cuts that would have to be
jammed into a six-month window. We would have to have across-
the-board cuts. We would either have to have long furloughs or
RIFs, and we would be taking people basically away from every
function. So we would be taking people away from collection, we
would take them away from exam, we would take them away from
automatic screening. We would be taking them from customer
service, we would be taking them from outreach. We would be
taking them out of our technology operation.
My responsibility--as, obviously, Congress's responsibility
to give us whatever budget, my responsibility is to tell you
what would happen. This would be our estimate, $4 billion less
revenue, phone calls not answered, returns backed up and not
processed.
Mr. BECERRA. Yes. And so there was no direction in the
budget bill that cuts the $600 million as to how you could do
it in a way that would not undermine services. And I don't hear
you saying that you could find a way to institute those cuts
that wouldn't undermine services.
Mr. SHULMAN. Well, if you look at the allocations, across
our enforcement, our service, our operations budget, all the
things I laid out would happen. The biggest cut is to
enforcement.
Mr. BECERRA. I also want to make sure I emphasize again
something else you said, because there is a need to dispel this
rumor, this myth floating out there, that the money that IRS
needs to try to implement this new patient's bill of rights is
somehow all focused on getting IRS agents to bang on people's
doors, when my understanding is the bulk of the money, the vast
majority of the money, is really used to provide assistance,
taxpayer assistance services, or to beef up mostly our IT, our
intellectual--our Internet technology, so that we can help
process a lot of these claims.
I was looking at the budget that you outlined for the use
of the money. Am I correct that 60 percent of the $470 million
that you requested to implement the new patients bill of rights
would go towards computer system upgrades, and those things
that you need to just implement the bill, getting 30 million
Americans now with good health insurance, and that of the 40
percent that remains, that would be used for personnel, two-
thirds of that would be used for taxpayer services in other
ways to provide a service, not necessarily to go out there and
do enforcement?
So, I guess that totals to about 85 percent of the money
being used for services, and for better systems operations.
Mr. SHULMAN. Let me make sure I give you accurate numbers.
So let me give you the way I----
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you.
Mr. SHULMAN [continuing]. Look at it, which is about 82
percent, or $390 million of the request, is to support the
refundable credit operation. Clearly, the biggest lift for us
is the infrastructure around having technology that gets income
data smoothly into and out of, in real time, the 50 exchanges
that will be built around the country in the 50 different
states.
When people get a refundable credit, we actually send money
on a monthly basis to the insurance company that people send
that money--so we need to have reconciliation systems with
them, feeding it back into the states in a real-time basis.
Only about 11 percent, or $50 million of the budget, is for
enforcement. And so, everybody likes to talk about IRS agents.
We have lots of people who are phone operators, technology
folks. We're much more boring than the popular image of the
agent, in lots of our operations. I think of us as a large
financial service operation. We are more--but we are very akin
to that. We do a lot of money flows, $2.3 trillion. And so that
is where most of it goes.
The enforcement money in the 2012 budget is largely for
traditional tax enforcement, compliance programs around the
taxes that are going into effect--that are in effect now, and
are going into effect over the next year or two.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. The chair now
recognizes Ms. Jenkins for five minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Commissioner, for being here.
As the House and Senate continue budget talks in an effort
to prevent a government shutdown, it is important that we
understand whether the IRS is prepared to handle a government
shutdown. So I am just curious. In the event of a shutdown,
what is the IRS's plan to process tax returns and issue tax
refunds?
Mr. SHULMAN. First of all, I will tell you everybody is
hopeful that there will not be a shutdown. We run a $13 billion
financial services operation, and the idea of stopping it for a
few days or a few weeks is strange to someone like me who has
run big operations. I think the President has been very clear
that it is not in anybody's interest to have a government
shutdown. My understanding is there is very productive talks
going on at this point.
What I will tell you is we had an old plan that looked at
government shutdowns based on October 1, when the fiscal year
begins. We have never had a government shutdown in the middle
of the filing season before. The closer we get to April 15th,
the more consideration and factors are at play.
As these dates, I think we are on our sixth CR, have pushed
out, we have had to adjust plans going forward. I will tell you
right now we are in discussions with OMB and the Administration
of exactly what would happen. And so I cannot tell you. Our old
plan was we deposited checks, we didn't process returns. That
was a plan that was built in 1995, when there was not so much
electronic filing. And now we are closely looking at it, and
are having discussions.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, thank you. In your testimony here you
mentioned that the average refund is nearly $3,000. And you say
this money can help taxpayers pay their bills, make needed
purchases, and to save.
But we all know that this refund money isn't just plucked
off the money tree in the back of the Capitol. This is money--
this is the taxpayer's money, and it could have been used the
whole year for them to invest, or to make purchases. And I
think, instead, they are giving the government, basically, an
interest-free loan.
So, I am just, again, curious. Do you see this high level
of refund as a deliberate action of taxpayers, or as a result
of maybe a Tax Code that is overly complex?
Mr. SHULMAN. I think each taxpayer is different--I think a
lot of taxpayers actually use the withholding system to have
automated savings so that they can then get a refund. People
like to do it.
In my ideal world as a taxpayer, I actually withhold the
exact right amount, and I neither pay nor get a refund. That is
my own personal goal. It is very hard to hit, because of the
complexity of the code and estimating exactly, you know, all
the factors that will come in.
And so, it is a fact that we usually put out, you know,
$250 billion to $300 billion of refunds. Retail sales--the
Commerce Department, over time, has looked at this--retail
sales usually increase in February through May, as a direct
result of refunds. I always encourage people to withhold
correctly.
And so, we see it as just a fact of the tax system, neither
good nor bad, just a fact, that we give you and you can make
your own judgements about.
Ms. JENKINS. But if it was a more simplified calculation,
do you think people would deliberately be lending the
government interest-free money during the year?
Mr. SHULMAN. I won't speculate on it. I mean I think a lot
of it is not--there is the complexity of the code, but there is
also the issue of people don't know always exactly what they
will make, what their spouse will make, what interest income
they might get, how their jobs will change, if they are going
to get a second job. So I think there is a bunch of factors.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The chair now recognizes Mr. Buchanan
for five minutes.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the
Commissioner being here. You met with us a couple of weeks ago,
and so I don't know how you get much work done--you are here.
But we are excited to see you back.
Let me just touch on a couple of things. And it is along
the line of tax simplification. I look at--in our area I was
chairman of a Chamber. We had about 2,500 businesses. Most of
them are--a lot of these businesses are 3 to 10 employees.
There are some that are larger, larger companies, banks, and
some other things. But I would say out of the 2,600 probably
2,200 are 20 employees or less. What are you doing to help
simplify their ability to file and, you know, quarterly things
that they have got to file?
Because I do hear it just takes so much time and effort
from these small businesses. You know, a lot of them do not
have a controller or a CPA, or they are a CPA but they have got
an accountant that is outside. What is the IRS doing to make it
simpler for them?
Mr. SHULMAN. As you know, we implement the tax laws that
are written. And as you know, I had the conversation with the
chairman earlier about simpler laws would clearly be helpful.
But it is not our role.
What we try to do is, given the laws that are on the books,
do as much outreach education service as we can. I would be
surprised if one of our people wasn't at the Chamber of
Commerce on a regular basis in your district, holding education
events, explaining tax law changes, being available to
businesses.
We spend a lot of time with the practitioner community. For
individuals, 66 percent of people use a tax professional. For
businesses, including small businesses, it is 80 percent. So if
we can get good information and tools to the practitioner
community, they can make sure that people file it well.
And we answer millions of calls from small businesses every
year. Our phone operators spend a lot of time doing that. We
have a dedicated website. We have a dedicated outreach and
education unit for small businesses. We have an e-newsletter on
tax issues for small businesses that has a distribution of
about 200,000. And so we do everything we can, given our
resources, given the code----
Mr. BUCHANAN. And secondly, because we have just got five
minutes, what about independent contractors? We have a lot of
Realtors, everybody else, you know, maybe it is themself, their
husband, but basically there is a lot of people out there--they
might be with Amway or whatever they are with, as independent
contractors. Is there anything we are doing to--and their
situation is probably even more difficult, because they are
just themselves, and--is there anything that we are doing to
help them and simplify things for them, as well?
Mr. SHULMAN. Again, we have all of the avenues of service.
They usually afford themselves of the individual services. We
answered 35 million calls last year. We keep having more self-
service options on our website, and we will continue to do
that. And we are trying just to get the right balance of--you
know, with the service resources we have.
My personal view is the vast majority of our service
resources should be going to individuals and small businesses
who cannot afford themselves of the professional tax community
help and are struggling to make ends meet.
Mr. BUCHANAN. And, Commissioner, my colleague mentioned
about dispute, when you have a dispute with the IRS. Let us say
medium-sized companies or a little larger companies, what is
the process--are the negotiators on the IRS side, are they
empowered--because you hear these things a lot of time just
drag on and on and on. Very expensive, and not only in terms of
outside professionals, but very expensive in terms of the
internal time it takes an organization--I am not talking about
the person that has got 5 employees, someone that has got, in
our area, for example, 400, 400 or 500. They have a dispute, it
just seems like it drags on forever.
And I guess the question is, you know, what is the process
on your side to resolve these things, or have someone in that
is bright enough, sharp enough--not that they are all not--but
is--are they empowered to get something done and get these
things wrapped up and get a compromise or--what is your
attitude, or how does it work on your side?
Mr. SHULMAN. I have been very public. I mean if you look at
things I have been talking about for the last three years, my
real goal with the business taxpayer is to resolve issues and
get certainty sooner for the IRS and for taxpayers. We have a
whole slew of programs, and I have been pushing them very hard.
Part of it is getting clearer guidance, creating safe
harbor, where we can simplify the rules. We have an appeals
function. So if you disagree with us, we close out an audit,
you can go to our appeals function----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Well, before the appeals, is the auditor
itself, the person, can they--do they have a boss that they can
go through and try to negotiate it out before it goes to the
appeal?
Mr. SHULMAN. Oh, absolutely. But what I was going to tell
you is we have expanded what we call fast-track appeals, where
we can just go in and audit, invite an appeals officer in to
negotiate a settlement.
Our folks have the ability to work through issues. We do
have time lines where you have got to get in, you have got to
get out with folks.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yes.
Mr. SHULMAN. Now, some taxpayers complain about the time
lines.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yes.
Mr. SHULMAN. Because they say someone is in, and they are
just trying to get issues and get out----
Mr. BUCHANAN. The big thing I hear is just getting it done
fast-track. I am glad to hear you have got something like that,
because they just don't want things to drag on for a year, they
would rather just get the people in the room and try to work
something out and move forward, because it costs a lot of
money, time, and aggravation over, you know, a period of time.
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. The chair now
recognizes Dr. McDermott for questioning.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Commissioner. I have been
listening to this testimony today, and I am not real sure why
we are having this hearing. But I heard the chairman mention
the Affordable Care Act and the additional responsibilities you
will have in auditing people's behavior with respect to
purchase of health insurance.
And I understand that this afternoon, later today, we are
going to mark up a bill that would prevent any money from being
spent in an insurance policy on abortions. And I suspect that
the audit responsibility will fall to you to determine whether
or not any money has been spent on abortions, or is planned by
the insurance companies--it sounds like an insurance function
that is going to wind up in your hands.
And I would be surprised if you have already started to
think about this, because you don't start to think until we do
something, but it is coming down the road. And I have some
questions I would like you to think about, and give me a
response if you can, in terms of how many additional people you
are going to have to hire to look at all the insurance plans,
to be sure that no money is being spent on abortions.
One of the issues that I think ought to be considered in
that is also the HSA. If I put my money in an HSA, can I take
it out and spend it any way I want on health care costs? And
how do you audit that to be sure that I am not taking advantage
of the Tax Code to put money in there and then wind up paying
for an abortion for whomever?
It seems to me we are adding things. We continually look at
the IRS as kind of our unofficial enforcer, and that you wind
up with the responsibility for doing that. And I would
appreciate if you could give me an answer in writing as to what
you think the effect will be, if the bill passes today
preventing the use of any health care money for abortion, I
would like to see from you an estimate of what it means to the
bureaucracy to have to go around and look and be sure that
nobody is taking advantage of the Tax Code.
You have any information about that at all at the moment? I
mean how many people you are going to have to have in this
system to do this?
Mr. SHULMAN. I don't.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And do you have an estimate of what you are
spending already, or you will spend to audit the system, under
the Affordable Care Act?
Mr. SHULMAN. On the bill you referred to regarding our
involvement, lots of bills are around until bills are passed.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Right.
Mr. SHULMAN [continuing]. We will look at that, and any
question you send me I will be happy to respond to.
Regarding the Affordable Care Act, we laid out in
excruciating detail in our 2012 budget what we will need in
2012. And as I mentioned before, the vast majority of that
money is technology infrastructure service money to interface
with the exchanges, interface with insurance companies to move
the money with the refundable credits.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And do you have--how are you going to
enforce the fact that people have or have not complied with the
law, the individual mandate?
Mr. SHULMAN. Oh, the individual responsibility payment? We
requested some money for that in 2012. All of that money is
technology and infrastructure money just around systems. It
will basically be document-matching, just like a W-2.
So, the insurance company will either send us fact or
coverage, saying ``This person is covered,'' or not. If they
say they are not, generally people will voluntarily comply, our
systems will match that, and they will say, ``I wasn't covered,
and here is the payment.'' If they don't say that, and we see
it, we will send them a bill. And the Affordable Care Act was
very clear about having some of our enforcement tools, such as
a lien or a levy not being available for that.
So, think of it like a credit card bill that you either
choose to pay or not pay. If you don't pay, you will get a
bill.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And--but you have no enforcement capacity.
Mr. SHULMAN. Some will call that enforcement capacity,
getting a letter from the IRS. It's like a credit card bill,
but it will have our letterhead on it.
I believe what you were talking about before in here is
that first of all, we are just going to have fact of coverage
information. We are not going to know about your coverage, we
are not going to know about your personal health issues.
And second of all, this is not the kind of thing that
agents spend time on, these dollar amounts. And so you don't
have agents rooting around asking these things. You have
document-matching, and bills that get sent out.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So people could get around the bill?
Mr. SHULMAN. What is that?
Mr. MCDERMOTT. People could get around the bill, since no
agent is going to ever look into their health care records. You
are not going to put agents at work looking into people's
health care.
Mr. SHULMAN. Most of our enforcement activity is not based
on face-to-face agents. And most people comply voluntarily with
the tax laws. Lots of people, when they get in correspondence
with us, pay up and feel that is enforcement.
So, I would not characterize it that we anticipate large
numbers of people getting around it. But there is always non-
compliance, and there is some non-compliance we don't find.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. The chair now
recognizes Ms. Black for questioning.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And as I talked to you
the other day, Commissioner, you asked me if I had some
concerns, and I talked a little bit about people making phone
calls, and maybe getting different answers as they called in,
one time to the other.
But I want to turn to a piece that I have read in the
information that was provided us about telephone assistance for
taxpayers, and that it continues to be a problem.
The percentage of callers that successfully obtain the live
assistance over the phone is down from 74.2 percent down to
72.6 percent this year. And the average wait times have also
increased from 9.9 to 10.3 minutes. And so far, this year, 10.3
percent of the calls were abandoned, and .8 percent reached a
busy signal or ended in a disconnection, probably out of
frustration. But both numbers are increases from prior years.
And the IRS's goal, as we understand it, is to answer only
71 percent of the calls in this current year, and then 80
percent in 2012, which is down from the goal that was set back
in 2007, of answering 82 percent. So the goal has been
decreased. And I know that you have requested an additional $30
million. So my question is, what do you intend on doing with
those $30 million and, with the goal being decreased, just how
does that fit? Why a decreased goal?
Mr. SHULMAN. Thanks for the question. Answering the
nation's taxpayers' telephone calls is a big deal to us, and
something we take seriously.
Let me be very clear about what the level of service is.
The level of service, which I checked this morning and is
running at about 74 percent this year, is a formula that takes
into account people who hang up, as well as the people that get
through to a live assister. It does not translate into 26
percent of people unhappy.
We added last year, a call waiting feature. It used to be
you just waited. And now it says, ``Your wait will be 10
minutes,'' if it is going to be 10 minutes. If people who hang
up after they hear that, because they do not want to wait, and
decide to call back later, if you add that, it adds about 10
percentage points. So you are actually up closer to 84 percent.
The reality is, from where I sit and my folks who are
stretching and trying to hit 74 percent, it is a pretty
straightforward formula. How many people do you have sitting on
the phones, answering the phones, being accurate with your
questions?
Most of this will be extra seasonal people during filing
season. And I am actually pretty proud the agency is
maintaining the level of last year, given that we are under a
CR and do not know what kind of cuts are coming forward. And so
we are trying to balance the money we have against the level of
service.
Mrs. BLACK. And my time is running out here, so--I do have
a second part of the question.
Mr. SHULMAN. Sure.
Mrs. BLACK. But to that I would say that I hope maybe we
use some technology as well, maybe as you say, to give them
more information about it will be a 10-minute wait time or
whatever, not just personnel, but also looking at other
technology that can be used.
But I want to turn the attention to a program called the
Historic Preservation Facade Easement Program. And I know that
Chairman Jo Ann Emerson was concerned about this, and brought
this situation up in Appropriations. And it has come to my
attention by someone else back at home, in particular.
And then, also the IRS advisory council in the 2009 general
report took issue with what is going on with the audits. And I
wondered if you might, in my one-minute time that I have left,
speak a little bit about the program and the fact that even the
advisory committee recommends that there may be a safe harbor
on the audit policy, because of it appearing to be so onerous.
And if you could speak to that, I would appreciate it.
Mr. SHULMAN. Sure. I would love you to come to our call
centers and see. We have spent a lot of time on technology and
productivity. Part of the reason we can still hit 74 percent is
because we have squeezed a lot of productivity out of not
adding workers this year.
On easements, historic easements is an issue. You get a big
tax credit. We need to have some coverage, make sure people
don't abuse it, but also make sure that there is historic
preservation, and people use those easements.
We take very seriously the IRSAC recommendations. Those
people spent a lot of time. And we are looking right now at
those recommendations. I cannot speak specifically to the
program here, but would be happy to follow up with you on it.
Mrs. BLACK. Well, I appreciate that, because there was a
recommendation, and I would like to know what you think about
the recommendation, if you all will follow through on that.
Thank you.
Mr. SHULMAN. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The chair now recognizes Mr. Kind for
questioning.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. Mr. Commissioner, thank you for being here, and for
the service that you provide.
I missed your opening testimony, so I apologize for asking,
but do you have an update in regards to the paid preparer regs
that you are coming forward with?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes. We have started registering. We have over
700,000 paid preparers registered this year, which just means
they get their name in and they have a number. We are now in
the process of working through the testing and continuing
education component, which will be next.
I have been very clear that I think this is important for
the tax system, to have a minimum level of competence with paid
preparers. But we also want to do it in a staged way, so there
is no disruption of service to taxpayers.
And so, we registered this year, we are working on the
programs for testing, and then we are going to give people
several years to pass the test to get in. So it is going to
take several years to get up and running.
Mr. KIND. Okay. And what is the response rate, as far as
eFiling right now? What percentage are filing?
Mr. SHULMAN. Last year, we were about 70 percent. We are
running about five percent higher than that this year. And so
it looks to be going in a positive direction.
Mr. KIND. Okay. You know, and any update on the debit card
refund program and how well that is working?
Mr. SHULMAN. No updates at this point of the program that
the Treasury Department is running.
Mr. KIND. Okay. Let me ask you, we have the, under the
Affordable Care Act, tax credits going to small businesses, 35
percent last year, this year we will continue to 2014, when it
goes up to 50 percent. Are you encountering any difficulty with
small businesses applying for those tax credits under the
Affordable Care Act?
Mr. SHULMAN. Most business returns come in in the fall. So
we will see what is coming. It is a very targeted group that is
eligible. As you know, 10 employees going to 25 employees with
a phase-out. And so I think, you would not yet encounter people
who are eligible having issues. We have heard from people who
wish they were eligible but who fall outside those ranges.
Mr. KIND. Yes, but you are not encountering any degree of
difficulty, as far as people determining their eligibility, or
being able to figure out whether to apply for the tax credit or
not?
Mr. SHULMAN. We have tried to, do outreach, make sure we
are available. We know the practitioner community is very, very
focused on that, as well.
Mr. KIND. Yes. I checked the website, IRS website, as far
as how you are explaining this to the small business community
out there, and you also offer some small examples of small
businesses, but not a calculator, itself. Is that purposeful,
that you are avoiding kind of a plug-in calculator from the IRS
website to see if small businesses would be eligible or not?
Mr. SHULMAN. I don't think we were avoiding it. Calculators
are good for some things and not for others. Our folks who work
on it probably decided it wasn't going to be that helpful for
this.
Mr. KIND. Okay. Notification of small businesses. The IRS
sent out postcards to small----
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes.
Mr. KIND [continuing]. About possible notification. What
about e-notices to small businesses?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes. We have an e-business newsletter for
small businesses, and there has been information about it
there. I mean we----
Mr. KIND. Are most small businesses filing electronically
these days?
Mr. SHULMAN. Most are.
Mr. KIND. Okay. So--I'm just thinking of the efficiency,
and maybe cost savings. Does it make more sense just to notify
them through e-notices, as opposed to formal postcards being
mailed out?
Mr. SHULMAN. We have tried different methods of
communication. We always do that. Most of our methods are
electronic, but sometimes we send out postcards to folks,
sometimes we don't. It is all based on the population, how we
can reach them, what information we have in the database. With
our e-business newsletter--not every small business signs up
with the IRS, but we actually had a database of potential
eligible taxpayers that had addresses. So that is why we sent
them.
Mr. KIND. Now I share Representative Becerra's concern that
many people have already raised in regards to what the $600
million in cuts to the IRS would mean, as far as the collection
of revenue and the lost revenue that we would miss out on.
But could you today give the committee kind of an update on
what type of cost savings measures that you are going through
in the IRS--in light of the budget deficits that we are facing,
some of the efficiencies that you are trying to encourage?
Mr. SHULMAN. Yes. Absolutely. I am a big believer--and
folks know this even before everybody was talking about the
deficit. The day I showed up I told our team that I view a job
of any big business or big operation is stop programs that no
longer make sense, make cuts where you can make cuts, and then
invest in the future. And that is--the set of budgets that I
put forward to try to do that.
Our 2011 budget--not the 2012--had about $180 million of
cuts. As electronic filing has grown, we have actually reduced
service centers and people processing returns. We have taken
our technology up to a standardization level that we are
extracting $75 million each year out of our core technology
budget. We have standardized on certain technology platforms,
made it easier. We have consolidated data centers. And then we
have actually just made some cuts in programs. We have cut some
outreach programs. We have actually cut some mailing of
materials, and we are going to keep doing that, going forward.
I will tell you, given the current fiscal environment, I
have also put a hiring freeze in place. Exceptions to come to
me to approve, and we are still investing in strategic
priorities. We have dramatically cut our travel budget, except
for case-related travel this year. And we have been in the
process of putting in contingency plans, so that if there are
dramatic cuts, that we could implement them.
I think our employees actually understand. The way I have
explained it to them--when I go out in town halls around the
country--is we need to find cuts now. We are going to have to
make hard decisions. If our budget is cut severely, I would
rather have us find the cuts, rather than RIF people. Because
in the Federal Government when you RIF everyone thinks you are
just finding efficiencies. It is a pretty blunt tool, and it is
based on seniority, and who got added last, and people kick
down. What I would rather do is find programs that, at least in
the hierarchy of priorities, we feel we should make cuts.
Mr. KIND. Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Thank you,
Commissioner Shulman, for appearing before the subcommittee.
And we appreciate your testimony and your frank answers to all
these questions.
Please be advised that Members may have some additional
questions that they will submit in writing. And those questions
and answers would be part of this hearing record.
Also, Commissioner, no doubt you have heard the news
reports about the report that Chairman Herger, Congressman
Reichert, and I released yesterday regarding the AARP's
structure and function. And early next week we will be sending
that report to you to request further examination of the tax-
exempt status of the AARP. But I wanted to officially let you
know that we will be sending that report to you.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, in regards to that, could I ask
is the committee going to inquire of other of these not-for-
profit 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4)'s?
Because as we have served on this subcommittee in the past,
that has been one issue I have raised quite often, with regard
to the non-profit, charitable world, is are they, in fact,
providing a service, a public good, that pays for the loss of
revenue that we give to those non-profits through tax-
deductible contributions, through the non-tax status that they
carry.
And so, I would be interested to know, does the chairman
expect that this subcommittee will do further examination of
other organizations, not just senior organizations, I know
there are a number of new senior organizations that have been
out there doing quite a bit of political work, and I would be
interested in making sure that we examine the non-profit world
all together. But certainly if we are going to look at, in this
case, the AARP, other senior groups, as well.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I share the gentleman's concerns. I
think they are very legitimate. And as we look at tax reform in
that context, we will be having those discussions. And the
specific report referenced as a result of questions that were
asked by Congressman Reichert and Ginny Brown-Waite, and the
report released was a culmination of 18 months of work done to
seek answers to those questions.
So, at this time we are focused on that particular issue.
But I think, in the context of tax reform, those--your question
is certainly an important one, and will be discussed.
Mr. BECERRA. I thank the chairman for that response. If I
could just indulge and ask one last question, the issue, as I
see it, is not about a particular organization, or about the
activities of an organization. To me it is we have a code that
says that you can apply to be treated differently from a for-
profit entity, which has to pay taxes. And if you are going to
get to forgo having to pay those taxes that an otherwise
established enterprise has to pay, we should make sure that the
public is getting some benefit for it.
Because there are a lot of businesses that want to do the
same type of thing and get the same type of break. You know,
essentially these not-for-profits get to operate for a far-less
cost, because they don't have to pay taxes. And there are a lot
of folks who are out there engaging in an enterprise and paying
taxes because they have registered as a corporation or some
type of business.
And I think it is important for us to make sure that if you
are going to try to tell the public that they should not have
to pay the same level of taxes that a for-profit enterprise
pays, that it should be for a good reason.
And I think the Commissioner would be a great witness to
have, along with the folks from his operations, to try to help
guide us in making sure that these operations that otherwise
would be taxable as for-profit entities are operating as they
should, as organizations that legitimately deserve that non-
profit status.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Very important questions, and certainly
know we have a current body of law that needs to be followed
with regard to whether an organization qualifies as tax-exempt
or not.
And clearly, the IRS is the agency, the entity that is best
positioned to make that determination, to enforce the law.
And so, that is why we are returning this--we are going to
send this specific report over. And then we will have further
discussions in the context of tax reform. I thank the
gentleman. His concerns are legitimate.
With that, the committee stands adjourned. Thank you,
Commissioner.
[Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]


