- HEARING ON THE MEDICARE DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING ON THE MEDICARE DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT COMPETITIVE BIDDING
PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

May 9, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-HL11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

80-258                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer M. Safavian, Staff Director and General Counsel

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

WALLY HERGER, California, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of May 9, 2012 announcing the hearing...................     2

WITNESSES

Panel 1:

Laurence Wilson, Director of the Chronic Care Policy Group,
Center for Medicare, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services     6
Kathleen King, Director, Health Care, Government Accountability
Office.........................................................    18

Panel 2:

Joel D. Marx, Chair, Board of Directors, American Association for
Homecare.......................................................    48
H. Wayne Sale, Chair, Board of Directors, National Association of
Independent Medical Equipment Suppliers........................    61
Dino Martis, President, Ablecare Medical, Inc....................    68
Alfred J. Chiplin, Jr., Senior Policy Attorney, Center for
Medicare Advocacy, Inc.........................................    75

HEARING ON THE MEDICARE DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT COMPETITIVE BIDDING
PROGRAM

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 9, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:03 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Honorable Wally
Herger [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

Chairman Herger Announces Hearing on the Medicare Durable Medical
Equipment Competitive Bidding Program

Wednesday, May 09, 2012

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Wally Herger (R-
CA) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
to examine the Medicare Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics,
Orthotics, and Supplies (DMEPOS) competitive bidding program to
understand how the program is impacting patients, suppliers, and
program expenditures. This hearing will help the Subcommittee assess
the Round 1 experience in nine Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs)
and the plans for its 2013 expansion into 91 additional MSAs. The
hearing will take place on Wednesday, May 9, 2012, in 1100 Longworth
House Office Building, beginning at 9:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of witnesses
will follow.

BACKGROUND:

The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 (MMA) established the DMEPOS
competitive bidding program to bring Medicare payments for certain
high-cost and high-volume items--such as hospital beds and diabetic
testing supplies--in line with actual market prices, as Medicare
reimbursement rates often far exceeded retail rates. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) competitive bidding process
entails DMEPOS suppliers submitting bids that include the price at
which they are willing to sell a specific item in an MSA and the
percentage of the market they would serve at that price. Contracts have
been offered to the lowest bidders with sufficient capacity to serve
the market.

MMA specified that Round 1 of the competitive bidding program was
to begin in 10 MSAs in 2007. In response to concerns that the CMS
handling of the process for awarding contracts to suppliers had
significant flaws, Congress terminated Round 1 two weeks after the
program began with passage of the Medicare Improvements for Patients
and Providers Act of 2008 (MIPPA). In addition to making improvements
to the program, MIPPA mandated that a modified version of Round 1 be
re-bid and implemented in 2011, and that the number of MSAs be reduced
to nine. The cost of this delay was offset by a 9.5 percent reduction
in 2009 DMEPOS fee schedule payments for competitively bid items.
Recently, the Medicare actuaries found that Round 1 has reduced program
expenditures by $202 million in 2011.

The competitive bidding program will soon undergo significant
expansion beyond the initial nine MSAs. The Affordable Care Act (ACA)
expanded the program so that Round 2 includes an additional 91 MSAs.
CMS is now assessing supplier bids for Round 2 with the intent that
competitively bid prices in these 91 MSAs take effect in mid-2013. The
ACA directed the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human
Services to use competitively bid prices nationwide beginning in 2016.
The Medicare actuaries expect the competitive bidding program to save
$43 billion over the next 10 years, including saving beneficiaries $17
billion, relative to the prior fee schedule-based system.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Herger stated, ``Congress
established the competitive bidding program in light of evidence that
the Medicare fee schedule payments far exceeded retail rates, leaving
the DMEPOS benefit prone to waste, fraud, and abuse. I believe strongly
in the competitive forces of the private market and the first year of
the program shows this process has resulted in lower costs for Medicare
and its beneficiaries. While this is encouraging, it is important to
ensure the process by which suppliers compete is fair and that
beneficiaries receive needed care. This hearing will help the
Subcommittee understand the successes and challenges with Round 1
before the program's scheduled significant expansion next year.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the impact of the DMEPOS competitive
bidding program on beneficiaries, suppliers, and Medicare expenditures
and the implications for program expansion.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Wednesday, May 23, 2012. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman HERGER. The subcommittee will come to order. We
are here today to assess the impact of the Medicare Durable
Medical Equipment Competitive Bidding Program. Our intent is to
understand the program's impact on beneficiaries, suppliers,
and Medicare expenditures, and the implications or program
expansion. Congress mandated the use of competitive bidding to
establish payment rates for high cost and high volume DME and
Medicare Modernization Act of 2003. Congress took this action
in response to evidence that Medicare fee schedule payment
rates often far exceed retail prices.
In fact, in some cases, Medicare beneficiary copays
exceeded the cost of the device on the open market. These
generous payment rates also made the DME benefit especially
vulnerable to waste, fraud, and abuse. A successful small-scale
test required through the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 showed
that competitive bidding for DME was feasible. Consistent with
the statutes the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
implemented a competitive bidding process for nine DME product
categories in nine geographic areas on January 1st, 2011.
This first phase of implementation is known as Round 1.
Medicare is in the process of expanding the competitive bidding
program to an additional 91 areas with competition-based
payment amounts to take effect in mid 2013. This expansion is
referred to as Round 2. The DME supplier industry has long had
concerns about the use of competitive bidding. It is important
to understand these concerns, not only because numerous
beneficiaries rely on medical equipment to keep them in their
homes and out of the hospital, but also because many suppliers
are the kinds of small businesses that form the background of
our economy.
Congress, with input from members of this committee,
responded to supplier concerns that the initial CMS effort to
implement competitive bidding was flawed. As a result, we
passed the Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act
in 2008, which terminated the initial Round 1 and required that
it be a bid once improvements were made. That said, it is
important that Medicare pay a reasonable and responsible price
for DME so that beneficiary and taxpayer dollars are used
wisely.
CMS has reported that the competitive bidding program
resulted in $200 million in savings in 2011. These first-year
program savings are derived largely from competition-based
payment amounts that are on average, 32 percent lower than DME
fee schedule prices. And these lower prices mean that
beneficiaries are paying less in the form of their 20 percent
coinsurance.
A comparison of the Medicare payment for an oxygen
concentrator, a common DME item, shows how the Medicare program
and its beneficiaries benefit from lower prices derived from
the competitive bidding. In the nine Round 1 MSAs, Medicare
would have paid $2,080 under the DME fee schedule with a
beneficiary paying 20 percent, or $416 on average. By contrast,
with competitive bidding, Medicare paid $1,395 and the
beneficiary paid $279 on average.
While I strongly believe in the competitive forces of the
private market, the process by which the competition is
conducted must be fair. To help the subcommittee understand the
successes and challenges associated with Round 1, before the
program scheduled expansion next year, we will hear from
witnesses who collectively provide a balanced range of
perspectives on the competitive bidding program.
Before I recognize Ranking Member Stark, but I understand
we will have Congressman Thompson speaking for him, I ask
unanimous consent that all members' written statements be
included in the record. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman HERGER. I now recognize the gentleman from
California, for 5 minutes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Chairman Herger, thank you for holding this
hearing on Medicare's Durable Medical Equipment Competitive
Bidding Program. Last year, we held a hearing on this topic in
May 2008, and what a different several years can make. That
hearing revealed serious problems with the implementation of
competitive bidding for DME. The health subcommittee worked
together on bipartisan legislation to delay implementation of
Round 1. Importantly, we didn't just give the industry a pass.
We reduced DME payments nationwide by 9.5 percent for all
product categories that would have been in the DME
demonstration, and we required CMS to revise the program to
avoid missteps from the initial implementation effort.
Historically, this subcommittee has raised concerns with
competitive bidding. We want higher quality and lower prices.
We can simply implement those changes through the fee schedule
and other administrative tools.
I have serious concerns about using competitive bidding for
other services, but purchasing equipment is a fairly
straightforward transaction, and I have been pleasantly
surprised by the outcome of the Round 1 rebid. Unlike the first
try, we haven't heard an outcry from suppliers around the
country facing difficulties in filling applications.
CMS really seems to have worked diligently to address the
operational programs--problems that plagued the inept attempt--
initial attempt. Not only does the demonstration appear to have
been implemented smoothly, it also appears that many of our
concerns about negative beneficiary effects haven't occurred.
We typically hear directly from patients or their advocates
when there are problems with such a substantial change to
Medicare.
I can report that we have not received any beneficiary
complaints with regard to this demonstration. However, we need
to be cautious as we proceed toward further expansion and
remain ever diligent in looking out for negative effects for
beneficiaries. I look forward to hearing from both CMS and the
GAO today.
In particular, I would like to thank the GAO for working
with us to expedite release of their statutorily mandated
report on the Round 1 rebid program. GAO's work is the first
outside audit of this demonstration and I am especially
interested in their expert evaluation.
Our second panel will also be important. We will hear from
several DME suppliers and a patient advocate, all of whom will
present their opinions on the DME competitive bidding program
to date.
We need to be circumspect about drawing significant
conclusions from this hearing. We will hear an overview of the
program in only nine metropolitan statistical areas across our
country. The program will expand next year to an additional 91
areas. While Round 1 impacts 6 percent of Medicare's
beneficiaries, Round 2 will increase that to more than half of
all Medicare beneficiaries. That is a substantial increase.
While the evidence appears to indicate that CMS can expand this
program, while protecting beneficiary access to care, saving
money for beneficiaries through lowered cost sharing, and
recouping savings for taxpayers through lower overall Medicare
spending, continued close scrutiny is necessary. DME is an
important benefit. It enables people to remain in the
community, and out of institutions.
We have a duty, a duty to Medicare beneficiaries and to
America's taxpayers to ensure that we maintain access to
quality care at the best price available. With that, I yield
back the balance of Mr. Stark's time.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. On our first panel the
subcommittee will hear from two Government agencies. Laurence
Wilson, who is the director of the Chronic Care Policy Group
and the Center for Medicare at CMS will discuss the agency's
efforts to implement the competitive bidding program. Our
second Government witness is Kathleen King, who is the Director
of Health Care at the Government Accounting Office. Congress
mandated that GAO study the competitive bidding program. We
look forward to hearing from Ms. King on what her agency has
found.
Mr. King, you are now recognized for 5 minutes--excuse me.
Mr. Wilson, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LAURENCE WILSON, DIRECTOR, CHRONIC CARE POLICY
GROUP, CENTER FOR MEDICARE, CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID
SERVICES

Mr. WILSON. Good morning, Chairman Herger, Mr. Thompson,
and ranking members--and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. I am pleased to be here today to discuss the
Durable Medical Equipment Prosthetic Orthotics and Supplies
Competitive Bidding Program. This important initiative,
required under the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, and
recently expanded under the Affordable Care Act, has been
effective in reducing beneficiary out-of-pocket costs,
improving the accuracy of Medicare's payments, reducing
overutilization and ensuring beneficiary access to high-quality
items and services.
CMS successfully implemented the program on January 1,
2011, in nine metropolitan areas after making a number of
important improvements based on new requirements from Congress
and after listening to feedback from our stakeholders. We are
pleased to report that the program has saved $202 million in
its first year of operation a reduction of over 42 percent
compared to 2010, with no disruption in access, or negative
health consequences for beneficiaries. We are now continuing
with the expansion of the program to 91 additional areas of the
country as the law requires.
CMS worked closely with stakeholders to design and
implement the program in a way that is fair for suppliers, and
sensitive to the care needs of beneficiaries. For example, the
program includes provisions to promote small supplier
participation and numerous protections for beneficiaries. The
program results in a large number of winners so that
beneficiaries are assured access and choice and there will
continue to be competition among contract suppliers on the
basis of customer service and quality.
In addition, quality standards and accreditation combined
with financial standards provide safeguards to support good
quality and customer service, while acting to weed out bad
actors and ensure a level playing field for legitimate
suppliers. The many improvements made by Congress and CMS have
been carried forward to successive rounds of the program. These
changes provide for a fair process that is less complex for
suppliers to navigate, and result in more effective scrutiny of
suppliers' qualifications and the integrity of their bids. We
continue to make further improvements as the program expands.
For example, to help fulfill our commitment to beneficiaries to
ensure quality and good service, our comprehensive monitoring
system will be expanded to cover the 91 additional areas and
the various new items.
This state-of-the-art system examines 100 percent of
Medicare claims and other data in close to real-time and
provides important indications on whether access or quality is
threatened. It tracks over 3,400 data points including
mortality, utilization, hospitalizations, ER visits, and many
others to provide us with information about the Medicare
beneficiaries and the services they receive.
As I noted before, we have observed no trends in these
health status indicators that cause us concern. Where we have
seen more significant reductions in utilization, we have
followed through with further investigation. For example, for
mail-order diabetic testing supplies, we surveyed beneficiaries
and found that they were still testing, but not ordering new
strips because they had stockpiles at home, up to a 10-month
supply or more, which is an indication of the overutilization
occurring prior to when the program took effect.
Our experience with Round 1 has shown that the competitive
bidding brings value to Medicare beneficiaries and taxpayers
compared to the current fee schedule system. In fact, the
average price discount across the nine metropolitan areas, is
35 percent. The CMS actuary projects that the program will save
$25.7 billion for Medicare over the next 10 years and another
$17.1 billion for beneficiaries through lower coinsurance and
premiums. In Orlando, the purchase amount of a standard
wheelchair dropped by $1,362. That is a savings of $1,089 for
Medicare, and the taxpayers, and an additional $272 in savings
for beneficiaries.
We are very pleased with the success of Round 1 of the
program. Nevertheless, we recognize that the scope of the
program is expanding and that it is a significant change for
suppliers and patients. We will continue to monitor
implementation closely, and be prepared to act swiftly to
address any concerns that may arise on behalf of beneficiaries
and suppliers.
We have a network in place, built around our National
ombudsman, local ombudsman, regional offices, CMS caseworkers,
contractors, and Medicare call centers to address and track
questions and concerns.
In summary, we will be diligent and thoughtful in our
implementation of this important program as it expands to more
areas of the country, and we will continue to be open to
further improvements suggested by our stakeholders, Members of
Congress, and others.
Again, I very much appreciate the invitation to testify
before you today, and would be happy to take any questions.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Ms. King, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN KING, DIRECTOR, HEALTH CARE, GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. KING. Chairman Herger, and Members of the subcommittee,
I am pleased to be here today.
Chairman HERGER. Let's have you push the button.
There is a button in front, I believe.
Mr. RYAN. You have to turn it on.
Ms. KING. It says talk.
Mr. RYAN. Is there a green light that is on in front of you
there?
Ms. KING. Is that better?
Chairman HERGER. That is much better.
Ms. KING. I pressed the wrong talk. Chairman Herger, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss a report that we are releasing on the Round 1 rebid of
the Medicare Competitive Bidding Program for Durable Medical
Equipment. Congress directed us to examine several issues
regarding the Round 1 rebid, and those are the subject of our
report today. We found that the number of bidding suppliers and
the number of contracts awarded in the Round 1 rebid were very
similar to Round 1. About a third of the 1,011 suppliers, or
356 suppliers that bid in the Round 1 bidding, were awarded at
least one contract. CMS made improvements to the bidding
process for the Round 1 rebid, and many fewer bids were
disqualified in the Round 1 rebid than in Round 1.
However, many suppliers still had difficulty meeting the
bid requirements. And, as in Round 1, CMS determined that some
suppliers bids had been disqualified incorrectly. Subsequently,
CMS extended contracts to seven of those suppliers.
During the first year, few contract suppliers, about 6
percent of those awarded contracts, had their contracts
terminated by CMS, voluntarily canceled their contracts, or
were involved in ownership changes. Under the program, many
noncontract suppliers exercised the option to grandfather
rental DME items for beneficiaries they were furnishing those
services to prior to the program.
We found that the number of these grandfathered suppliers
generally decreased steadily throughout the year as the rental
periods expired, or as beneficiaries chose a contract supplier.
Some contracting suppliers entered into subcontracting
agreements with noncontract suppliers to furnish services to
beneficiaries. In July of last year, about 31 percent of
contracting suppliers had subcontracting agreements. As the CBP
allowed, 43 distinct or unique suppliers had contracts for
product categories in which they did not have prior experience,
and 44 distinct suppliers were awarded contracts in areas where
they did not have a prior business location.
CMS's beneficiary access monitoring efforts reported
declining inquiries and complaints over the first year of the
program, high levels of beneficiary satisfaction, and no
changes in health outcomes. Although some of CMS's monitoring
efforts have limitations, in the aggregate, they provide useful
information to CMS regarding beneficiary access and
satisfaction. Medicare claims data from the first 6 months of
the Round 1, show that fewer distinct beneficiaries in the
areas received DME items in 2011 than 2010 for the six product
categories we analyzed. However, we do not assume that
utilization in 2010 was the appropriate level of Medicare
utilization.
Further, the decline in the number of beneficiaries
receiving services in 2011 does not necessarily indicate that
beneficiaries did not have access to needed DME. It is too soon
to determine the full effects on Medicare beneficiaries and
suppliers. Although we found that in general, the Round 1 rebid
was successfully implemented, our findings are based on the
limited data available at the time we did our work. While the
prevalence of grandfathered suppliers for some rental items may
have ameliorated beneficiary access concerns during the first
year, the number of grandfathered suppliers will continue to
decline as rental agreements expire.
Likewise, we don't know yet whether any change in the
number of subcontracting suppliers will affect beneficiary
access. Therefore, more experience with the program is needed,
particularly to see if beneficiary access problems emerge. For
that reason, it is important to continue to monitor changes in
the number of suppliers covering beneficiaries, and trends in
utilization.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared remarks. I would
be happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. King follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Ms. King, thank you for your testimony,
and I am grateful for the work that GAO has put into examining
the performance of this program. As you know, Congress
responded to initial concerns about the implementation of Round
1 by stopping it and requiring CMS to rebid it using an
improved process. Did Round 1 rebid go more smoothly than the
initial Round 1, and were Congress' concerns addressed?
Ms. KING. Yes, they were. The Round 1 rebid was definitely
much more smooth than the Round 1, and we evaluated the Round
1, and found a number of significant issues with that, and many
of them were resolved. In particular, CMS gave more information
about the kinds of financial documentation that were required
and gave notice to a supplier when their financial
documentation was incomplete. So most of the procedural aspects
in Round 1 were definitely ameliorated.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Wilson, I would like to get
your reaction to some of the concerns we will be hearing from
representatives of the supplier industry later today. One
concern is that some suppliers may submit excessively low bids
in order to be offered a contract. Some believe there is an
additional incentive to submit low bids because bidders are not
necessarily required to accept a contract when offered. Can you
describe the process that CMS uses to determine which bids are
not legitimate, and therefore, disqualified from competing on
bid price, and whether the agency plans to expand this bona
fide bid review process in Round 2?
Mr. WILSON. I would be happy to address that, Mr. Chairman.
That was an issue that we gave serious consideration to in the
design and development of the system, and is in fact, the
subject of a number of discussions with stakeholders. So for
example, we looked at the program and wanted to ensure that
bids were bona fide and ensure that we didn't have essentially
low-ball bids accepted in the system that would be factored in
the price. So we set up a system to essentially screen the bids
statistically, and if they were aberrantly low, we would
request information from the bidders that would support the
price that they bid. We would ask for price sheets,
manufacturer invoices, or other information that detailed
service requirements in order to support the amount that they
bid. And if they could not support that bid price, we actually
threw out those bids. We feel that that process worked very,
very well.
And so we are carrying that forward to the next two, Round
2 in the 91 areas and actually expanding it. We don't feel as
though the lock-in aspect, or issue is necessarily practical
and we do have a concern that the statute may not allow us to
carry that type of aspect or approach forward within the
system. But we don't have concerns because what we found in
Round 2, was that essentially 92 percent of suppliers accepted
their contract offers. The ones that did not accept their
contract offers, essentially their prices were about half above
the price or the median, and half below. So we didn't see that
as a concern impacting price. That said, I think it is
something that we should look at as the program moves forward,
and consider.
Chairman HERGER. Another concern we often hear is that
because participation in Medicare will be limited to suppliers
whose bids are accepted, other suppliers might be unable to
stay in business, and there would be less competition when
contracts are rebid in future years. What is your reaction to
this concern, and could you also comment on why CMS believes it
makes sense to limit participation to winning bidders rather
than allowing any willing supplier to receive the competitively
bid rate?
Mr. WILSON. When we read the statute, it certainly tells us
that we can only contract with the winners in the competition
to provide services. But I think there is an important reason
for that. If you allowed non-winners to subsequently
participate, there would be no incentive to offer value to
Medicare and the taxpayers, no incentive to bid a price that
truly represented a true market price for the product. And so I
think it is important, from an economic sense and from a
program savings perspective, and value to beneficiaries, to
keep the program the way it is in that regard.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Thompson is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wilson, in your
testimony, you state that the Round 1 rebid saved about $200
million so far.
Mr. WILSON. Yes, sir.
Mr. THOMPSON. Do those savings accrue to both the Federal
Government, and to the beneficiaries?
Mr. WILSON. They do.
Mr. THOMPSON. If so, well, they do, so how much about the
Government save, and how much did beneficiaries save?
Mr. WILSON. I think we need to do further analysis of that.
What I can tell you today, sir, is that at least $41 million of
the $202 million, is direct beneficiary savings in terms of
coinsurance. I think there are additional savings that are
related to premium offsets, and I would be very happy to get
back to you on that particular issue.
Mr. THOMPSON. Okay, thank you. And how much does the
average DME user in these areas save? Do you have that number?
Mr. WILSON. Sure, the average price savings, is 35 percent,
as I mentioned in my testimony, and so I think that on average,
given that coinsurance is 20 percent for beneficiaries, that
they would save that 35 percent on their coinsurance.
Mr. THOMPSON. Well, and thanks for the good work of
everyone on this committee on both sides of the aisle. The
MIPPA strengthen accreditation requirements for all Medicare
DME suppliers. Has this requirement helped prevent fraud, waste
and abuse within the Medicare program?
Mr. WILSON. I absolutely think it has. It does several
important things. It elevates the standards by which suppliers,
that suppliers need to meet in order to participate in the
program. It also provides for some very, very important
clinical requirements that relate to how beneficiaries are--how
the items and services are delivered to beneficiaries, how they
are educated, and what standard suppliers need to meet for the
delivery of very, very important, and critical care items like
oxygen and wheelchairs.
Mr. THOMPSON. And how about the so-called illegitimate
suppliers? Were you able to weed out some of those as well?
Mr. WILSON. Well, we think that the accreditation program
absolutely does that, because again, it sets standards.
Accreditation agency goes out and survey suppliers. They need a
physical location in order to be surveyed. Information is
collected. And so I think that those kinds of standards erect
barriers which filter out or stop at the front door some of
those illegitimate suppliers.
Mr. THOMPSON. The information that we have suggests that
CMS has received about 130,000 beneficiary inquiries, and about
150 beneficiary complaints about the competitive bidding
program in 2011. And as you know, it is important that we
figure this one out, and make sure that beneficiary access to
necessary suppliers is appropriate. But we also need to make
sure that suppliers are complying with the terms of their
contracts. So can you give us an example, or any examples of
beneficiary inquiry or complaints that indicated supplier
access, or quality problems and the actions that your agency
took to correct those?
Mr. WILSON. Sure. I would be happy to do that. And the
first thing I would say is we are very pleased with the 1-800
response because we heavily marketed 1-800 to our information
intermediaries like beneficiary groups and State health
insurance programs and many, many others so that we could
answer questions about the program and help our beneficiaries
get the items and services they need.
I think a good example of how we were able to address some
concerns that came up through the call center process may go to
wheelchair repairs. We had several instances of beneficiaries
not being able to obtain repairs. The supplier was having
difficulty getting parts from the manufacturer. We intervened
in that process, facilitated a discussion between the
manufacturer, the supplier, and the beneficiary in order to
make sure the parts could be acquired to fix the wheelchair.
And then beyond that, CMS went back and looked at its repair
policy and expanded it to allow essentially any supplier to do
any repair so that we could stem any future problems like that.
So we had a policy response that worked. We had a response for
the individual that worked, and I think that that was a very
good result.
Mr. THOMPSON. And then in the areas with competitive
bidding, there has been some concerns that it has brought about
an increased use in hospital care and ER visits. I know you are
monitoring this. Can you speak about this complaint and about
that increased hospital visit issue?
Mr. WILSON. I would be happy to. We are not seeing
increased hospitalizations. We have a very sophisticated
monitoring system. We look at the entire competitive bidding
area. We look at those beneficiaries that may be in a specific
disease group, COPD, emphysema, that may use oxygen for
example, that are likely to access the product, and then we
look at the specific utilizers of the product. We look at all
three cohorts to see if there are any types of concerns which
would go to maybe their ability to get to a supplier, or even
the quality of the product with looking at the ones that
actually utilize it. We are not seeing increases in hospital
utilization, hospital admissions compared to the comparator
regions.
Mr. THOMPSON. And the ER visits part?
Mr. WILSON. And the ER visits, mortality, any of those
important indicators. So we are very pleased with the health
outcomes information that we are able to review. And I would
just note as well, that we are looking at 100 percent of the
Medicare database. We are not looking at a sample. We recreate
this every 2 weeks. Policy staff, clinicians, physicians sit
down and review this data, and so we are very, very attuned to
what is going on and we take the monitoring program very
seriously.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. THOMPSON. Yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, the gentleman from Texas is
recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wilson, you said
in your testimony CMS has a goal of 30 percent of the contracts
go to small businesses, or small suppliers as you call them. Is
this an internal goal or requirement by Congress and do you
feel 30 percent is an adequate target?
Mr. WILSON. Well, I would just start by saying,
Congressman, that we are very pleased with small supplier
participation in the program. The statute tells us we need to
have at least two suppliers in every competitive bidding area,
and it says we need to essentially help or provide
opportunities for small suppliers to participate. We have gone
way beyond that by setting up networks, or setting up a policy
to allow small suppliers to join into networks. A new
definition that we worked through with the Small Business
Administration about the definition of a small supplier, and
then we tied an important policy to that that essentially set a
30 percent target for small supplier participation, whereby, if
30 percent of the winners in a particular competition, in a
particular area, by product category, are not small suppliers,
we would add small suppliers until we met that target.
That was very successful. We ultimately had about 51
percent of participating suppliers in the first nine areas
meeting that definition of the small supplier. So we think that
is a very good result.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. Is there any difference between
metropolitan and rural?
Mr. WILSON. I am sorry, Congressman, I couldn't quite hear
that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Is there any difference between metropolitan
areas an rural areas?
Mr. WILSON. There is quite a bit of difference between
metropolitan and rural areas.
Mr. JOHNSON. I know that. How do you address it?
Mr. WILSON. Well, we address it in a few important ways.
One, we follow the terms of the statute which essentially say
we cannot bid in a rural area, so we do not. We also have
authority under the statute to essentially carve out of
metropolitan areas any low-population density areas. So we have
done that in a number of cases so that we are truly looking at
integrated urbanized areas where there is a competitive number
of suppliers and beneficiaries that will make the program work,
generate savings for the program, and patients.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, I think small businesses are important
job creators in this country, and I am pleased to hear that 51
percent of the contracts awarded went to small business. What
are you doing to make sure that number holds steady and small
businesses will always be part of the competitive program?
Mr. WILSON. Well, we have offered the same opportunities in
the current Round 2 of the program that we successfully brought
forward in the initial round of the program. And we believe
that that 30 percent target will allow us to have a lot of
small suppliers participate.
Mr. JOHNSON. You worked with the Small Business
Administration several years ago to create the definition of
small supplier for this program, and under this definition of
small supplier is a supplier that generates gross revenues of
$3.5 million of more--or less in annual receipts, including
Medicare and non-Medicare. Do you feel this definition is still
an accurate representation of the DME community?
Mr. WILSON. It is the definition that we currently are
using. I believe it is still accurate. I think that is a very
good question that I would be happy to look into further to see
if, you know, potentially it should be revisited, and I will
say that we have not revisited it since 2009 so it may be time
to do that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Well, why was the definition lowered from your
previous standard of $6.5 million?
Mr. WILSON. Well, $6.5 million was the standard for a small
business, which is a more general standard. What we wanted to
do was specifically target DME suppliers, because that is a
narrower definition, or a narrower term of business, and to see
what was reflective of that cohort.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Nunes is recognized.
Mr. NUNES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wilson, I am told
that 80 to 90 percent of American businesses are being excluded
from supplying Medicare beneficiaries under the competitive
bidding model that CMS has implemented in the nine competitive
bid areas, and I have three examples here of this. The first
one is there were 1,409 suppliers of CPAP respiratory devices
and supplies. Now there is 105. That is a 93 percent reduction.
The second example is, there were 1,433 suppliers for life-
support oxygen, and now, there are 211. That is 85 percent
fewer.
If a senior needs a walker, there used to be 1,501
locations to choose from. Now there are just 133. That is about
a 94 percent reduction. So I am not an expert here, but given
the size of the senior population and the growth and what seems
to be a limited number and dwindling number of people being
able to win these competitive bids, and then by your own
numbers, people who even won the bids backed out, do you know
why people that win the bids are backing out?
Mr. WILSON. Congressman, are you referring to the 8 percent
that I cited; 8 percent of bidders that did not accept their
contracts?
Mr. NUNES. Yeah, why is that happening?
Mr. WILSON. We do not know why they didn't accept their
contracts.
Mr. NUNES. Okay, so how it is possible that if you are
going to reduce the number of suppliers that seniors won't be
impacted? And if the program is working well, why would bidders
be pulling out?
Mr. WILSON. We don't know why that very small number of
bidders decided not to accept our contract. It could have been
for any number of reasons. We have suppliers that come into the
program and out of the program all the time. That has always
been the case, competitive bidding aside.
I think the thing that I say about looking at the numbers
you cited, and looking at this industry, there are a lot of
supplier numbers, a lot of suppliers providing a small amount
of DME. It is not a big part of their business and so the
numbers you cited don't really go to full-service DME suppliers
that are providing a lot of items, and I will give you an
example. I will use Pittsburgh, a place that I am familiar
with. In Pittsburgh, there were about, in 2010, about 815 DME
supplier numbers. Only 169 were providing more than $10,000 in
DME billing, so very small part of their business; maybe a
cane, maybe a walker; maybe, you know, a few boxes of test
strips, but not a big part of their business. I think seniors
will not be impacted because we always award enough contracts
to guarantee access.
So when we looked, when we looked back at the 2008 round,
what we saw was, we set a demand target that was generous in
order to guarantee that beneficiaries would have access and
choice, and the actual number of supplies and items delivered,
fell far short of that. That way we were absolutely sure that
we could guarantee access. We never want to worry about that.
Mr. NUNES. But are you concerned with the three examples
that I gave, like 85, to 95 percent reductions in suppliers.
That seems like a just a huge change, or are you disagreeing
with those numbers, or you agree that has happened?
Mr. WILSON. I can't--I can't tell you if I agree that is
happening. I would really have to look at the data. I think
what I am saying is that when I looked at the data, I am seeing
a much different picture about the composition of the industry,
and who is providing a level of service that is important in
the marketplace for ensuring access for our beneficiaries. And
what I understand is that the great majority----
Mr. NUNES. I will tell you what I will do. I will get you
the data that I have, and the examples that I have, and I will
get those to you in writing and where I got the data from, and
we will see if that matches up with your data, and see if, in
fact, the suppliers are reducing dramatically in the
marketplace. And so at least then we can clarify here whether
there has been an 85, 95 percent reduction in some areas of
suppliers. Will that be okay?
Mr. WILSON. I would be very pleased to look at it, sir.
Mr. NUNES. Okay, thank you, Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Kind is recognized.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for your testimony here today, and Mr. Wilson, start
with you. It sounds, based on your testimony, that so far so
good. We are seeing some promising significant cost savings
without jeopardizing access of care, quality of care,
utilization or choices of patients, and you also cited--I
wasn't clear what this was referencing--$272 of savings per
beneficiary. Is that an estimate of what the beneficiaries were
receiving in the last year based on the savings?
Mr. WILSON. That was an example that I used to show what a
beneficiary would save in Orlando on a standard power
wheelchair.
Mr. KIND. Oh.
Mr. WILSON. Based on coinsurance.
Mr. KIND. Just on a standard power wheelchair in the
Orlando market.
Mr. WILSON. Yes.
Mr. KIND. Okay. And the $202 million in savings was a 42
percent reduction from 2010 from the previous year?
Mr. WILSON. That is correct, a straight-line comparison.
Mr. KIND. All right. Well, let me ask you and Ms. King, in
regards to, and I think Mr. Nunes was kind of alluding to this
in his questioning, is there concerns as we move forward and
clearly, we are going to have to be attentive and continue to
monitor this program and see how it plays out, but through the
competitive bidding process, it is going to lead to greater
consolidation and more suppliers dropping out, and getting back
to Mr. Johnson's line of inquiry, and the impact on small
businesses, is that something we are going to have to keep an
eye on; greater consolidation and ultimately losing the power
of competitive bidding in certain areas? Why don't you go
first, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. WILSON. Thank you. You know, I think we always have to
monitor what is going on in the marketplace to ensure that
there are no threats or concerns, particularly with respect to
beneficiary access. I think we want a viable market. I think
what we have tried to do is ensure participation of suppliers
even beyond winning a contract, so there is a process for
allowing subcontractors. There is a process where grandfathered
suppliers, essentially, you can maintain the beneficiaries that
you had prior to competitive bidding, and keep those and bill
Medicare. There are opportunities to bill other payers. There
are opportunities to bill Medicare for things and items that
aren't included under the competitive bidding program.
Mr. KIND. A 30 percent figure for small businesses, is that
a goal or is that a requirement?
Mr. WILSON. That is a target for us, and the reason why we
call it a target, sir, is that it may be that in certain
competitions, although this was fairly rare, that there may not
be enough small suppliers that won a contract, or bid.
Mr. KIND. Let me ask you something more specific to my
area. I represent Western Wisconsin, and Round 2 of the
Minneapolis/St. Paul will be part of the competitive bidding
MSA area. That leaks into some rural western counties in my
congressional district. My concern is, my guess is, that most
of the businesses winning the competitive bids are going to
come from the Twin Cities area. And my guess again, I could be
completely wrong, and getting back to Mr. Johnson, this is
going to put the squeeze on a lot of my small suppliers in
Western Wisconsin where they won't be awarded the contracts,
and might go out of business.
We know that those that win the competitive bids have to
service the Medicare beneficiaries, but there is no requirement
that they have to service private insurance beneficiaries,
including in the surrounding areas of the MSA area. Is that a
concern, something that we should keep an eye on as we move
forward in Round 2?
Mr. WILSON. Well, on the first part, sir, I think the--we
are hopeful that a lot of small suppliers will participate.
Based on our experience, we think they will. But we are going
to look at that pretty closely. In terms of participating,
participation with private insurance, I mean, we are seeing
that with a lot of the suppliers currently in the Round 2--in
the Round 1 areas. I think if that is a concern, that is
something that we can look into and investigate for you.
Mr. KIND. Yeah, because the counties that I describe in my
district are heavily Medicare beneficiaries and so there is a
smaller private presence in that. But even in the surrounding
MSA area, and not within the MSA itself, the surrounding area,
I am going to be, you know, concerned about the impact it is
going to have on supplying private insurance beneficiaries
through this next round. So that is something that you are
sensitive to, or not aware of any potential problems?
Mr. WILSON. Well, we are not aware of any potential
problems; did not see any in the Round 1 areas. I think it is a
very good point, and something that we can look into, because
we do understand it is a broader marketplace and we don't want
to have a deleterious effect on those beneficiaries.
Mr. KIND. Right, right. Thank you.
Mr. WILSON. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Dr. Price is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses on a very important topic. Competitive bidding is
extremely vital for--the supply of these things for our
communities is extremely important. Many of us are concerned
about the competitive bidding process. Many of us don't believe
that it is actually competitive, and when we talk about canes
and wheelchairs, as an orthopedic surgeon, that is one thing,
but when you talk about oxygen supply, and CPAP machines, these
are life-saving and life-threatening devices if they are not
available. So I think it is absolutely vital that we remember
the importance of what this means to patients, to patients in
the community.
Mr. Wilson, I have got a number of questions and I will
follow-up with written questions afterward. But are you aware
of how many Round 1 contract winners have gone out of business?
Mr. WILSON. They won a contract and then subsequently went
out of business?
Mr. PRICE. Yes.
Mr. WILSON. My understanding, I don't have an exact number
for you. We would be happy to provide that, but I understand it
is only a handful.
Mr. PRICE. But you have that information?
Mr. WILSON. We do.
Mr. PRICE. Okay, if you could get that to us, that would be
great. Does CMS screen the providers to determine whether or
not they actually have the capacity to serve the Medicare
population in an area?
Mr. WILSON. We do very carefully.
Mr. PRICE. How do you do that?
Mr. WILSON. Well, there are a number of different tools
that Medicare uses to screen a provider, both within the
competitive bidding program and outside of the competitive
bidding program. But we absolutely want to assure the
qualifications of a provider. So there are many Medicare
requirements, supplier standards that have to be met. We also
look at the state licensing, the accreditation program, which
relies on quality standards. There is a specific set of
qualities.
Mr. PRICE. Many States don't have licensing requirements,
mine being one of them. Ms. King, you mentioned, I believe, I
didn't see it in your written testimony, but in your oral
testimony, you said 44 percent of the contracts were awarded to
companies that had previously not served that geographic area.
Is that accurate?
Ms. KING. Not quite; 44 suppliers, not 44 percent.
Mr. PRICE. So Mr. Wilson, how, with those 44 suppliers, how
do you determine their capacity to serve a population if they
are never served before?
Mr. WILSON. Well, they all need to be accredited and meet a
set of quality standards. The quality standards include
product-specific standards for oxygen, and all other
requirements under the Medicare program.
Mr. PRICE. But they have never served that area before.
Mr. WILSON. Well, I don't think that we see a lot of oxygen
suppliers that have never provided oxygen before. I think what
I would tell you is that 76 percent of all suppliers awarded a
contract were experienced in an area providing the--providing
the services for which they were awarded a contract.
Mr. PRICE. Are you aware of the number that Mr. Nunes
referred to in the nine CBAs, 1,409 suppliers of CPAP and
respiratory devices before Round 1. Now there are 105, a 93
percent reduction. This isn't a cane or a hospital bed. These
are CPAP machines, respiratory devices, respiratory-assist
devices, life and death issues. Are you aware of that number?
Mr. WILSON. I am not aware of that specific number. I can
tell you that there were over 950 oxygen suppliers in Miami
prior to the competitive bidding program going into effect. We
don't think that all of those providers and provider numbers
were appropriate.
Mr. PRICE. What if the patients think that one of those
that is actually the most responsive in their experience ought
to be the one providing their care? Does that come into play?
Mr. WILSON. Well, we want to have patient choice under the
program, and so we award more than enough contracts.
Mr. PRICE. Tell me how patient choice is arrived at when
you have 1,409 suppliers before CMS intervenes, and 105
afterward. Tell me how that satisfies patient choice.
Mr. WILSON. Well, for the items you mentioned, I would say
that those are grandfathered items. They can elect to stay with
their current supplier.
Mr. PRICE. And as you know, the problem with that, is that
as your program continues, the grandfathering ability to
participate and the number of patients that they have dwindles;
and therefore, they have much greater difficulty being able to
continue their provision to the community.
Mr. WILSON. That is true, but the individual patient can
still elect to maintain their relationship with that supplier.
Mr. PRICE. Are you aware of the number that was also quoted
by Mr. Nunes, 1,433 suppliers of life-support oxygen; now there
are 211, an 85 percent decrease?
Mr. WILSON. I am not aware of that. I am aware of some of
the very, very high number of suppliers in certain areas of
the----
Mr. PRICE. Understanding that it is patients who are
affected by this most directly, not CMS?
Mr. WILSON. We hope--we hope to provide choice for
patients, and we hope to judge the qualifications of suppliers
so that they meet the standards that allow them to provide.
Mr. PRICE. I would encourage you to reread Ms. King's
testimony which says that there is not the information
available yet that allows us to draw that conclusion. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
also thank our witnesses for being here today. Mr. Wilson, back
to your term, integrity of bidding. Is it true, that CMS has no
mechanism to ensure that suppliers actually have the capacity
to meet their claims in terms of their bid? For example,
suppliers are not required to provide a letter of credit with a
deposit or a surety bond.
I guess I am talking about how do you determine whether a
supplier is credible, or viable?
Mr. WILSON. Well, we do have a process put in place by the
Congress to ensure that they are viable providers that can meet
the terms of their contract.
Mr. BUCHANAN. What is that process? Do you have a letter of
credit, or is there a surety bond? Some of the larger
suppliers, what, you know, what how do you look at that, just
so I know.
Mr. WILSON. There are financial standards required under
law, so we do look at a number of different data points, the
same types of data elements, financial ratios that banks use to
judge viability of either a borrower, or a business. And so we
collect tax documents, balance sheets, cash flow. We get credit
reports, credit scores, and other information that we can then
use to evaluate whether or not the business, that the supplier
is viable and able to meet the terms of their contract over a
3-year period.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Also, Mr. Wilson, if a contractor doesn't
meet his commitments as a supplier, are there any penalties?
Mr. WILSON. We do have an oversight process that we have
used. We want to make sure that suppliers are following the
terms of their contract and the regulations, and where they do
not, we have intervened with the supplier, we have called in
accreditation organizations to do surveys, and we have actually
pulled contracts.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Also, just at a conference last year, Mr.
Blum stated he was concerned with overutilization. If
overutilization is a problem, wouldn't it be more effective to
redefine eligibility criteria? In terms of overutilization,
that is what we are talking about here. That was his quote.
Mr. WILSON. I think that the accreditation program is a way
that Congress put in place as a way of redefining the
eligibility criteria for suppliers. I think also the
competitive bidding program is another way where we only offer
contracts to those that meet financial standards accreditation
and offer the best value for Medicare and its beneficiaries.
So I think that has had an effect on overutilization. And
in reading the GAO report and looking at our own extensive
monitoring, we have seen overutilization come down in the
competitive bidding areas; but also, for those requirements
that apply more broadly, we have seen utilization come down in
other areas of the country as well.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Mr. Wilson, one other question here. It is my
understanding that the CMS has added electrical stimulation
devices, TENS, to a list of products included in the recompete.
TENS is a noninvasive therapy used by physicians for treating
chronic lower back pain. However, effective last month, CMS
plans to roll back coverage for TENS devices while they study
TENS, which has been approved by the FDA. In fact, it has been
approved over the last 30 years. Why not continue coverage of
TENS until you guys finalize your studies?
Mr. WILSON. Well, I know that that is a proposed decision
upon which we are accepting comments right now, and so it could
be that that is given consideration by the folks in our Office
of Clinical Standards and Quality. I am not personally working
on that issue.
What I would say about adding those devices to competitive
bidding is that we are required by law to essentially phase in
all items of DME over time, the particular order of which is
that those at the highest cost, highest volume. So we are
trying to meet the terms of the statute in that regard.
However, I would say that we have been talking with our
stakeholders about some of the items that we have brought in,
received some feedback from some, and I expect to receive
more----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Let me just say that there are people that
have hundreds of employees, a lot of different firms, that are
in the same situation. You create a lot of uncertainty when it
has been approved by the FDA for 30 years, and then all of a
sudden you cut it back without even completing the study. So I
would just suggest that, you know, these are a lot of companies
that create jobs, have been in business for some time, and just
to create this uncertainty for them, they don't know what
exactly to do going forward, because these studies in terms of
government could run on for years. So they are very concerned,
a lot of them, about this. So I hope that you will take some of
their thoughts and ideas into consideration.
Mr. WILSON. I will carry that message back to the folks
working on those coverage issues.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Roskam is recognized.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wilson and Ms.
King, thank you for your testimony today.
Mr. Wilson, I just wanted to focus in on a couple of the
themes you have heard from other members and reflect on some of
the concerns that I am hearing from providers in suburban
Chicago that I represent.
Could you walk me through the process by which you evaluate
a meritorious bid? So, in other words, what happens if you miss
it? What happens if you get it wrong? What happens if a bid
gets through the process and basically poisons the well and
creates something that in fact isn't sustainable? What is the
remedy?
Mr. WILSON. Well, let me walk you through the process
initially, and I can tell you how we address some of the
concerns that have been raised, for example low-ball bids and
maybe other issues.
Mr. ROSKAM. Go to low-ball bids, because that is really
what I am hearing about.
Mr. WILSON. The first thing we want to do is we want to
qualify the supplier. We want to make sure they meet all of
Medicare's requirements, State requirements, everything else.
We have an extensive process for doing that. So we evaluate the
provider and then we scrutinize the bid, and the bid scrutiny
starts with our low-ball bid process, something that we worked
on with our advisory committee, industry and stakeholder
advisory committee going back to the inception of the program.
Essentially we screen out the lowest bids in a product
category. We use a statistical measure to screen out the bottom
ones. And then we ask the supplier to support that bid by
providing information that shows us that they can obtain the
product for less than what they bid and allow for the cost of
the services to deliver to a beneficiary.
Mr. ROSKAM. Let me just jump in. Have you had any
experience where bidders have not been able to fulfill the
commitment of their bid?
Mr. WILSON. Well, within the bona fide bid process, we have
thrown out bids where they could not document a price.
Mr. ROSKAM. After you have approved it.
Mr. WILSON. Yes.
Mr. ROSKAM. So take the screened ones. I accept at face
value that you have that original screening done. Somebody
comes in, they meet that screen, and then they come through and
as it turns out, they can't do it. Have you had that
experience?
Mr. WILSON. We have had that experience where a supplier
maybe did not meet the terms of their contract, where they were
maybe unwilling to go deliver an item to a beneficiary that was
a little bit far from their location or maybe not offering
certain services that they should be offering, and we have put
them on corrective action plans. This is a handful of cases. If
they have not met the terms of that corrective action plan, we
have sent in accreditation organizations to resurvey them, and
if they have not come back into compliance, then we have pulled
their contracts in a handful of cases.
Mr. ROSKAM. Ms. King, you have done the evaluation. My
memory is you have done the evaluation of those nine areas, is
that correct?
Ms. KING. We have.
Mr. ROSKAM. Did GAO come across any examples of folks that
had made a bid and not been able to follow through on the bid
based on pricing, in other words, the so-called suicide bids
where they come in too low?
Ms. KING. That was not part of our analysis.
Mr. ROSKAM. So you did not even look at that?
Ms. KING. We did not.
Mr. ROSKAM. Okay. Mr. Wilson, going back to you for just a
minute, could you speak about--there is some controversy around
this bidding process, obviously, and there is a public group of
economists and others with some renown that have criticized the
bidding process itself.
What is it that animates the hope in you that they are
wrong, that all these people that have criticized, it is just
like they don't get it? Because it seems to me like there may
be something ``there'' there, and you seem to have an
extraordinary amount of confidence. From what does your
confidence come?
Mr. WILSON. I think there are two important goals for this
program, and a bunch of others, but two important ones. One is
to provide a savings for the taxpayers and beneficiaries of
Medicare. The other is to ensure that our beneficiaries don't
have any negative effects on their health.
Mr. ROSKAM. Agreed completely.
Mr. WILSON. And we have seen--and that access is
maintained. We have monitored that very, very closely and have
seen that those goals are met. So that makes us pleased with
the result that we have.
Beyond that, I think that when a group of economists of the
type that we saw writes us a letter, we take it very, very
seriously. And we looked at the particular issues that we
raised, we talked about them internally with our lawyers and on
the policy staff with our leadership to see if those are things
that we could do.
I think at the end of the day, at least where we are in the
program now, we had some concerns about moving forward with
those. One was this lock-in issue, about being able to, if you
bid, and you are locked into your contract, you can't turn it
down. I think from a practical matter, we don't feel we have
the authority to do that, but, more importantly, do we want to
lock in a supplier that doesn't want to participate and make
them go into a beneficiary's home and give them critical health
care services.
Mr. ROSKAM. My time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I think that our committee's hearing back in
2008 showed that competitive bidding for durable medical
equipment is a place where we can find some agreement, believe
it or not. In 2008, when we saw the real problems with the
initial incarnation of DME bidding, both sides came together to
bring the program back to Earth.
As this program is about to expand to 91 additional
metropolitan areas, including northern New Jersey, I would say
that we must ensure that beneficiaries continue to have access
to lifesaving equipment at affordable prices. But it all comes
back to our seniors. This needs to be about delivering the best
care to beneficiaries for a lower price.
Prior to implementation, Mr. Wilson, did CMS evaluate how
the competitive bidding program would specifically impact
patients residing in skilled nursing facilities, nursing
facilities and intermediate care facilities? Secondly, what is
CMS doing to ensure that these provider settings are not unduly
impacted by the competitive bidding program prior to expanding
the program to 91 additional MSAs nationwide. Could you answer
those two questions, please?
Mr. WILSON. Yes, sir. I think we did focus on the skilled
nursing facility setting to see whether there were particular
issues that we would need to address to make the program work.
Really the only item that is a central concern for skilled
nursing facilities under the DME competitive bidding program
are the enteral nutrition services. So we did look at that
issue. We did provide for a special category of bidding where a
skilled nursing facility could bid to just provide services to
their own patients. They wouldn't have to meet the other terms
of the contract that other suppliers would.
So we did allow this essentially exceptional process to
exist for them, and we have been monitoring that area of the
program closely to look and see whether there are concerns with
respect to health outcomes for the patients receiving those
services in skilled nursing facilities. We are not seeing any
concerns right now and we haven't heard any either through the
complaint or inquiry process. But if anyone, or you, sir, are
hearing those, we would be happy to look into them.
Mr. PASCRELL. So you don't see any impacts that we should
be concerned about at this point?
Mr. WILSON. I don't at this time. However, we will continue
to monitor that closely as part of the system that we have put
in place.
Mr. PASCRELL. Mr. Chairman, I think that we need to follow
up, particularly in terms of the impacts of each of these
procedures in different specialties within these nursing homes,
nursing facilities, and not just the nutritional area. But the
other areas you said do not have any concerns of yours?
Mr. WILSON. DME, durable medical equipment as a benefit
category under Medicare is not covered in skilled nursing
facilities. The skilled nursing facilities under Medicare law
are expected to provide those items to their in-patients. So
oxygen, wheelchairs, all of the rest are really outside of the
program we are talking about today.
Mr. PASCRELL. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson, I realize that based on your testimony, you see
few problems with the current competitive bidding process. In
your opinion, why are so many suppliers dissatisfied with this
current program?
Mr. WILSON. You know, we do understand that this represents
a change for suppliers. We do understand that the program
represents reduced prices and less access to the Medicare
market. I think what we have tried to do is to work with our
stakeholders, suppliers, beneficiaries to understand how we can
provide greater access, are there changes we can make to make
the program work better but still achieve our goals. But we do
understand that there are some fundamental goals in the system
that don't always maybe meet their goals.
Mr. TIBERI. There are many that believe that the current
program will lead to fewer suppliers sooner, maybe for sure
later, meaning less competition and ultimately fewer to supply
a growing number of beneficiaries which will lead to higher
costs because of the less competition. What do you think about
that?
Mr. WILSON. You know, I think we have seen some
consolidation in Medicare when you look at different benefit
categories and different items. I think there is certainly the
potential for some of that here. I think whether that results
in a threat to access, I really don't see that coming. I think
there is lots of access in the market now. I expect there will
be access to meet the growing beneficiary population.
Mr. TIBERI. Are either of you aware of auction expert and
economist Dr. Peter Crampton's recent criticism of the
competitive bid process. Has that caused CMS at all to
reevaluate?
Mr. WILSON. Yes, and I think I addressed that a little bit
earlier. I think we heard the issues coming from the economists
that I think wrote this committee and wrote us. Dr. Crampton
was the principal economist behind that letter and behind the
effort to sort of look at these issues.
We met with him several times to hear his concerns and his
ideas. I think at the end of the day, we were moved away from
the two issues that he was really concerned about. One is this
lock-in issue that I discussed, and the other is median price.
We think the program worked well the way we set it up and that
there were problems making the changes that he described.
I think one of the fundamental differences here is that we
very much view the program as a way to--as more of a Medicare
payment system that employs competition, and I think the
perspective of Dr. Crampton and the economists' letter is more
this should be looked at as a commodities type auction. This is
about providing services to patients in the home, and we have
held that first.
Mr. TIBERI. So have either of you read the industry's
market pricing proposal, and, if so, what do you think?
Ms. KING. It is not something that we have evaluated.
Mr. TIBERI. Okay. Mr. Wilson?
Mr. WILSON. I have been provided a copy of the legislative
language and I read that several months ago.
Mr. TIBERI. What do you think?
Mr. WILSON. We have some fairly fundamental concerns with
the program as we read that legislative language. I think the
first thing that I have mentioned is that when you look at some
of the mechanics of the system that they have set up, we
believe that it will result in almost universal failures of the
auctions that they set up.
Mr. TIBERI. All right. The last question is how much has it
cost to implement the competitive bidding program, and did CMS
have to hire additional staff?
Mr. WILSON. Yes, sir, CMS hired a few additional staff. I
can get you a number in terms of what we have spent so far. I
am sorry I don't have that today. When I did an analysis about
a year ago, I can tell you that the administrative cost was
about .04 percent of the savings that resulted from the
program.
Mr. TIBERI. Ms. King?
Ms. KING. That is something that we were asked to look at
as part of our work, and we collected some of the operational
costs for operating the program and it was partly implemented
through contractors, and costs that we were able to identify
were about $19.6 million.
Mr. TIBERI. To implement?
Ms. KING. Yes.
Mr. TIBERI. $19.6 million?
Ms. KING. Yes.
Mr. TIBERI. That is a number that will continue to grow,
right, as it continues to be implemented, thus far?
Mr. WILSON. It will grow as we expand the program to
additional areas, yes, sir.
Mr. TIBERI. And you will get back to me on the number of
employees?
Mr. WILSON. I can get you that.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Ms. Black is recognized.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me begin by
thanking the chairman for allowing me to sit on the committee
and hear the testimony and ask questions. I appreciate that.
I want to just go down the future and look at what is going
to happen in the future. So I wasn't able to find in the
documentation, I wasn't here earlier for your oral testimony,
you may have said this, but how long are these contracts for?
Mr. WILSON. By law, the term is 3 years or fewer. So
generally we have used a 3-year term.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay. So we have 3 years worth of contracts.
And then after that, we are going to put out bids again and we
have already narrowed the pool of bidders. So how do we, going
forward, I think you can show up to this point in time, by at
least what I see here in this documentation, that there has
been some savings. But when you narrow the pool of competitive
bidders for the next round, how does that make sense? Now you
have less people bidding.
Mr. WILSON. Well, you may have less people bidding. You may
have more. I don't any think we know that. I think we still see
many, many suppliers in the marketplace continuing to provide
services. So I think we are already recompeting Round 1 of the
program. We just began that process.
Mrs. BLACK. How do you have more suppliers coming into a
program where they can't be reimbursed? Are you talking about
subcontractors? Are they then going to be able to bid?
Mr. WILSON. Sure. Subcontractors can bid, suppliers that
are providing services maybe through Medicaid programs, those
patients, private patients, those providing services that are
not yet included in the Medicare program for competitive
bidding.
Mrs. BLACK. Ms. King, do you have any feeling on how this
will affect future bidding when you narrow the pool?
Ms. KING. I think that it is not something that we have
examined, but we think that the program bears watching in the
future to see what happens to the number of contract suppliers.
But I think also, as Mr. Wilson said, it is not only the people
who won in the first round who can bid in the second round.
Other suppliers and subcontracting suppliers, new entrants into
the market, people serving private beneficiaries will be able
to bid in the second round.
Mrs. BLACK. Well, I am concerned about access, and I have
heard that. About 50 percent of my district is rural, so there
are many of those suppliers that have gone out of business
because they said they just, you know, are not able to compete,
and I have heard from some of my constituents that they are not
getting access the way they were previously. So I do have a
concern about that.
But, Ms. King, let me go to you because your report looks
at utilization for product categories by comparing the first 6
months of 2010 with the first 6 months of 2011. Does GAO
believe that reduced utilization in these MSAs is a sign of
access of care being restricted?
Ms. KING. No, we don't necessarily draw that conclusion,
because we don't start with the premise that the level of
utilization in 2010 was the appropriate level of utilization.
And given the fact that there aren't any demonstrated access
problems in the first year, you know, we don't think that it
necessarily means that beneficiaries did not have access to
needed equipment.
Mrs. BLACK. Also then back to you again, Ms. King, the GAO
documents the numbers of contract suppliers that have not had
previous experience with a product category or geographic area.
Are there contract suppliers more likely to subcontract?
Ms. KING. I don't actually know the answer about whether
they are more likely to subcontract or not, but 31 percent of
contracting suppliers had subcontracts as of the middle of the
year last year, so it is a pretty common experience for
contractors to have subs.
Mrs. BLACK. I am sorry, what was the percentage?
Ms. KING. Thirty-one percent.
Mrs. BLACK. Okay, 31 percent. So there is no evidence right
now that these suppliers are unable to fulfill their
contractual agreements from what you have seen?
Ms. KING. No.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Gerlach is recognized.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry, I was out
for a constituent meeting there. I am sorry if I ask a question
that might have already been posed.
But I was curious about, Mr. Wilson, the mail order
diabetic supplies issue. Is that category of product, is that
just as it says, mail order diabetic supplies versus a local
pharmacist that might have a practice of doing home delivery of
diabetic supplies, either to an individual senior's home or to
a long-term care facility? Is the mail order diabetic supply
that you are part of Round 1 that you were bidding and then
providing reimbursement for just mail order?
Mr. WILSON. In the Round 1 program, that is correct, sir.
It was just mail order basically through a commercial or
government mail carrier, and home delivery and walk-in retail
could be treated separately. For the national mail order
program that we are rolling out now, our definition of what
constitutes mail order will change and essentially we will have
deliveries to home through the mail or home delivery through a
van, all of that will be subsumed in the national mail order
program, although walk-in retail, if someone wants to go in,
talk to their pharmacist, get their drugs from the same place
they get their diabetic test strips, they will still be able to
do that.
Mr. GERLACH. But how will the independent community
pharmacist be able to continue to provide that home delivery to
a senior that has a very great difficulty getting out of her
home to get to the local pharmacy, how will you properly
reimburse the local pharmacist for that delivery to make sure
that kind of patient access and patient care is maintained?
Mr. WILSON. Well, I think we will be able----
Mr. GERLACH. Will you provide a separate home delivery
reimbursement to the pharmacist for doing the home delivery?
Mr. WILSON. Essentially if it is a home delivery, it would
have to be accomplished through the national mail order
program.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. But that is not answering my question.
My question is, how will you reimburse the pharmacist so the
pharmacist can still get out into the home of that patient, see
that patient, talk to that patient, answer questions for that
patient, without making that patient, who has a very difficult
time physically from leaving his or her home and driving X
number of miles to the pharmacist, who is not necessarily going
to get reimbursed anymore for that home delivery under this new
model?
Mr. WILSON. I don't know that our model accommodates that
particular situation.
Mr. GERLACH. So is that not then the patient access issue
that might have been raised in Ms. King's statement saying that
the accessibility issue is not fully vetted here in your review
of this situation, and you are not sure of what the impacts
might be on patient accessibility and patient care?
Mr. WILSON. What we are talking about in the national mail
order is just replacement test strips. So they have their
monitor. They can--if they need replacement test strips, that
is something that can be sent through the mail. It is a very
commodity type of product. That supplier, mail order, that
provides it, is required to still be able to educate the
patient, answer their questions and provide the services that
they would normally get.
Mr. GERLACH. It is my understanding, I have a local
pharmacist who supplies supplies to a local long-term care
facility, and he delivers a certain kind of supply product that
they have requested, a certain kind of testing equipment,
testing product. Under this new mail order diabetic supply
program that you are going to have, and if it goes to a lower
bidder that may use a different kind of testing product than
the one that the people at this particular facility want to
use, how is that going to be accommodated under that new
program? Will they have to accept a testing product that they
think is inferior compared to the one that this pharmacist now
delivers to that long-term care facility? Will they have to
just basically bite the bullet, I guess, and take the more
inferior product, because that is the one that was awarded
through this program?
Mr. WILSON. I would have to look into exactly how that
model would work at a nursing home, but I believe a caregiver
at the nursing home could pick up the test strips and bring
them back. I will look into that question.
Mr. GERLACH. Can I write to you maybe and give a little
more facts and circumstances around that question so you have
an opportunity to look at it a little more fully and then can
get back to me on that?
Mr. WILSON. I would absolutely appreciate it because I want
to make sure there are no concerns here, and if there are some,
then I would like an opportunity to address them.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you. I appreciate it very much. Thanks.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. I want to thank Mr. Wilson and
Ms. King for testifying today. Your insights and perspectives
are extremely helpful.
I would now like to invite our second panel of witnesses to
step forward so we may hear the supplier and beneficiary
perspective on this important issue.
On our second panel of the subcommittee, we will hear from
representatives of the stakeholders directly affected by the
competitive bidding program. Two of the witnesses are here on
behalf of supplier organizations.
Joel Marx is the chair of the Board of the American
Association of Homecare, an organization that represents a
large number of DME suppliers from around the country.
Wayne Sale is the chair of the Board of the National
Association of Independent Medical Equipment Suppliers, which
is a national organization that focuses on small mom-and-pop
suppliers. We look forward to hearing not only the concerns
that these organizations have with the current program, but
also what they see as an alternative.
We will also hear from a small business owner, Dino Martis,
who is President of Ablecare Medical, Incorporated. Mr. Martis
is a Round 1 participant who believes that the current
competitive bidding program functions relatively well.
Our final witness is Alfred Chiplin, who is the senior
policy attorney at the Center for Medicare Advocacy. We look
forward to hearing Mr. Chiplin share the beneficiary
perspective. Mr. Marx, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOEL D. MARX, CHAIR, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION FOR HOMECARE

Mr. MARX. Good morning, Chairman Herger and Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Joel Marx. I have submitted written
testimony which I hope will be accepted.
I operate a medical service company which is based in
Cleveland, Ohio. We provide virtually all types of home medical
equipment and services, including oxygen therapy, wheelchairs
and hospital beds. My company was founded by my parents in
1950, and we have grown over the years and are now somewhat
larger than the typical provider in our sector. We serve more
than 25,000 patients annually through 14 locations in Ohio,
Pennsylvania, upstate New York and West Virginia. My company
was awarded several contracts under the bidding program.
I am also testifying today as the proud chairman of the
board of the American Association for Homecare, which is the
primary trade association for providers of home medical
equipment. The vast majority of the Association's members are
small family operations that, like my company, have served
seniors and people with disabilities in their communities for
many years.
Let me cut straight to the heart of the issue. We do not
oppose a properly designed competitive bidding program for home
medical equipment in Medicare. Let me repeat that. We do not
oppose a properly designed competitive bid program for home
medical equipment. In fact, we favor and strongly endorse a
state-of-the-art auction system that would provide true market-
based pricing, save exactly the same amount of Medicare and
beneficiary dollars that the current bidding system is
projected to save, and corrects the fundamental flaws in the
current system.
The current system limits Medicare beneficiaries' access to
care, it limits choices for consumers, and it will eliminate
the Nation's existing network of home care providers, which
will ultimately result in hardship and added costs for
patients. That would be extremely shortsighted since home care
is cost-effective and preferred by patients.
The existing Medicare bidding program designed by CMS
distorts the marketplace and the intent of Congress. It
radically reduces the number of providers, that is,
competitors, allowed to serve Medicare patients, thereby
creating oligopolies in the marketplace. It is forcing home
care providers to reduce supporting services in order to accept
manipulated reimbursement rates obtained through a flawed
process. These sufficiencies have been highlighted numerous
times before Congress.
More than 240 economists and auction experts, including
several Nobel Laureates, have told CMS that significant
modifications are needed to fix the current bidding program.
More than 30 patient advocacy groups believe that the bidding
program as structured today is flawed and needs to be changed.
I describe the flaws in the current bidding program in detail
in my written testimony, but let me mention a few of them
briefly.
The bids are not binding. This is unheard of in any auction
system. The pricing calculation uses a median bid rather than a
clearing price, and, as CMS has testified, half the bidders bid
their best price and ended up with a price lower than that. And
there has been a troubling lack of transparency at CMS.
To fix the fundamental flaws in the bidding program, an
alternative market-based pricing program for home medical
equipment has been proposed by market auction experts and
providers. That proposal, known as the Market Pricing Program,
or MPP, would require changes to ensure a sustainable program.
These changes are consistent with the original intent of
Congress and save the same dollars originally expected.
Let me just mention a few key features of the program. It
is designed to be budget neutral, and it is now before CBO for
scoring. The bids are binding. You stand behind your bid. There
are bid bonds, performance guarantees. And only serious bidders
will participate and no one will game the system.
The bid price is based on the clearing price, not the
median price, which conforms with standard auction design.
Reimbursement rates in areas would be adjusted based on the
auctions conducted in comparable geographic areas. Rural areas
that are currently exempted would remain exempt.
And finally, bid areas would be smaller than metropolitan
statistical areas and more homogeneous. Current bidding areas
can encompass up to three States with differing laws,
regulations and costs. This ensures fairness to smaller
community providers.
We strongly urge Congress to pass legislation that would
change the current bidding system to a sustainable market
pricing program at the earliest legislative opportunity. This
will not result in higher costs to Medicare beneficiaries and
will fix a flawed program.
We hope that Congress will take the advice of auction
experts, listen to patient advocacy groups and work with the
affected stakeholders to create a sustainable bidding system
that will serve as a model for other parts of Medicare and not
serve as a cautionary tale.
I thank you and would be pleased to answer any questions
the committee may have.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Marx follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Mr. Sale, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF H. WAYNE SALE, CHAIR, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF INDEPENDENT MEDICAL EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS

Mr. SALE. Good morning and Members of the Committee.
Chairman HERGER. If you could hit the button for your mic,
please.
Mr. SALE. I am sorry. Thank you, sir.
Good morning Chairman Herger and members of committee.
Thank you for calling this hearing. I appreciate the invitation
and the opportunity.
My name is Wayne Sale. I am the chairman of the National
Association of Independent Medical Equipment Suppliers, NAIMES.
I have been asked to present my observations of the CMS version
of Congress' 2003 mandated competitive bidding program and
forecast its effect when expanded into 91 additional CBAs.
For many years, I have enjoyed going to auctions and
bidding on everything from antiques to cars to artwork. At
every one, I registered and was required to stand behind my
bid. If I bid on it and I was the last guy to raise my hand, I
bought it. If I scratched my head or waved my hand to a friend,
I may buy it. So that is how auctions work. The high bidder
wins when the buyer is bidding and the low bidder wins when the
seller is bidding. Your bid is your word and your word is your
bond. How else can it work?
Well, CMS has developed a bidding process that is
different. The bid that the sellers of medical equipment submit
don't count. They go into a pile and are sorted from the lowest
to the highest and CMS picks the one in the middle and assigns
it to the product that they are bidding on. If you bid low,
below the median price, they may ask you if you want to sell to
Medicare, and if you decline, then they go to the next bidder
and they ask them. Does that sound like an auction you have
ever heard of?
Well, that is the competitive bidding process that CMS has
created in response to your 2003 directive. And a taxpayer may
ask, did you get what you asked for? I am not an auction
expert, but this is not an auction at all. There are no market
forces at play here. There is no competition in the pricing
mechanism when prices are chosen behind closed doors and then
released in a memo that says these are the prices, take them or
leave them. CMS has taken years of time and $20 million to
develop a competitive bidding system that contains everything
but competition.
Oh, those auctions I enjoy going to? I can see who I am
bidding against and I know what the bid is and I know what I
must do to win. In the CMS bidding process, I have no idea who
is bidding or what they are bidding or how to win a product
category. All of the bids are submitted through a closed-door
process. It takes months and months to hear from them, and, if
you win, you don't know how, and if you lose, you don't know
why. And it is legal. This federally-funded and
congressionally-mandated bidding process is contrived entirely
in secrecy and then announced and implemented as if it were the
result of a fair competitive price process.
That is the truth, and that is the problem. You are one
year into a competitive bidding process that has resulted in
administratively assigned prices with zero transparency. There
is more to their design that is built to fail, but I only have
a minute and a half left, so let me get to the remedy that we
believe will satisfy Congress' mandate.
Today my colleagues and I bring a fix for your
consideration. It is called real competition. A real
competitive bidding program will work better than an old
administrative pricing program. The process we are suggesting
is that you replace CMS's bidding scheme with one we call a
market pricing plan. It is more like a real auction, where
bidders are committed to their bids and the veil of secrecy is
eliminated and transparency enters the process to keep it
honest. The result will be good prices that will bring more
beneficiary access, better beneficiary service, and progressive
products and ideas. And a good healthy competition will bring
Medicare good prices.
An added benefit to the MPP is its sustainability. It is a
program that will last through the challenging times that we
have ahead as 78 million baby-boomers march into the Medicare
system over the next 30 years. The effects of the
implementation of Round 1 competitive bid have not been pretty,
nor have they been fully recognized at this point. The
reduction of the number of suppliers in each CBA has made
equipment and supplies difficult for Medicare beneficiaries to
acquire.
My written testimony will tell in greater detail the
specifics, but for now, I ask the chairman that I be allowed to
submit a CD for the record that contains the testimony of
patients who have summoned the will to speak to you whenever
you have a chance to listen. Their experiences with this
pseudo-competitive bidding will say more than I ever could, and
the complaints will grow if this version of competitive bidding
is expanded into 91 additional CBAs.
Chairman HERGER. Without objection.
Mr. SALE. Thank you very much, sir. This small industry is
only 1.4 percent of the Medicare spending, and it has a lot of
potential as a community-based supplier to meet patients'
needs. Avoiding expensive hospitalizations is our specialty.
Keeping people at home keeps costs low. Don't overlook our
value by focusing just on our cost. We can help bring savings
to this table and this country. I guarantee it.
Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sale follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Mr. Martis is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DINO MARTIS, PRESIDENT, ABLECARE MEDICAL, INC.

Mr. MARTIS. Thank you. Chairman Herger and Congressmen,
thank you for inviting me to testify today on the Medicare
Durable Medical Equipment Competitive Bidding Program.
I am president of Ablecare Medical. We are a small business
based in Cincinnati, Ohio, and we began operations in 1991. We
are a full service respiratory and DME company. Currently we
take care of about 3,000 Medicare patients who depend on us to
provide their care.
Numerous studies have documented the problems in Medicare's
DME benefit; inappropriate reimbursement, fraud, lack of
clearly defined services and outcomes. Competitive bidding has
brought some pressure to bear on those problems, but concern
remains. Fortunately, the debate is no longer centered on
whether reimbursement should be reformed, but whether
competitive bidding is the right approach.
Based on my experience in Round 1, competitive bidding is
working and we are excited about our involvement in this
program. In the past, taxpayers and beneficiaries have paid for
product that in some instances are tens of times greater than
market rates. GAO and the Health and Human Services Inspector
General found problems in documenting actual services provided
to beneficiaries and the quality of those services. Our
industry as a whole was unable to show a positive correlation
between prices and clinical outcomes. There are many reasons
for this and they have been outlined in my written statement.
It is important to note that reimbursement prior to
competitive bidding was not sustainable given continually
rising overall health care costs and expected growth in the
Medicare and Medicaid population over the next decade. This
committee has heard testimony about beneficiaries paying more
in cost sharing for certain DME than the typical cost of
purchasing that equipment outright.
We have seen that economic hardship has depressed patient
utilization of health care services. It has been our experience
over the last few years that consumers are reducing demand due
to a combination of falling incomes and rising cost sharing
requirements. With the introduction of competitive bidding, CMS
has reduced the out-of-pocket burden for beneficiaries, many of
whom, if not all, are on fixed incomes by lowering the cost of
DME and by extension the required beneficiary cost sharing.
From my perspective, the benefit to DME companies is that a
greater probability exists that with lower out-of-pocket costs
there will be more beneficiaries who are better engaged in
their care over the long term as recommended by their
physician. This will also increase patient volume, which will,
in turn, compensate for loss reimbursement.
In Round 1, we bid on oxygen, hospital beds, PAP, enteral
and diabetic supplies. We did not win diabetic supplies. When
we bid, our oxygen bid was exactly, in fact to the penny, the
same as the current allowable by Medicare. For the other bids,
we were 0.05 percent from the current allowables. Competitive
bid has forced changes in our business, but it has not reduced
patient access or the quality of care.
DME providers take pride in providing quality service
services and access and the quality of service provided is
market-based. We cannot afford to provide a lesser quality
product if we intend to continue in business. We do have to
become more efficient. We have recognized that, and we have to
use technology. We have recognized that as well.
We commend CMS for the way they have structured the
competitive bid process. The agency appropriately provided an
opportunity to small- and medium-size businesses to be a part
of this program, and they provided these same businesses the
flexibility and opportunity to engage with the program as they
saw fit.
Our experience suggests that while no single solution will
address all the issues generated by the transitioning to
competitive bidding or delivery model, I think it would be a
mistake to abandon competitive bidding. The alternative system
proposed would encourage higher bids and it would mean higher
cost sharing for patients. Various studies have shown that as
out-of-pocket costs increase, beneficiary engagement and
adherence to physician prescription decreases. This is
detrimental to the beneficiary, to the DME industry, CMS and
the taxpayer.
In the interest of taxpayers, program beneficiaries and the
DME industry, we respectfully urge Congress to let this program
continue, making adjustments as needed. We stand ready and
willing to assist in any effort.
Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martis follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Mr. Chiplin, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALFRED J. CHIPLIN, JR., SENIOR POLICY ATTORNEY,
CENTER FOR MEDICARE ADVOCACY, INC.

Mr. CHIPLIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Subcommittee. We have also submitted written testimony for the
record.
The subcommittee's continued focus on Medicare's durable
medical equipment, prosthetics, orthotics and supplies
competitive bidding program is important. We remain cautious
about beneficiary access to the scope and quality of DMEPOS
items and services as suppliers continue to jockey to do
business in this new environment. We think, nonetheless, that
if properly implemented, including the development and
expansion of appropriate beneficiary education and safeguards,
the program could be a positive vehicle for ensuring that
beneficiaries get the supplies that they need while holding
down cost to the taxpayers.
We are pleased to see that the Medicare agency in its April
2012 assessment of the DMEPOS program is projecting savings to
the Medicare Part B trust fund of $25.7 billion between 2013
and 2022 and a reduction in beneficiary and coinsurance amount
of $17.1 billion during that same period.
Out-of-pocket savings in the area of the CMS report is the
most exciting. We hope over time that the cost savings will
increase and that access is not impacted by decreasing costs.
As has been cited, out-of-pocket savings have an important
impact on access.
We remain concerned that providers carry a range of
products within product categories and that beneficiaries are
not inappropriately required to change brands or types of items
and services in order to stay within cost parameters dictated
by the competitive bidding process in local markets. On the
whole, we feel that the Medicare agency should be required to
step up its efforts to educate beneficiaries about the program,
including a special Web site specifically for Medicare
beneficiaries.
As to the standards for DME that have been developed, we
are pleased to see that they are extensive and comprehensive.
We do have a few areas that we would like to see looked at. One
is that there continues to be broad monitoring. We would also
like to see that the data that is gathered include information
about the level of beneficiary appeals through the appeals
process in addition to complaints. Complaints and appeals are
different matters. So we would like to see that tightened.
We also would like to see Congress address how it might
deal with the suppliers who are not awarded contracts and do
continue to provide services in some areas. This, we think, may
well be a problem. We would like to have some attention devoted
to that.
We also think it is important to give more attention and
clarity for beneficiaries on the question of how grandfathering
works. It is a complicated area and beneficiaries are often
confused. In our work, we hear from beneficiaries more about
the confusion about things than anything else at this point,
just about how the program will work.
We would also like to see that further analysis from the
Medicare agency look at the broader comparison of the number of
beneficiary complaints filed. Simply looking at what has come
in on the 800 number is not really enough. Over the years, our
experience has been that even when serious problems occur, few
beneficiaries file complaints and even fewer enter Medicare's
administrative process, and we think data analysis should have
some mechanism for recognizing this reality.
In conclusion, we remain cautious about the DMEPOS program.
We think, nonetheless, that if properly implemented, including
expanded beneficiary education efforts and safeguards, the
program could be a positive force toward reducing cost to
beneficiaries and saving costs to the Nation as a whole.
Thank you very much.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chiplin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Mr. Marx, CMS has stated that the Medicare
actuaries' estimate that the current competitive bidding
program will save more than $25 billion over the next 10 years
with the Congressional Budget Office offering a figure in the
same ballpark over the same period, realizing that it is
challenging the past legislation that increases expenditures.
What impact do you expect that the market pricing program that
you support as a replacement would have on Medicare
expenditures?
Mr. MARX. Thank you for that question, Chairman Herger. The
MPP, Market Pricing Program, is designed to be budget neutral.
The Association and the industry supports a program that will
keep the same savings for Medicare and beneficiaries through
that 10-year program, and we are prepared once we get the
scoring to make sure that it does reach that goal.
Chairman HERGER. If CBO were to come back with an estimate
showing that MPP would increase spending, would the industry be
willing to accept additional reductions to ensure that
replacing competitive bidding with MPP is budget neutral?
Mr. MARX. I would not expect that, but we are certainly
open to looking at any alternative to fix a flawed program that
is going to harm beneficiaries in the long run.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Sale, your organization has focused on small suppliers
and as someone who comes from a small business background
myself, I certainly want to make sure that small businesses are
able to compete on a level playing field. Considering that CMS
set a target for small supplier participation to equal 30
percent, and both CMS and GAO state that actual participation
exceeds 50 percent, do you believe that small suppliers are
adequately represented in the competitive bidding program?
Mr. SALE. Thank you for that question, sir. I have heard
the numbers 30 and 50, 51 percent thrown around today several
times. In looking at the Round 1 bidders, there are looked to
be around 7,000 bidders. There were 350 or so winners. My
membership is comprised of about--well, of those 7,000 bidders,
about 96 percent of them are small businesses. So when you
eliminate 90 percent of 7,000, you eliminate 6,300 small
businesses. The 30 percent of the 350 that they were supposed
to hit, they hit 50 percent. So you got 175 of that 350 are
small businesses. The rest of larger. Just applying the
percentages. It may not be totally accurate.
So the answer is the competitive bidding process leaves a
vast majority of small businesses outside of the Medicare
program and subsequently, reduces the competition in the
marketplace to frightening levels where service, access and
innovation we believe will suffer. How could it not?
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Martis, I would expect a
supplier to be firmly in the camp that higher Medicare fee
schedule payment rates are strongly preferable. And I
understand you have experienced no significant problems with
lower reimbursements that resulted from the competitive bidding
program. How was your company able to continue operating while
seeing significant reductions in Medicare payments?
Mr. MARTIS. Thank you, Chairman Herger. There are a number
of reasons for that. One of the reasons is with the method that
competitive bidding was structured, the very same issues that
have been brought up here have actually benefited us in higher
volumes, so higher volumes have, in fact, replaced the per-
service reimbursement reduction.
The second thing that we had to do at our company is, we
had to learn how to use technology, and how to become more
efficient in our service provision. That does not mean that we,
in any way, decreased service provision to the beneficiary, or
the quality of services. It just meant using technology for
greater efficiencies.
In fact, in some cases, Chairman Herger, we have increased
the provision of equipment to the patient, which has increased
the quality of care and has decreased our cost. For example,
Dr. Price was mentioning oxygen and PAP as life-saving care.
And we have now started to use portable concentrators. We have
started to use APAPs instead of just plain CPAPs, which is
increasing the quality to the patient, but decreasing our
service costs.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Thompson is recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here. Mr. Chiplin, the savings achieved
through competitive bidding, is certainly a preferable proposal
than one that would increase cost to beneficiaries, or erode
the guaranteed benefits in my view. And I am pleased that this
rebid seems to be running much better than the original
program, and I am glad that beneficiaries are saving money.
My question to you is, if we went back to the--if we didn't
do it this way, would we, in fact, raise cost to beneficiaries
or erode the Medicare guarantee, such as premiums support,
increased cost-sharing, and income-related premiums? And would
you agree that that would be the case, and would have a
negative impact on the beneficiaries?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Thank you, Mr. Thompson. In general, yes, I
think those are very serious areas of concern.
Mr. THOMPSON. Now, in your testimony before the Energy and
Commerce Subcommittee on Health in 2010, you noted that it was
difficult to find beneficiary-specific information on CMS's Web
site. Is that correct?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Yes, sir.
Mr. THOMPSON. Has CMS addressed these problems?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Well, I did a little homework before coming
over, and it is still difficult to find, get to the
information. Once you get to the information, it is actually
pretty good. It is a big scavenger hunt. That is the term that
I use for it. That is why I propose that we have a special Web
site that is dedicated to seniors, to beneficiaries that really
starts with their concerns and not just an add-on to what we
are dealing with with the suppliers. Because their issues and
concerns are different, although there are overlaps, but they
are basically different.
Mr. THOMPSON. So that would be your recommendation?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Yes, sir.
Mr. THOMPSON. How about, a lot of beneficiaries, Medicare
beneficiaries don't have access to the Internet. How do you
deal with that universe?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Well, actually, the Medicare population is
increasing its access to the----
Mr. THOMPSON. It is increasing, but it is not all there
yet.
Mr. CHIPLIN. Is the not all there, but it is certainly on
the uptick. I think that you have to educate beneficiaries in a
variety of ways. You have to use all kinds of media, written,
word of mouth, television, all kinds of things, and also an
intergenerational education approach, because seniors rely on
their family members and children for basic information about
all kinds of services.
Mr. THOMPSON. Mr. Marx, I would like to look at the
estimated costs of the market pricing proposal, and one of the
key elements of your proposal would be higher payments using a
clearing price as opposed to the median price, and have you had
this scored? Has this been scored? Push the button.
Mr. MARX. The industry has had it scored, but not through
CBO yet. It is at CBO awaiting scoring.
Mr. THOMPSON. How is it that you assert that it would be
revenue neutral if you haven't yet had it scored?
Mr. MARX. Well, there is an estimated increase in payments
going from the market price to the clearing price, but we are
expanding the universe of patients, which in Round 2, is going
to affect right now in somewhere in the 50 to 60 percent range,
and our program expands it to about 70 percent of the Nation,
still maintaining that rural exemption. So we are picking up a
greater population base at a slightly increased cost, which
keeps businesses afloat, and that 3, 4, 5 percent difference
will make a difference long-term.
Mr. THOMPSON. But the price would still be higher than
under the current program?
Mr. MARX. It will be higher for those in that 50 percent
range. It will be substantially lower for the 20 percent of the
patients that are added additionally.
Mr. THOMPSON. You had mentioned in your initial remarks
that--I think you said bids are not binding.
Mr. MARX. Currently, yes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Currently. I find that difficult to deal
with, and I, along with Mr. Sale, believe that once the bid is
made and it is accepted, the deal is the deal. And if it is a
moving target, it is extremely difficult to do business, and I
would think that the beneficiaries are on a little shaky ground
as well as far as knowing that they are--that their needs are
going to be addressed. Is there anything that you want to add
to that nonbinding binding bid?
Mr. MARX. Not only are the bids not binding, March 30th, we
placed our bids for the Round 2 locations, and that period is
from July 1st, 2013, until June 30, 2016. So not only are the
bids not binding, the bids that we are submitting don't even go
into effect for 15 months, and then they are in effect for 36
months after that. And how do I estimate my costs for gasoline
4\1/2\ years from now? You can't make a valid bid when you have
that long a period between the time you placed the bid and the
response you get back from the seller.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Nunes is recognized.
Mr. NUNES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wilson testified in
the last panel that essentially everything was going forward,
working well, there were no problems and he disputed the letter
from the 200 economists who said that this program was not
working well and needed to be fixed, changed, in some way.
So who is right? The economists, or Mr. Wilson? We will
start with Mr. Marx and I will let you all answer.
Mr. MARX. The economists did not say that the program is
affecting beneficiaries today. What they are saying is, the
long-term success of the program will ultimately decimate the
industry, and you will have an access issue down the road. The
pricing that is being used today is less than the best price
submitted by half of the providers. So how can they--if they
are putting in their best price, and the bid comes back lower
than that, how can they maintain that long-term? That is the
real issue. And when you only have 6 percent of the population
affected by it right now, there is a lot of cost shifting and
support from outside of the markets.
Mr. NUNES. What about the examples that we were, that some
of us gave to Mr. Wilson, and he disputed the data or seemed
not to be aware of the data, how we have reduced 90 percent in
terms of the numbers of suppliers. The data that we presented
in the questioning that the members of this panel presented
to--of the committee presented to the panel, are those, are you
aware of these numbers that 90 percent of the suppliers in many
areas are basically not able to compete?
Mr. MARX. I am fully aware. That has been ameliorated a
little bit by the grandfathering position, which gradually,
which allowed existing patients to continue with their existing
suppliers up till January 1st of this year. So that is just
starting to kick in. Last year existing patients were not
disrupted, which was an appropriate decision from the
beneficiary's perspective, not forcing them to change
providers.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Sale? Would you like to comment?
Mr. SALE. Yes, sir, thank you for the question. I have
heard both sides, and I think the economists are looking at the
future growth of the Medicare population, along with the
trillions of dollars in unfunded debt that our country is
looking at. I think the economists are looking forward and up.
I think CMS is looking backward and down at the performance of
a program that has lots of numbers that we don't know about,
and lots of data that we can't see.
Mr. NUNES. So I want to just to drill down this a little
bit. So the CBO number of $25 billion, you don't believe that
that savings is going to be realized?
Mr. SALE. I believe that it is forced savings, if it is
correct. I tend to think they are inflated.
Mr. NUNES. Maybe meaning that there will be lack of
coverage at some point?
Mr. SALE. Well, I don't see how, when you eliminate 90, or
95 percent in your example, of the competitors in the
marketplace you can't--you eliminate competition subsequently
in every economic example I have seen. Prices go up in such an
environment. So yes, I think it is unsustainable. Since the
program seems to be unsustainable, certainly the savings would
be, I think, overstated, yes.
Mr. NUNES. Okay, Mr. Martis.
Mr. MARTIS. Thank you, Congressman. While I cannot speak to
the numbers of the economists, I can speak to what CMS has done
with this program. So I would say I think CMS, or since you
asked, Mr. Wilson, I think is correct. It has been said that we
are depleting competition. We are not depleting competition.
While there are reduced number of providers, the providers that
remain are adequately able to take care of the demand and we
are also aware of the numbers of participants or beneficiaries
that are expected into this system.
I think CMS has done a very good job at deciding what a
company's capacity in actuality can be. They had conflicting
mandates. I mean, on one hand, we are saying we will give them
choice, or we have to give a patient a beneficiary choice; on
the other, we are saying, well, we have to also do a bid. In
normal bids, the lowest price wins as long as they have a
certain accepted quality, and they have a certain accepted
capacity. But here we have a number of different providers. I
don't believe if we allow every single provider back in, and we
reduce costs, I don't believe it is sustainable. I believe it
sustainable as it stands today. I think CMS has designed the
best program they could within the mandates that they have been
given.
Mr. NUNES. Okay, thank you, Mr. Martis. My time is expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Sale, I just want
to commend you for what I think was probably the most eloquent
description of the lack of competition in competitive bidding.
I think we will probably replay that over and over and over.
Mr. Martis, I am struck by your last comment. Do you believe it
is the role of the Federal Government to determine how many
providers are out there?
Mr. MARTIS. No, sir, I----
Mr. PRICE. You just said that the number of providers that
CMS has determined are an adequate number, so I--is my
conclusion correct that you believe it is CMS's role to
determine how many providers are out there?
Mr. MARTIS. No, sir, I think it is CMS's role to reduce
expenses to beneficiaries, to keep the program viable for the
beneficiary, and for the DME dealer, and to ensure a certain
amount of quality and access to care. I believe they have done
that.
Mr. PRICE. And I guess that is my concern, that CMS, a
certain amount of quality, which is what I heard you and what I
hear CMS talking about all the time. But it may not be the
level of quality that the patients desire or want.
Mr. Marx, I was struck by CMS's comment that there were,
and kind of offhand comment, that there were some suppliers who
``didn't meet the terms of the contract.'' What does that mean
to patients when somebody doesn't meet the terms of a contract?
Mr. MARX. My guess would be that----
Mr. PRICE. Want to turn your mic on please.
Mr. MARX. My assumption would mean that they are not
providing the service to the patients that they contracted to
provide.
Mr. PRICE. What does that mean?
Mr. MARX. I don't know what Mr. Wilson meant, whether a
patient called and asked for a service, and it was too late in
the day to provide it, or it was in an outlying area. Those
could be areas where the provider let the patient down.
Mr. PRICE. And the service might be a hospital bed, or a
walker, or a cane, but it might be an oxygen supply.
Mr. MARX. Oh, it could be oxygen. It would be CPAP. It
could be life-sustaining items.
Mr. PRICE. Life-sustaining items?
Mr. MARX. Yes.
Mr. PRICE. So when CMS selects suppliers who don't
necessarily meet ``the terms of the contract,'' that could be
life-threatening to patient?
Mr. MARX. Yes, it would be life-threatening.
Mr. PRICE. I am impressed by this MPP, the Market Pricing
Program that has been proposed that you all have proposed,
because I think that it gets to the same level of savings in a
way that provides much more efficient and higher quality, and
more responsive care to patients as well as continuing to allow
for innovation. Would you take a little time and just describe
the Market Pricing Program for us?
Mr. MARX. The Market Pricing Program is an auction program
run by auction experts. It is proposed to be run electronically
through an iterative process that reduces the pricing down to a
true cost to do business. It is competitive. It allows multiple
contracted providers, and it requires that if you want to bid,
you have to be viable, you have to have a bid bond, a
performance guarantee. If you bid it, and the pricing is above
your bid, you will contract or forfeit your bid bond.
It makes a fair pricing program, but it also preserves the
choice of consumers. It keeps a larger population of local
providers. It reduces the size of the bid area, whereas in an
area of Cincinnati, there are three States the provider must
serve to serve patients in that contract: Ohio, Kentucky and
Indiana. They are all part of that competitive bid area, and
for a small provider to be licensed in three States and meet
three States' regulations and a territory that could amount to
80 or 100 miles across, it is very difficult.
The MPP reduces the size of the markets so that local
providers can serve their local community as they have done for
years.
Mr. PRICE. So by exclusion of the small local providers
CMS, by design of their program, CMS is, in essence, decreasing
the responsiveness and the ability for patients to receive the
care that they received in the past. Would you agree with that
statement?
Mr. MARX. I do.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, and thank you for allowing me to be
here today, Mr. Chairman, to participate in this hearing. Mr.
Marx, do you believe that allowing bids to be nonbinding
encourages low-balling?
Mr. MARTIS. Congressman, if a provider would like to low-
ball, yes, the answer is yes, it could. I don't know whether it
encourages low-balling, but a submission of a low-ball bid is
possible. However, my understanding of what CMS did in this bid
process, is they took out the outlier bids, the highest and the
lowest, and tried to come to a median bid on the remainder.
My own personal experience, what we did with our company,
is, as I stated before, for the majority of the bids, or
actually all of the bids, except for oxygen, where we were
dead-on. For all of the other bids, we are .05 percent away
from the current allowed amount. So I don't see why providers
would low-ball the bid to a level where they know they can't
provide service.
Mr. TIBERI. Did you enter into all contracts that you were
awarded?
Mr. MARTIS. Did we enter all contracts that we were
awarded, sir? Yes, we did.
Mr. TIBERI. Were the payment amounts adequate to cover the
project categories that you talked about that you were involved
in?
Mr. MARTIS. We believed so, because as I said, Congressman,
we were .05 percent away from the allowed amount, so yes.
Mr. TIBERI. Do you plan on participating into Round 2, and
if so, like areas like Columbus, Ohio?
Mr. MARTIS. We do, yes, sir.
Mr. TIBERI. So you plan on participating?
Mr. MARTIS. Yes, sir.
Mr. TIBERI. Mr. Sale, you talked about this process of
Market Pricing Program, or this new proposal. Would it have
similar effects on reducing expenditures and beneficiary costs
in your opinion?
Mr. SALE. Would it have effects on reducing what, sir?
Mr. TIBERI. Beneficiary cost, and cost to Medicare's over
all expenditures that CMS argues their current process does?
Mr. SALE. I certainly think it would reduce the
expenditures from where they are now, and I think 20 percent of
that is going to reduce and save beneficiaries. I would like to
say, though, that the 20 percent coinsurance that is left after
Medicare has paid its 80 percent, generally is paid by
insurance companies. We talk about beneficiary savings, but 89
percent of my patient population that is Medicare, has a
coinsurance; some through, you know, any other the Anthems, the
AARPs. So they pay a monthly premium to someone to cover that
$17 billion.
So I would like to nullify the fact that these are really
beneficiary savings. In many cases, these are insurance
savings, and if you put that into context, the answer is both
numbers will go down, yes.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, you mentioned something that I don't
know if you were in the room when I was questioning Mr. Wilson,
but I asked him with respect to the current process, did he
believe that you would have--the current process would force
fewer suppliers ultimately, sooner but certainly later, fewer
suppliers in the business and then ultimately, we would have
more beneficiaries? Everyone knows that we are going to have
more beneficiaries, fewer suppliers. Would that lead to
increased costs ultimately? He said no. Can you comment further
on that based upon what you already said?
Mr. SALE. Well, I am not.
Mr. TIBERI. Why you believe that there will be fewer
suppliers under the current system?
Mr. SALE. Several reasons. First of all, this program as it
is designed, has been in play a year. And already, 40 percent
of those who submitted bids that are in bid areas that didn't
get them, 40 percent of those businesses are going out of
business.
I have brought letters with me from people in CBAs. One
company in particular that was almost 30 years old, they were
left out of the Medicare system. And when their patients were
moved over, they went out of business. And it is not unusual to
see those businesses fall in the process that is happening now.
As the prices go down and the incentives to improve service
and access are decreased, I believe service and access will
decrease. And as businesses go out of business, and the 3-year
contracts run on, when the rebid comes, there will be fewer and
fewer people to bid, and subsequently, bids will go up. It is a
supply/demand axiom that is pure, is true in every area.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for indulging me and
allowing me to go over. If I can just ask the chairman if we
could ask both the--Mr. Sale's association, and Mr. Marx's
association to provide some additional information regarding
the number of folks who have gone out of business, because that
is in direct conflict to what Mr. Wilson said.
Chairman HERGER. Without objection, if you would supply the
committee with that information, we would appreciate it.
Certainly.
Mr. SALE. Yes, sir.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the panel
for their informative testimony. My concern is that outside of
the fact that I get more emails from the Scooter Store than I
do from Viagra telling me that I can have the scooter free, and
Medicare will pay for it, the small supplier who doesn't bid is
pretty much put out of business by the person who wins the bid.
I don't see that that is particularly fair.
I guess, to cut to the chase, I would suggest, and I would
ask Mr. Chiplin if there would be any real problem? We do it in
most other things that we just set through negotiation or
comparative shopping, set a price. This is what we will pay for
oxygen. I don't know that I would want to pay any more than a
welding shop does, but the same guy delivers the oxygen to the
welding shop as to grandma. I see absolutely no difference
there.
It has to be there at a certain time. They don't want to
let them run out. A tank is a tank. They are all standard.
There are only a couple of suppliers of oxygen tanks. They are
all alike. And I presume they are all priced the same. Perhaps
they are made in different parts of the country for shipping
reasons, so why wouldn't it be possible for the government to
set a price? And then anybody who chooses to provide the
equipment or the service can do it?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Well, thank you, Mr. Stark. In general, there
are many ways that you could have designed the program, and
achieved the similar kind of goal. I think what you have
recommended should be explored. The bottom line for the
beneficiary community is that they are able to get the services
that they need, timely, and in the sufficient amount and
quality.
Mr. STARK. All of these products, it seems to me, are
something I could go to the medical supply store and buy.
Mr. CHIPLIN. Yes, sir.
Mr. STARK. And so why should a Medicare beneficiary, or
myself, or anybody else have anything different? If we go out
and the government goes out to buy a pickup truck, we set a
price. And then if you want to deal, if you are a local agency
with a local Ford dealer, Chevy dealer go ahead, wherever you
happen to like the service. Same thing is true of Star Wars or
nuclear weapons. We don't have to put those out to bid. We
don't have a lot of suppliers for them, but----
Mr. CHIPLIN. It I think what you are----
Mr. STARK. [continuing]. But what we have in particularly
small suppliers, who are apt to, you know, the Scooter Store
guys go around and get the bid in the community, and then they
subcontract through the local person and skim off the top. I
don't know why we should have to continue that. Is there any
good reason?
Mr. CHIPLIN. Not to my knowledge, sir.
Mr. STARK. Anybody else think of any reason why we
shouldn't just set a price, and if you want to sell at the
price, fine.
Mr. SALE. My I respond?
Mr. STARK. Sure.
Mr. SALE. Thank you for the question, Congressman Stark. I
hear intermittently as we are talking about the services that
Medicare offers under the DME benefit, and I would like to
clear up, there are no services paid for under the DME benefit.
It is only equipment, one. Two, when we are paid, we are only
paid for the equipment, but the list of things that we must do
in order to get paid continues to grow through the years as CMS
has added requirement after requirement after requirement.
Mr. STARK. You buy a jet fighter, you are paying for the
jet and not all of the fussing, so----
Mr. SALE. That is true. You pay for the jet and the
building and the labor that goes into it. You don't pay
anything for--you have an oxygen machine delivered, they don't
pay anything for the on-call, the 24/7 on-call. They don't pay
anything for the billing requirements.
Mr. STARK. Why should they? That is part of the service,
for heaven's sakes. I mean, come on.
Mr. SALE. They don't pay for service.
Mr. STARK. McDonald's is there 24/7. I don't pay any more
for the hamburger at midnight than I do at noon.
Mr. SALE. We are an emergency service, and the calculations
that they have put in place for reimbursing oxygen, and CPAPs,
are based only on the cost of the equipment.
Mr. STARK. Fine.
Mr. SALE. They don't include the service. We have to put
that in, that is the small business' investment in its
community and in the patient care.
Mr. STARK. Right. And why should anybody be excluded?
Mr. SALE. Well, we have to supply that, otherwise you could
go to an Internet and get what you wanted.
Mr. STARK. That is even better.
Mr. SALE. But they can't bill Medicare. They don't meet the
requirements that are----
Mr. STARK. If it is at a price, I mean, all of this mumbo
jumbo about bidding is nonsense. Government could set a price,
and anybody that could provide it would. That is how it should
work.
Mr. SALE. And I think that is the way it was. They were
administratively set for years, and then Congress came up with
the idea to see if we could drive the cost down a little bit
through competition. And competition is fine. We don't mind
competition. We just want fair competition, and if you are
going to have a bidding process, we would like to have
competition as one of the factors of it.
Mr. STARK. I say, let's do away with the bidding process.
Set a price.
Mr. SALE. Really, we should do away with the CMS process
that is cumbersome and time-consuming and takes years and years
and years; put an MPP plan in place that could be done in 6
months, and rebid it every 2 years so that we can be
sustainable for decades to come.
Mr. STARK. Well, we are not here in the business to sustain
your business for decades to come. That is hardly competitive.
Mr. SALE. No, I have 78 million baby-boomers coming and
aging is a disabling process.
Mr. STARK. I don't care.
Mr. SALE. We are planning for that.
Mr. STARK. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you, and it would be nice if we
could set a price. Maybe set it a little bit above free, but
how do we know what that price is? I think that is what the
question is. How do we know what the price is, and I think the
success of this great Nation of ours is the free enterprise
system where the marketplace has set what that price is. And I
think that is what really the purpose of our hearing is today,
to how do we get the lowest price that we can have and still
sustain the quality that we need.
With that, I want to thank each of our witnesses for your
testimony today. Hearing such a range of perspectives has been
helpful to the subcommittee. It is important for members to
understand the impact that competitive bidding has on
beneficiaries, suppliers, and Medicare expenditures. Since it
would not be prudent, or viable to simply return to the often,
excessive payment rates of the old DME fee schedule, I want to
commend the supplier industry for offering an alternative that
is based on competition and aims to set prices using market
forces.
The subcommittee will carefully consider all of this
information. It is my hope that the Congressional Budget Office
will soon inform us as to the spending implications of moving
to such a proposal. As a reminder, any member wishing to submit
a question for the record will have 14 days to do so. If any
questions are submitted, I ask that the witnesses respond in a
timely manner. With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
Questions For The Record

Member Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


