- TRANSPARENCY AND FUNDING OF STATE AND LOCAL PENSION PLANS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRANSPARENCY AND FUNDING OF

STATE AND LOCAL PENSION PLANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 5, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-OS3

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            XAVIER BECERRA, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               RON KIND, Wisconsin
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published
in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the official
version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare both
printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of
converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of April 28, 2011, announcing the hearing...............     2

WITNESSES

Honorable Walker Stapleton, Colorado State Treasury..............     6
Josh Barro, Walter B. Wriston Fellow, Manhattan Institute for
Policy Research................................................    11
Jeremy Gold, FSA, CERA, MAAA, Ph.D., Jeremy Gold Pensions........    16
Robert Kurtter, Managing Director, U.S. Public Finance, Moody's
Investors Service..............................................    26
Iris J. Lav, Senior Advisor, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities.....................................................    37

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Federation of State, County And Municipal Employees,
statement......................................................    81
International Association of Fire Fighters, statement............    83
Joint Group, statement...........................................    89
Labor Coalition, statement.......................................    95
Municipal Employees Retirement System, statement.................    96
National Education Association, statement........................   101
National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems,
statement......................................................   104
Public Plans Community, statement................................   113
Service Employees International Union, statement.................   118
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, statement.   122

TRANSPARENCY AND FUNDING OF

STATE AND LOCAL PENSION PLANS

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Charles
Boustany [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Thursday, April 28, 2011
OS-3

Boustany Announces a Hearing on the

Transparency and Funding of

State and Local Pension Plans

Congressman Charles W. Boustany, Jr., MD, (R-LA), Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee on Ways and Means, today
announced that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on the transparency
and funding of State and local defined benefit pension plans. The
hearing will take place on Thursday, May 5, 2011, in Room 1100 of the
Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 9:30 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

Many have expressed increasing concern that State and local defined
benefit pension plans (i.e., ``public plans'') have become dangerously
underfunded. Based on the plans' own accounting measures, estimates
suggest that as of 2009 they faced an aggregate shortfall of between
$700 billion and $1.3 trillion. Many economists, however, have argued
that these plans are improperly measuring their assets and liabilities
in a way that significantly understates the true scope of the problem.
Indeed, several recent studies have concluded that the plans may
actually be underfunded by more than $3 trillion.

Growing concerns about the financial health of these public plans
have led some public officials to suggest that a Federal bailout of
these plans may be appropriate. The proposed FY 2012 State budget by
Illinois Governor Pat Quinn (D-IL), for example, explicitly suggests
that Illinois may seek a Federal guarantee of a new debt issuance to
cover its unfunded pension plan liabilities.

In response to concerns about the financial health of these public
plans--and about possible efforts by State and local governments to
secure a Federal taxpayer bailout of such plans--Rep. Devin Nunes (R-
CA), a Member of the Committee on Ways and Means, has introduced the
``Public Employee Pension Transparency Act'' (H.R. 567). This
legislation is intended to enhance transparency in this area by
encouraging public plans to disclose: (1) various plan funding data
using their own actuarial assumptions, including a statement of those
assumptions, and (2) the fair market value of plan assets and the value
of plan liabilities using Treasury yields as the discount rate. While
H.R. 567 would not impose any new standards on public plans with
respect to actual funding requirements, State and local governments
failing to make the disclosures proposed under the bill would lose
their ability to issue debt that is tax-preferred under Federal income
tax law. Additionally, H.R. 567 provides that the United States would
not be liable for any obligation relating to funding shortfalls in
State or local pension plans.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``Whether the
underfunding of State and local pension plans is $700 billion or over
$3 trillion, it is a serious concern for workers and retirees, for
State and local governments, and for taxpayers in general. The
Subcommittee needs to understand how public plans are currently
calculating their assets and liabilities, not just so we can get a
clearer picture of how underfunded those plans really are, but also to
determine whether there is adequate transparency in how these plans are
reporting their shortfalls. Given that some have raised the specter of
a Federal taxpayer bailout to cover the unfunded liabilities of these
State and local plans, it is important for the Subcommittee to review
this issue and to consider possible approaches to ensure that no such
Federal taxpayer bailout is ever needed.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on the measurement and transparency of
funding levels of State and local pension plans and will explore
whether improvements to those plans' actuarial assumptions--and
enhanced transparency in the reporting of the financial health of those
plans--are warranted. Among the approaches to these issues that the
Subcommittee will review is H.R. 567.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
written comments for the hearing record must follow the appropriate
link on the hearing page of the Committee website and complete the
informational forms. From the Committee homepage, http://
waysandmeans.house.gov, select ``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for
which you would like to submit, and click on the link entitled, ``Click
here to provide a submission for the record.'' Once you have followed
the online instructions, submit all requested information. Attach your
submission as a Word document, in compliance with the formatting
requirements listed below, by the close of business on Thursday, May
19, 2011. Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail
policy, the U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries
to all House Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter
technical problems, please call (202) 225-3625 or (202) 225-5522.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. Welcome to this morning's Oversight
Subcommittee hearing on the Transparency and Funding Levels of
State and Local Pension Plans. According to the Federal, State
and local levels of government, our country faces a growing
burden of public debt. Too often, governments have deferred
difficult choices by pushing obligations off into the future
without responsibly saving for the day when those obligations
are due.
At the State and local levels, public employees are often
promised defined benefit pension plans subsidized through the
Tax Code that guarantee payments down the road. But the numbers
suggest public employee pensions may be dangerously
underfunded. This raises critical questions about the promises
public employers make, how pension liabilities are calculated,
and whether greater transparency is needed to protect the lives
and livelihoods of the men and women to depend on these
pensions as they plan for their futures. Millions of State and
local government employees participate in defined benefit
plans. These include many of our most valued public servants,
firefighters, police officers, emergency personnel, nurses and
teachers. But too often, State and local governments have not
kept their end of the bargain and are failing to adequately
fund employee pensions.
Though there is argument about how best to calculate
pension assets and liabilities, it is clear that there is not
enough money set aside to meet future obligations. Economists
estimate the plans were underfunded by as much as $3.8 trillion
in 2009. The corresponding increases in State and local pension
contributions threaten to affect all Americans through higher
State and local taxes and reduce services.
This hearing will consider how accounting standards differ
for public and private pensions. There is growing consensus
that accounting standards for public sector pensions encourage
State and local governments to overpromise, underfund by taking
on risky investments by discounting guaranteed future benefits
against unrealistic rates of return. Unlike private pensions,
which are required by law to use more realistic accounting
standards, public plans are held to a lesser standard and
suffer from lax accounting methods that can hide the magnitude
of the problem. Public plans can discount future liabilities by
making risky investments, a practice that imposes added risk on
the taxpayers according to a new Congressional Budget Office
report just released.
Of course, some argue that State and local affairs are
generally not in the business of the Federal Government. But
these plans are of increasing Federal concern because of our
Tax Code which subsidizes retirement savings and gives
preferential tax treatment to State and local debt.
Furthermore, in our age of public and private bailouts, there
can be little question to where State and local governments
will turn when trillions in pension payments come due. And as
if to underscore this threat, the recent proposed budget of the
State of Illinois indicates that the Governor might seek
Federal guarantees of future debt to cover pension liabilities.
Finally, we also will discuss H.R. 567, the Public Employee
Pension Transparency Act, which was introduced by Congressman
Devin Nunes, a Member of the full Committee. As a condition
to receiving preferred treatment under Federal income tax law,
H.R. 567 requires public plans to disclose funding data and
honest valuations of plan assets and liabilities. Respecting
the rights of States and local governments, the bill does not
try to tell States how to fund or pay pensions, it merely
promotes transparency in their funding.
Whether the underfunding of State and local pension plans
is hundreds of billions or several trillion dollars, it is a
serious concern. With more retirees drawing pensions by the
day, and some in government already raising the threat of a
Federal bailout of these public plans, it is critical that the
Subcommittee take this opportunity to review the issue and
consider how better to protect workers and retirees as well as
the Federal taxpayer.
Before I yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Lewis, I ask
unanimous consent that all Members' written statements be
included in the record and the recently released CBO-issued
brief entitled underfunding of State and local pension plans.
Without objection, so ordered.
Now I will turn to Mr. Lewis for his opening statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Chairman Boustany, for holding this
hearing. Last month, this Subcommittee held a hearing to attack
an organization that represents millions of seniors. At that
hearing, I asked the chairman, ``who is next? Who else is on
your list?'' Now, I have an answer.
This week is Teacher Appreciation Week 2011. Today,
Republicans have set their sights on the teachers who educate
our children, police officers who keep our communities safe,
and first responders in moments of crisis. They paint teachers,
firefighters, librarians and nurses as villains in their quest
to widen the gap between the rich and the poor.
Our neighbors are not the villains. They are not the cause
of the current economic situation. They are simple, hardworking
Americans trying to retire with dignity and escape poverty as
they age.
The Republicans have made many arguments to support today's
attack. Republicans blame pension plans for State budget
shortfalls. This is not true. States spend less than 4 percent
of their budget on pension contributions. The Republicans claim
that pension benefits are too high. This is not true. The
average State pension benefit is modest; about $20,000 a year.
The Republicans also claim a Federal bailout may be needed.
This is not true. The losses in the plan are related to the
market and the recent recession. The Republicans claim that
their solution would create transparency. It would not. It
would create confusion and lead to unnecessary cuts in vital
State services. Given the facts, I ask myself why are we here
today? We both know that there is no immediate need for the
Federal Government to take action. The committee has been
looking at this issue since the 1970s.
I am also mindful that under the Committee rules of this
Congress, this Subcommittee's jurisdiction is limited to
oversight of existing laws. Our jurisdiction does not extend to
select revenue measures. The subcommittee does report out
legislation. Therefore, any consideration of House bill 567
would need to take place elsewhere under the regular order of
the Committee.
Based on all of this, I believe today's hearing is simply a
distraction from the Republican failure to create jobs. While
the American people continue to wait for jobs, the Republicans
are playing a dangerous game with the welfare of women,
seniors, and now teachers. It is time for the American people
to take notice, stand up, and speak out. Today, I stand for
America's middle class and State and local workers across the
Nation. I thank the teachers for all that they do. And with
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the Ranking Member for his
opening statement.
We will now turn to our panel of witnesses. I want to
welcome the Honorable Walker Stapleton, Treasurer of the State
of Colorado, welcome sir; Mr. Josh Barro, who is a fellow with
the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research; Mr. Jeremy Gold,
who provides pension finance consulting with Jeremy Gold
Pensions; Mr. Robert Kurtter, managing director of the U.S.
State and regional ratings of Moody's Investors Services; and
Ms. Iris Lav, senior adviser for the Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities.
I want to thank you all for being here today with us. You
will each have 5 minutes to present your testimony here before
the Subcommittee with your full written statement submitted for
the record.
Mr. Stapleton, you can now begin.

STATEMENT OF HON. WALKER STAPLETON,
TREASURER OF COLORADO

Mr. STAPLETON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis and Members of the
Subcommittee on Oversight, thank you for the opportunity to
testify this morning in support of the Public Employee Pension
Transparency Act. My name is Walker Stapleton, and I am the
treasurer of Colorado.
Before being elected treasurer last November, I spent my
entire career in the private sector. I am fortunate to have
both an MBA and a graduate degree in business economics. One of
the most important duties I have as treasurer of Colorado is to
serve as the only elected official on the board of our State's
Public Employee Retirement Association or PERA. PERA has nearly
500,000 members including State workers, members of the State
judicial branch, teachers in our public K-12 and higher
education systems, local government workers and members of our
State Patrol, among others.
Last year the Colorado legislature passed pension reform
legislation which accomplished two main objectives: It lowered
the cost of living adjustment from 3.5 percent to 2 percent,
and it raised the eligible retirement age of members from 55 to
58 for educators and from 55 to 60 for everyone else. These are
worthwhile reforms, but they unfortunately fell far short of
the systematic improvements needed in Colorado's pension system
to protect current and future retirees as well as Colorado's
taxpayers.
Let me discuss the lingering and growing challenges facing
PERA and the key factor that Colorado's pension reform
legislation did not address. The system is operating with an
unrealistic and unachievable rate of return which is now set at
8 percent. In Colorado's case, PERA currently maintains an
unfunded liability of more than 21 billion based on this 8
percent expectation. Of course, if this rate of return is
lowered, the unfunded liability becomes far greater, and in my
view, more realistic and transparent for PERA members and
Colorado taxpayers alike. The question is whether States like
Colorado should be in the business of guaranteeing market
returns. If the answer to this question is no, as I believe it
should be, then public pension plans like PERA need to start
adopting rates of return in line with Treasury yields and stop
the pervasive underfunding of plans. Overestimating a pension
system's expected return is essentially gambling with the
financial welfare of the next generation of Americans.
As you may know, Wilshire Associates, a nationally
recognized financial consulting firm, recently completed a
study of 126 public pension plans, including Colorado's.
Wilshire found that not a single plan would meet an 8 percent
return expectation over the next 10 years. In PERA's case, they
have used an 8 percent rate of return to claim solvency over 30
years, meaning the only way they will achieve an average of 8
percent over the next two decades will either be to raise the
rate of return even higher, which is fiscal fantasy, or to
require members to contribute more for the benefits that they
receive.
It is also worth noting that approximately 25 percent of
PERA's portfolio of investments is currently invested in fixed
income products, yielding in the neighborhood of 4 percent,
which requires the rest of the portfolio to return closer to 10
percent in order to average an overall return of 8 percent. The
only way to achieve this unrealistic return is to take outsized
market risk, further exposing our public pension plans to more
volatility.
If a default occurs, States, unlike private businesses,
cannot declare bankruptcy and restructure, and taxpayers will
be obligated to backfill resulting pension liabilities.
The Public Employee Pension Transparency Act makes a lot of
sense. While it is not mandatory for States to adopt, it
categorically states that the Federal Government will not bail
out a State's public pension system.
This Act increases transparency standards for public
pension systems. Unfortunately, the Government Accounting
Standards Board, or GASB, refuses to require this minimum level
of transparency from public pension plans in its accounting
standards. The GASB currently does not and will not in the
future require plans to disclose the sensitivity analysis of
discount rates so that plan members, local government leaders
and the public can assess for themselves what the underlying
liabilities in these plans may be.
Greater transparency and better information is important
for everyone, for the fiscal health of our States, for elected
leaders to make decisions and for our taxpayers to use when it
comes to evaluating the significant liabilities associated with
public pension systems in this country.
I strongly support this legislation and am here today to
urge every Member of this Committee to support the Public
Employee Pension Transparency Act. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stapleton follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.003

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Barro, you may proceed with your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF JOSH BARRO, WALTER B. WRISTON FELLOW, MANHATTAN
INSTITUTE FOR POLICY RESEARCH

Mr. BARRO. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Boustany and
Ranking Member Lewis for having me here today to talk about
this important issue.
If you are trying to evaluate the pension plan serving a
State and local government, there are some simple questions you
might want to ask about it, such as how much do the pensions we
provide cost? How much do we owe to active workers and
retirees? And over the next few years, how much more cash are
we going to have to come up with to make our required
contributions into the pension fund?
But if you pick up the comprehensive annual financial
report of most State and local pension funds in the United
States, you will either find no answers to these questions or
you will find incorrect answers to them.
The recession has been driving pension contributions
skyward in States and localities all around the country. And
many State and local governments are currently feeling the need
to reform their pension systems. Indeed, 18 States enacted some
sort of pension reform law in 2010. But because of this lack of
useful financial information, many States have made
underwhelming pension reforms, and a lot of them are even
coming back to do a second round of reform having just done
reform within the last 18 months.
As a couple of examples of the pressure that localities are
feeling, Newark, New Jersey, made $37 million in pension
payments in 2009. They had to make $62 million for 2010. San
Francisco will make $357 million in payments this year, and
their city treasurer expects that that will rise to $800
million within 2 years.
So how can the financial disclosures around pension funds
be improved so that State and local law makers have better
ability to make good choices about pensions? H.R. 567 would
make several improvements to the way that pension funds make
their disclosures, and there are some additional disclosures
that these funds should also be encouraged to make.
The most important change relates to the valuation of
pension liabilities using a practice called fair valuation of
liabilities, or market valuation, as would be encouraged by
H.R. 567. As the CBO said in a report just yesterday, fair
valuation provides a more complete and transparent measure of
the costs of pension obligations. Using a fair valuation method
will help States and municipalities and their taxpayers and
bondholders better understand where they stand with regard to
pension liabilities.
States and cities also don't know what their future outlook
looks like for the year-to-year cost of pension obligations.
Even though pension funds the way they smooth their asset
returns means that we can expect pension contribution rates to
keep rising through about 2014, because of stock market losses
in 2008 and 2009, most pension funds are not releasing
projections of how those costs will move, so municipalities and
States can't do effective budget planning because they don't
know how big those cost explosions are going to be.
H.R. 567 will require a 20-year projection of cash flows
which will give States and localities better clarity about what
their future costs will look like.
There are some additional transparency measures that States
and localities would be wise to adopt. One, again, relates to
asset smoothing, that process of gradually recognizing unusual
gains and losses. Over the last decade, many States and
localities, their pension funds have made opportunistic changes
in the way they perform smoothing, either increasing or
decreasing the length of the smoothing period to artificially
inflate the appearance of financial solvency in their funds.
In one case, New Jersey, such a shift was actually used to
justify a 9 percent increase across the board in pension
benefits that appeared affordable just because of this
accounting trick. States should be encouraged to adopt a
standardized smoothing practice so they do not have the option
to game that system.
Finally, public pension plans do not disclose what is
called a normal cost of the pension benefits that they are
awarding in a given year. That is to say, what is the present
cost of all the promises we made to active workers this year in
exchange for their labor? This is a standard feature of private
sector pension disclosures. But you can't figure out when you
look at a public employee pension, and it is not the same
amount as the cash contribution that is being made into a
pension fund. For this reason, it is extremely difficult to do
comparisons of the value of public and private sector
compensation packages. We don't really have a good sense now of
what the pension benefits that public employees are getting are
worth.
So why should Congress involve itself in this which is a
State and local issue? States don't understand how big a hole
they have dug for themselves. And in certain States such as
Illinois where the funding ratio of public plans has fallen to
38 percent, even under the current GASB standards which are too
aggressive in terms of valuing the liabilities, the risk is
that eventually you will have clamor for a Federal bailout of
insolvent State and local pension funds that appear to be on
the brink of being unable to make payments to the State and
local employees. It is better to avoid that situation now by
giving State and local leaders the clarity they need to fix
their own pension problems so that Washington does not have to
later.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Barro.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barro follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.006

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Gold, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF JEREMY GOLD, FSA, CERA, MAAA, PH.D., JEREMY GOLD
PENSIONS

Mr. GOLD. Good morning, Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member
Lewis and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to present my views with respect to transparency
and funding of State and local pension plans. My views are my
own and do not represent any other persons or organizations. I
am an independent consulting actuary specializing in the
financial aspects of pension plans. I will address the
disclosure of the assets, liabilities and costs of public
pension plans in the context of H.R. 567.
The disclosures at the heart of H.R. 567 are long overdue,
and I welcome this bill. H.R. 567 is conceptually right.
I will suggest three changes that will keep it right in
concept and make it more useful and efficient in practice.
The bill calls for two financial measures that are so
fundamental that they must be made available to every
decisionmaker and every interested party, the market value of
plan assets and the current liabilities.
H.R. 567 requires that the current liability be determined
by discounting future cash flows using rates of interest
derived from U.S. Treasury securities. In my written testimony,
I quote former Federal Reserve vice chair Donald Kohn, who has
explained why bulletproof promises should be discounted at
rates derived from bulletproof securities.
My first recommendation--H.R. 567 calls for averaging
Treasury rates over 24 months and for segmenting rates for
three different future periods. These ideas have been borrowed
from private pension funding law where they are used to reduce
contribution volatility. H.R. 567, however, is not a funding
bill. It is a disclosure bill. Good disclosure should use the
Treasury spot rates at one point in time. We cannot spend
averaged dollars, nor can we make good decisions based on
liabilities that have been averaged. H.R. 567 calls for the
fair value of assets at one point in time. The proper
comparison liability must be based on spot rates at one point
in time.
The comparison of assets at market and liabilities at spot
rates answers two questions that cannot be answered accurately
in the pre-H.R. 567 world. First question--will future
generation of taxpayers be paying for services provided to
earlier generations? Second question--how does this plan's
funding compare to plans in other jurisdictions?
My second recommendation: H.R. 567 calls for extensive
projections of future statistics that would be expensive and
potentially uninformative. The subsections calling for these
projections should be stricken. Eliminating the projection
along with the rate averaging and segmenting should reduce
compliance costs to a level that I would call modest in the
first year and nearly negligible in subsequent years.
My third recommendation: The bill should add a new item
which will be very valuable and easy to calculate. Mr. Barro
just referred to it. I call it the current cost. It is the
portion of the current liability that has been accrued in the
latest fiscal year. Current cost asks a third question that
cannot be answered in the pre-H.R. 567 world: What is the
market value of benefits earned by public employees this year?
Current costs will make it possible to fairly compare
compensation from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and between
private and public sector employees.
In summary, I recommend that we use spot Treasury rates,
not averaged, not segmented. I suggest the elimination of the
20-year projection requirement, and I suggest the inclusion of
a defined current cost computed on the same basis as the
current liability. I thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Gold.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gold follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.014

Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Kurtter, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT KURTTER, MANAGING DIRECTOR, U.S. PUBLIC
FINANCE, MOODY'S INVESTORS SERVICE

Mr. KURTTER. Thank you. Good morning.
Mr. Chairman, Congressman Lewis, Members of the
Subcommittee, my name is Robert Kurtter. I am a managing
director in U.S. Public Financial Group at Moody's Investors
Service. Thank you for inviting Moody's to participate in
today's hearing.
My comments will focus on our views of the potential credit
impact of transparency initiatives like H.R. 567 and the
Governmental Accounting Standards Board project on pension
disclosure. While Moody's does not rate pension plans
themselves, we monitor proposals like these and the related
developments because our assessment of government pension plans
is one of the many factors in our credit analysis of
government-issued bonds. Moody's comments on policy
initiatives, however, should not be taken as an endorsement or
criticism of any such initiative or the conduct of any
particular issuer.
In recent years, we have observed increases in the unfunded
pension liabilities of State and local governments. This growth
has occurred for several reasons. First, during peaks of the
stock market in 2001 and 2007, some State and local governments
enhanced benefits and/or reduced employer contributions.
Second, the recent economic downturn significantly diminished
the value of pension plan assets. Third, adoption of early
retirement incentive programs shifted costs from payroll to
retirement systems. And fourth, demographic factors, including
an aging work force and the increasing life expectancy of
beneficiaries are adding to liabilities.
State and local governments have needed to increase their
pension contributions at a time when declining revenues are
also requiring them to impose budget cuts. These developments
have prompted a discussion about whether the existing
disclosure standards of our government pension plans remain
appropriate and also about whether and to what extent
government pension plans are underfunded.
In addition to the proposed legislation, the GASB is
considering changes to its financial reporting rules for public
sector pension plans. As I described in my written testimony,
if the GASB changes were adopted, as proposed, employers
subject to its disclosure requirements could calculate their
funding requirements as they do now, but they would have to use
different methods to calculate certain elements of the pension
expense they disclose in their financial reports.
Moody's believes H.R. 567 would increase public access to
State and local government pension plan data. Additionally,
both the bill and the GASB proposal would increase
comparability of that data. At the same time, they could also
increase the amount and complexity of the information
disclosed. If these or other initiatives help investors and
government issuers have more informed discussions about the
credit risks associated with these obligations, we believe
these proposals could create incentives for issuers to address
their unfunded pension liabilities.
Governments have many options to improve the funded status
of public plans. These include increasing government or
employee contributions or adjusting benefits. Depending on the
specific measures taken, these actions could be positive,
neutral or negative for bond holders. Though as noted earlier,
any changes in the funded status of the pension plan would be
one of the many factors that we would consider in our credit
analysis.
Of course, the decisions that governments make about their
pension plans affect much more than their credit profile as
bond issuers.
Our opinions do not speak to the wider implications for an
issuer or its stakeholders of any actions it takes. Also, as a
credit rating agency, Moody's does not take a position on
whether or how a State or local government should address a
pension funding shortfall. Our role is limited to providing
opinions and research about issuers' likely ability and
willingness to pay their bonds in full and on a timely basis.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify on this
important matter. I look forward to answering your questions.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Kurtter.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kurtter follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.023

Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Lav, you may now proceed.

STATEMENT OF IRIS J. LAV, SENIOR ADVISOR,
CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES

Ms. LAV. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Lewis and
Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the invitation to
appear before you today. I will make six related points and I
will then elaborate on the problems that I see with H.R. 567.
First, as was mentioned, most State and local employees
receive modest pension benefits, averaging less than $23,000 a
year. Second, most States can address underfunding in their
pension plans with relatively modest measures, such as
increases in contributions from employers and employees and
some sensible and moderate changes in benefits. Only a few
States, those with pensions that are grossly underfunded and a
history of failing to make required contributions, would have
to make more extensive changes.
Third, pension funds, according to the Federal Reserve
data, have already recouped two-thirds of their recession
market losses. But smoothing and data lags have led recent
studies to portray the situation as worse than it is.
Fourth, the use of a so-called riskless rate, as we are
discussing, to discount liabilities makes underfunding appear
much greater than what pension funds report. But, the somewhat
academic debate over whether or not to discount liabilities
using a riskless rate is quite distinct from the actuarial
finding of how much States and localities have to deposit in
their pension funds to meet their future obligations. States
and localities should use a realistic measure of future
investment returns to set their deposit levels.
Fifth, H.R. 567 I view in many ways as a solution in search
of a problem, one that would override the careful process that
the Governmental Accounting Standards Board has nearly
completed. The Board's proposed new rules would standardize
State pension fund reporting and make it more transparent.
Sixth, and finally, moving State and local employees from
defined benefit to defined contribution plans, which some
sponsors of H.R. 567 have said they would like to see, would
not address the funding problem that public pension systems now
face. On the contrary, it would raise annual costs in many
instances. Some States that were considering such a conversion
have backed away after concluding that they would face higher
costs.
I will now elaborate on the problems with H.R. 567. For the
past 4 years, GASB has been conducting extensive research and
consultation and holding hearings with well over 100
stakeholders in order to develop new pension financial
reporting standards.
The draft GASB standard makes clear that the liability
amount that results from the riskless rate does not properly
reflect State and local government pension liabilities.
Instead, GASB has carefully crafted rules that reflect market
expectations and applies a lower discount rate only to the
least well-funded plans in order to reflect the greater risk to
their solvency.
Congress should not replace GASB standards and the
financial market discipline that induces State and local
governments to comply with those standards with H.R. 567's
unnecessary Federal intrusion into the issue. Unlike the GASB
process, H.R. 567 would likely increase public confusion
between liabilities based on a riskless rate and actual
liabilities. That could spook bond markets and lead States and
localities to cut spending for education and other key areas or
raise taxes more than necessary. It also would create an entire
new Federal bureaucratic structure to regulate something that
market forces should manage.
Most States with significant pension underfunding are
moving to address it. And they are doing so in a variety of
ways. They are increasing employee contributions. Eleven States
did that last year, and 16 States made changes that will reduce
benefits for future employees. Some 12 States have raised their
retirement ages. Other States have made changes that will
require consistent employer contributions. States should be
able to gradually solve their underfunding problems with the
steps they are already taking, with modest increases in
employer and employee contributions, with a greater recovery in
the markets, and by adhering to the new rules that GASB will
promulgate. The Federal Government does not need to intervene
in this issue. In fact, that would do more harm than good.
Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Ms. Lav.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lav follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.033

Chairman BOUSTANY. We will now begin questioning, and I
will begin here with Mr. Barro.
Some States and local governments have actually borrowed
money in order to make contributions to their pension funds.
And in these cases, the government borrows money in hopes that
the pension fund earns investment returns greater than the
interest rates so that they can remain solvent and meet their
liabilities. This might work well if the investments actually
earn a great deal on returns. But what happens if the
investment actually loses money? Is this really constituting
buying stocks on margin in effect?
Mr. BARRO. That is really exactly what it is. One of the
great champions of this was Governor Rod Blagojevich of
Illinois who pushed forward a $10 billion pension obligation
bond issuance in, it was either 2003 or 2004. And yes, this
practice is purely a creature of the use of discount rates
roughly in the range of 8 percent; the idea is the government
can borrow around 5 percent, invest, earn an 8 percent return
and they are just getting free arbitrage there. Now, of course,
the problem with is that the equity investments are risky and
the payments that you have to make to the bondholders are
fixed.
And so, yes, if the market performs poorly, it is exactly
like buying stock on margin and losing. You shouldn't be under
the illusion that because the State issues pension obligation
bonds and uses them to buy assets to put in a pension fund that
it has somehow improved its overall fiscal solvency.
The other thing I would note is that it creates avenues for
other chicanery, which we saw in Illinois where the State
issued 10 billion in bonds but only used about 7.3 billion of
the issuance to shore up the pension funds. The rest was used
to service debt on the bonds and to close gaps in a couple of
years of State budgets. So it is just another way for the
government to make its books more complicated, hide borrowing
and further actually worsen a State's fiscal situation.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Barro.
Mr. Gold, do you want to comment on that?
Mr. GOLD. I think you have it right. I think Mr. Barro has
it right. It is borrowing to invest in risky assets. I began
writing about this when I did my dissertation in 1999. And all
I have seen since then is greater and greater issuance.
Illinois is one of the poster children, but a number of other
States have ventured down that risky route.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
A new report released yesterday by the Congressional Budget
Office said, and I quote, ``By accounting for different risk
associated with investment returns and benefit payments, the
fair value approach provides a more complete transparent
measure of the cost of pension obligations than the actuarial
standards that are currently in use.''
So for the panel I would like each of you to address this.
Do you think that CBO is correct? Or are current standards more
accurate? Why don't we start with Mr. Stapleton.
Mr. STAPLETON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the many
reasons why I am a strong supporter of this particular piece of
legislation is that, in my view, the Government Accounting
Standard Board has not done its job in maintaining uniform
standards that are in line with the financial accounting
standards boards which govern private sector companies. You can
look at any number of things, including not fair value
assessing what the liabilities are. You can look at
amortization rates. They allow the amortization period to be
far greater under GASB rules than under FASB rules allowing for
a smoothing of write-offs over a much longer period of time.
In the private sector, plan liabilities are valued
separately. Under GASB plan liabilities, the expected rate of
return equals the actual rate of return. In the private sector,
liabilities are valued using corporate high yielding bonds
which come out around 6 percent.
And the issue of the sensitivity analysis, I was with Mr.
Attmore, the Chairman of the Government Accounting Standards
Board a number of week ago. I asked him from a disclosure
standpoint, will you simply provide a sensitivity analysis so
that people, State leaders and public policy makers can judge
for themselves what these liabilities may be? And he said no.
And so I view this as simply transparency of information,
of people being able to reach their own conclusions, whether it
be State leaders or public policy makers. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Barro.
Mr. BARRO. Yes. I would just say briefly that I think CBO
was absolutely right in its characterization of the
appropriateness of the fair value method for valuing
liabilities. And frankly, I think it is a reflection of the
near unanimity on this question in the financial economics
community. It is often portrayed as a debate. But the main
parties that you see defending the 8 percent discount rate
practice are pension fund managers and actuaries. I think that
there isn't a good financial economics argument for the use of
a discount rate associated with risky investments to value a
liability that is not risky.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Gold.
Mr. GOLD. In my comments, I made a distinction between a
funding law such as the PPA of 2006 and a disclosure bill or
proposals coming out of GASB. There is a history which is built
into actuarial methods for guiding funding over long periods of
time, and from that history, developed many of the practices
which found their way into ERISA, found their way into
accounting and so on.
Financial economics is exactly the--well, financial
economics addresses the difference between an engineering
approach to developing contributions, which at some future date
will be adequate if things work out, and valuing promises made
today. And the financial economics, or fair value approach, is
far superior for accounting purposes.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Kurtter.
Mr. KURTTER. Yes, thank you. We do believe that pension
fund unfunded liabilities may be overstated because earning
rate assumptions don't reflect current market conditions, that
directionally those rates are too high. GASB is considering
initiatives to lower those rates, and several States and
pension plans have already taken actions to begin lowering
those rates.
We don't have an opinion about what the right rate is other
than to note that directionally these are moving toward more
realistic number. We look at pension funding on a case-by-case
basis for each credit involved, and that this is really only
one factor that we look at in our overall credit assessments.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Ms. Lav.
Ms. LAV. I would not say that 8 percent is the exact right
number right now. As Mr. Kurtter said, a number of pension
funds are bringing that down, and one needs to figure out what
the right number is. But CBO's preferred method is using
municipal bond rate, adjusted for its tax exemption, and as
they note in a footnote, there are a number of anomalies to
that idea. This is for disclosure. I should back up and say
they say that that does not mean that that should be the way
that funds contribute.
As I said, those are two different things. But even using
municipal bond rate for disclosure has its problems. For
example, the bond rate is higher in the States with the weakest
fiscal system. So you have a situation with a higher rate, you
have lower pension liabilities disclosed if you have the worst
fiscal system because your bond rate, the interest you have to
pay is higher. That doesn't make any sense. Also, if you
compare with corporate bonds, which have interest rates in the
6, 6\1/2\-percent range, they use their bond rates to discount
liabilities. But everybody knows that corporate bonds are more
risky than municipal bonds. So they get to use a higher
discount rate and show lower liabilities because their bonds
are more risky than State and local bonds? So there is some
basic fundamental problems with these conceptions that don't
necessarily make sense in the actual world.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank each of you for being here this morning. This question is
for the entire panel. My time is limited, so I ask each witness
to answer either yes or no to the following question.
Do you support closing public pension plans?
Mr. STAPLETON. No.
Mr. BARRO. It depends on the State, but in most cases yes.
Mr. GOLD. I am sorry. I missed a word. I am not very good
at hearing. Do I support what?
Mr. LEWIS. Closing.
Mr. GOLD. No, I do not.
Mr. KURTTER. Moody's does not have an opinion on that
matter.
Ms. LAV. No, I do not.
Mr. LEWIS. Do you have a personal opinion or are you
speaking for Moody's.
Mr. KURTTER. I am speaking for Moody's.
Ms. LAV. No.
Mr. LEWIS. Let me just ask, does closing public pension
plans save money? Ms. Lav?
Ms. LAV. No.
Mr. LEWIS. Why not?
Ms. LAV. If you have unfunded liabilities that exist from
past service or from market losses, you still have to pay off
those unfunded liabilities. And if on top of that you are
creating a defined contribution plan, you haven't lost those
liabilities. You still have to pay them off, and you have to
put money into a defined contribution plan. And in fact, a
defined contribution plan for any given level of retirement
security you want to provide for your employees, which is
important for attracting quality employees, then you have to
put more money in a defined contribution plan like a 401(k)
kind of plan because then you don't have the benefits of pooled
investment and professional management.
Mr. LEWIS. Ms. Lav, I would like to understand more about
the people who benefit from public pension plans.
Ms. LAV. Sure.
Mr. LEWIS. What type of State and local workers are
eligible for public pension plans?
Ms. LAV. Most State and local workers benefit, so we are
talking about first responders, we are talking about correction
officers, we are talking about teachers, we are talking about
social workers and nurses and bus drivers, schoolbus drivers, a
whole range of State and local workers.
Mr. LEWIS. To continue, how much, on average, do these
retirees receive in pension benefits?
Ms. LAV. Across States, the Census reports that they
receive an average of about $23,000 a year.
Mr. LEWIS. Could you tell us whether all State and local
workers participate in Social Security?
Ms. LAV. No. All State and local workers do not participate
in Social Security.
Mr. LEWIS. What are the exceptions?
Ms. LAV. The exceptions are quite a number of teachers,
about 40 percent of teachers and a majority of public safety
workers like police and fire, and then there are some States, a
few States, where most of the workers don't participate. So
those workers need more from their pensions because they don't
also have Social Security.
Mr. LEWIS. Could you tell the Members of the Committee what
is the purpose behind providing workers with pension benefits?
What is the intent?
Ms. LAV. Well, first of all, studies that do what we call
apples-to-apples comparisons find that public workers
particularly at middle and higher income, or middle and skilled
areas, are paid less than their private sector counterparts. So
pensions are part of their compensation.
But in general, it is important that people have retirement
security. And this is part of how State and local governments
attract quality workers to do the work. And so they provide
deferred compensation as well as current compensation. It is a
choice that has been made, an important one.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you. I thank all members of the panel. Mr.
Chairman I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the Ranking Member.
Mr. Buchanan, you are recognized 5 minutes.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for doing this most
important hearing. I also want to thank our colleague,
Congressman Nunes, because I think it is very critical. I just
think back, we were being in business for a lot of years we had
profit sharing plans and 401(k)s that we have now. But I look
back on the last 10 years and if you take a look at S&P, for
example, they are flat-lined.
So my point is, I am looking at these, I was thinking in
2008 I was sitting around with a bunch of people having dinner
at Christmas just before that news, maybe 15, a lot of them
were investors and everything, and the market, everybody lost a
third of their net worth then.
So when we talk about someone put a number together at 8
percent or 4 percent or 12 percent, in these uncertain times,
you can come up with any number you want. I always refer back
to the rule of 72 that if you have an 8 percent number, it
doubles in 9 years. But the bottom line, these are different
times. So it just seems like we have to reassess where we are
at. We need more transparency so that it doesn't lead everybody
into bankruptcy.
So I will start with you, Ms. Lav. What do you think a
number should be today when you are looking to put together
what you might have to pay out in the next 10 or 20 years, what
number? Because if you look at the bond rate, maybe there has
been some appreciation, but if I look at interest rates today,
it is almost free money if you are going to go into Treasuries,
and the equity markets have been zero for 10 years on average,
but historically for a lot of years, they were 10 percent.
But where do you even begin to get a number that makes any
sense? That is why I am concerned as more people retire,
someone mentioned 8 percent, do we need to be dealing with 1
percent? What makes sense going forward for the workers?
Ms. LAV. I am not going to put a specific number on it. I
haven't done that research. That is not what I do.
But I do know it is not--it is very unlikely to be 4
percent. You know, I think that it would be somewhat
irresponsible for States and localities just to invest in
Treasury bonds. I think that would not make any sense. That
would not----
Mr. BUCHANAN. But you understand the S&P, in the last 10
years, went down, has been down, it has been flat-lined at zero
and it went down 38 percent in 2008. How do you get to a number
of 4, 6, 7 percent with any confidence going forward?
Ms. LAV. Well, I mean pension returns have not been, the
returns to pension funds have not been zero.
Mr. BUCHANAN. What have they been in the last 10 years?
Ms. LAV. In the past couple years, they were in the double
digits, they were down in the recession----
Mr. BUCHANAN. Do you know what the returns have been in
these pension funds on average? Take them across the board.
What is the average for the last 10 years? Do you have any
idea? I don't even know that number, but I know my overall
returns have not been good.
Ms. LAV. I think CBO had a number, it was in the
neighborhood of 3 percent or something like that. But this was
through two back-to-back recessions. I certainly don't think
you necessarily want to plan for the future of having two
recessions, one of them the largest since the Great Depression
within 10 years, I don't think that that is a realistic way to
plan either, to assume that that is going to happen.
Mr. BUCHANAN. These are different times today. I am an
optimist, but at the same token, the reality of it is a lot of
people are reassessing where they are at. I can't tell you--I
represent Florida--how much retirees that were hoping to retire
based on a 6, 8, 4 percent number. They are not seeing those
returns, so now they are working longer and those kinds of
things.
Mr. NUNES. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. BUCHANAN. Yes.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Buchanan, I want to thank you for your kind
words on the bill. I want to make sure, I know the bogeyman is
out here and people are talking about 4 percent or 3 percent
and the detractors to this bill that are against transparency
continue to use that rate of return as if that rate of return
was meant that the Federal Government is now going to say this
is what the return is going to be.
The purpose in drafting the legislation had nothing--when
we looked at that rate, was to do nothing other than to protect
the workers from the employers, meaning the government. Because
really, when we look at that discount rate of today, which
would be around 4 percent, it is not to do anything but compare
oranges to oranges or apples to apples, so that you can compare
a plan in Fresno, California, to a plan in Florida. And that
was the purpose of this discount rate. That is why we put this
in there just to have a conservative rate so you would be able
to compare these plans across State lines and from entity to
entity.
Mr. BUCHANAN. I thank the gentleman. But I guess my point
in saying all this is I was trying to work toward the
uncertainty that we have faced in the last 10 years. And we
need more transparency. And I appreciate your effort.
Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Ms. Jenkins, you
are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I want to thank you all for being here today.
I find it a bit ironic that Congress, which doesn't have
the political will to take action to fix Social Security is
here today talking about our grave concern with our State and
local government pension plans.
So I am not sure that any of us have much credibility on
this issue. But I have great respect for the panel in
particular as a former president of the National Association of
State Treasurers, a State treasurer myself, and a board member
on our public employee retirement system in Kansas; I really
have the utmost respect for State treasurers. So I would like
to address some questions to Treasurer Stapleton.
Some have commented that this bill, H.R. 567, is
unnecessary because the Government Accounting Standards Board,
GASB, already provides standards for State and local pension
plans. I would just like your response to that.
Mr. STAPLETON. This is not the case. GASB standards, in my
opinion, have basically permitted plans not only to adopt their
own rates of return, but basically act like the wild West when
it comes to assuming plan returns. That is why there are no
credible levels of comparison between plans.
I spoke earlier about differences in amortization length.
Obviously, the longer the amortization period, the less you
have to write off in a given amount of time. Under the
Financial Accounting Standards Board, which governs the private
sector it is a much shorter length of time to write off plan
assets.
I have been very disappointed with the oversight of the
Government Accounting Standards Board and their refusal to
transparently invest in information that will allow public
policymakers to make informed decisions. I see this bill as a
nonpartisan bill, as a bill to increase information, whether 4
percent is the right rate of return, I can guarantee you that 8
percent is not the right rate of return. If you go into the
insurance market and try to get a private contract or somebody
to guarantee you a rate of return, you will never find somebody
that will guarantee you an 8 percent rate of return.
States have increasingly tried to regulate the insurance
industries, and when they have done that, they have required
plans to have more assets than liabilities. And so if GASB had
done its job or would do its job and require the same standards
that are applicable in the private sector, we wouldn't need to
be here today. But it is refusing to do that. And so plan
members are not getting a uniform level of information to
assess liabilities. And public policy makers need this
information for State governments to responsibly respond to
these liabilities because the fact of the matter is that plans
are not taking the advice of their own actuaries.
Just look at what happened which was chronicled in The Wall
Street Journal with Calpers a few weeks ago. They told the
board to lower the rate of return, then they started getting
letters in from school districts, from local governments around
the State that said, we cannot afford for you to lower the rate
of return. And they said, we are going to discount the
professional advice of our actuaries and create in effect a
deferred liability for future generations. And we cannot allow
that to happen.
Ms. JENKINS. Excellent. Thank you. The bill, the Public
Employee Pension Transparency Act, is not mandatory, but does
condition the continued ability to issue tax exempt bonds upon
filing certain information about State and local pension plans
to the Internal Revenue Service. As a State elected official,
do you think that is fair?
Mr. STAPLETON. Absolutely. This does not force compliance.
There is a carrot, which is tax exempt bond financing. But even
if States comply, after they comply and issue this information
back to the plan holders and back to their States, they still
don't have to adopt the rate of return. It is just a way to get
greater information.
And as I said earlier, I asked Mr. Attmore at the
Government Accounting Standards Board what is the problem with
providing a sensitivity analysis of different discount rates?
Let's look at 8 percent, let's look at 6, let's look at 4
percent, but let's make sure that public policy makers at the
State level have a wide range of information from which to
reach conclusions. And he said no, in the coming standards,
that they will not provide that information.
Ms. JENKINS. And finally in your testimony, you said
overestimating a pension system's expected return is
essentially gambling with the financial welfare of the next
generation of Americans. Can you explain what this gamble
places at stake for the next generation? And is it fair to say
that this gamble could also impact the current generation
through decreased services, increased taxes?
Mr. STAPLETON. One of the things that opponents of this
legislation and of transparency with public pension plans in
general like to point out is they try and make apples to
oranges comparisons with private sector plans. They will say,
well, look at the underfunding in private pension systems. The
problem is that structurally you are talking about two
different things.
First of all, as I mentioned earlier, private plans have a
different valuation assessment for what their liabilities are.
They peg it to high-yielding corporate bonds at 6 percent. That
does not happen in public pension plans where the expected rate
of return equals the actual rate of return. But structurally,
unless I am an investor in a private company with a lucrative
defined benefit plan, I don't really care, because I am not
going to be on the hook.
But in the public pension system, all taxpayers at the
State level are on the hook if the plans become insolvent
because the State of Colorado is not going to let the Jefferson
County School District go insolvent without finding a way for
funding. And we are bankrupt, like a lot of States. And the
only people that can actually make up the difference are the
taxpayers. And that is why it is important that we have this
level of transparency so that everybody can know where we stand
and can take public policy actions to remedy what I believe is
a very serious problem.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Treasurer.
I yield back.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Kind, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. KIND. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the panelists for your testimony here today. As a
Democratic representative from the great State of Wisconsin, I
have to admit we kind of received our fair share of attention
in the last couple of months in the media, both at home and
nationally.
This may seem a little heretical to my Democratic
colleagues up here on the dais, but I commend Governor Scott
Walker and what he did. I think what he proposed in the State
of Wisconsin was incredibly bold and courageous in recognizing
the deep fiscal hole that we were in and coming forward with
the bold proposals that he did.
And quite frankly, the fact that hundreds of thousands of
people showed up in subfreezing weather, braving bitter wind
chills, blowing snow, bitter winds in their face in both the
square in Madison and virtually every city throughout the State
of Wisconsin, I have to believe they wouldn't have done that if
they had all the facts, if they knew the real fiscal crisis
that our State was facing and how boldly the Governor was
really trying to address these issues.
Because if they had known that the State public pension
fund was only funded at 99.8 percent and that that 2
percent--.2 percent shortfall was creating a deep fiscal hole
for our State, I cannot believe that they would have been out
there for weeks and months on end protesting what the Governor
was trying to do with the State public pension system. I mean,
they wouldn't have been so selfish and so self-centered in the
demonstrations that they were conducting throughout the State
of Wisconsin.
No, I think not.
I think those individuals, those workers, those families
knew exactly what they were doing when they were out there
protesting what the Governor and the Republican legislature was
trying to jam down their throats. This had nothing to do with
the budget crisis that the State of Wisconsin was facing.
In fact, Governor Walker was just here in this town a few
weeks ago and admitted in testimony before Congress that his
assault on worker rights had absolutely nothing to do with the
budget situation that we face in the State of Wisconsin.
In fact, they stripped that portion out of the bill and
therefore admitted before the entire world that it had nothing
to do with the budget implication.
But nevertheless, the public employees knew that they had
to be a part of the solution, and they were willing to
contribute more to their State public pension system. They were
willing to contribute more to their health care system.
In fact, Governor Walker got every concession that he was
asking for from those public employees, but that wasn't good
enough. He had to go after those worker's rights and strip that
away, basically telling them, you no longer have a seat at the
table, and your voice isn't going to matter anymore, and we are
going to jam these decisions down upon you.
So it was not surprising seeing hundreds of thousands of
people going out and braving that cold weather and that bitter
wind chill day after day protesting what Governor Walker was
doing to the State of Wisconsin. If we want to have a serious
conversation about the fiscal hole we are facing at the State
and Federal and local level, let us talk about the real cause
of what is driving these budget deficits, which is rising
health care costs.
Now, my Republican colleagues have a proposal on how to
deal with it and that is going to the workers of the country,
to seniors, to disabled people, the children and saying, you
contribute more to your health care plans, and that is it.
They are not proposing anything to deal with rising health
care costs. And that is just going to shift the burden more and
more on working-class families throughout the Nation.
Or there is another approach that we can take and that is
through the health care reform measure that we passed that will
reform the way health care is delivered in this country and
ultimately how we pay for it. So it is based on the value and
no longer the volume of care that is given. And surprise,
surprise, this has been a bipartisan agreement for many, many
years. Some of the most prominent names in the Republican party
from Newt Gingrich, to Bill Frist, to my former Governor and
former Secretary at HHS, Tommy Thompson, Mark McClellan, they
have all been saying we have to go to a value- or outcome-based
reimbursement system in the health care system, or it will
bankrupt us. That is what is driving the fiscal crisis at the
State and at the local level. That is the largest and fastest
growing area of spending at the Federal level. That is what we
should be focused on, instead of some one-size-fits-all
Washington approach to the State public pension system, 99.8
percent funded in the State of Wisconsin, and yet look at all
the attention that we garnered as a State over the last couple
of months.
Mr. Chairman, I would like with unanimous consent to submit
for the record a letter dated May 4, 2011, to me from the
Secretary of the Department of Employee Trust Fund, Dave
Stella, from the State of Wisconsin.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.039

Mr. KIND. In the letter, he adamantly opposes H.R. 567.
And, in fact, in the last paragraph--and I quote him--he
says, ``thus, contrary to what the proponents of the
legislation suggest, the issue is not a current lack of
transparency and disclosure; it is simply an effort to justify
a Federal takeover of areas that are the financial and
regulatory responsibility of State and local governments.''
For the party that claims to be the party of less
government in Washington and more responsibility at the State,
proposing this one-size-fits-all approach with this Federal
legislation is contrary to even I think your principles. And
our own Secretary back in the State of Wisconsin is opposed to
this legislation. So I think we could spend a lot more time on
the issues that are really driving these budget deficits rather
than some type of Washington one-size-fits-all approach.
Mr. BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired. We just had
a vote called. There are two votes. One is a 15 and one is a 5.
I think what we will do now is go to Mrs. Black for
questioning, and then we will recess afterward.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Under the current government accounting standard for rules,
public plans can discount their pension obligations based on
expected rates of return on pension assets, as has already been
talked about in some detail. By putting their value into the
stock market, private equity and other risky investments, State
and local plans can decrease the current actuarial value of
their liability.
Now, GASB rules are contradictory to basic finance theory
that I think has already been said here by a number of our
panelists in the practice of financial markets where discount
rates are based on characteristics of liability, not asset. And
Congress actually had banned this type of accounting for single
employer private pensions, but yet we are still using it in the
government.
Do you believe that GASB rules encourage State and local
governments to take on inappropriate risks with these planned
assets? And also, added to that, do you believe that H.R. 567
would have an effect on this practice? And you can start with
Mr. Stapleton, if we can, and just go down the panel.
Mr. STAPLETON. Thank you, Mrs. Black.
Yes, I do believe that the lack of uniform standards
required by the Government Accounting Standards Board has
allowed State plans to very dangerously adopt overrealistic
rates of return. Even if you look at an actuarial analysis,
which is called a Monte Carlo analysis, that is often provided
to States, they talk about the probability of achieving
different rates of return.
In Colorado's case, there is almost a 30 percent chance
that we will not achieve an 8 percent rate of return. If I told
you and other Members of this Committee that there was a 30
percent chance that they would be in a life-threatening car
accident on the way to work today, I think I would have a lot
of people biking. Yet essentially that is the risk that we are
taking day in and day out with the State's tax money, assuming
these rates of returns.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Barro.
Mr. BARRO. I would agree with that, and I think we see that
in the political resistance to plans that are lowering assumed
rates of return. In New York, we just had a reduction in the
rate of return assumed for the State employee retirement system
and yet, just coincidentally, the plan happened to at the same
time adjust other actuarial assumptions with regard to
longevity and such that happened to largely offset the effects
of the reduction and the rate of return.
So I think there is significant resistance to reduced rates
of return. And in order to not lower the rate, you have to
invest in an aggressive manner. The other thing I had noticed
is that the defense of this aggressive investment is
essentially that the government can be indifferent to
variability and risk in asset returns. Because the government
is going to be around forever, it has this superior ability to
take on risk. And the implications of that are really kind of
perverse.
Pension funds happen to be vehicles through which we make
promises to public employees and through which we invest in
assets. But these are fundamentally unlinked activities, and
there is no reason that a government couldn't just create
essentially a sovereign wealth fund by issuing bonds and using
the proceeds to invest in equities. If the government really
has a superior ability to take on risk, we should be doing a
lot more of that. They should issue as many bonds as they can,
use them to buy up as much stock as they can and use that as a
cheap source of financing for government activities.
Now, obviously, that makes no sense because it would
involve governments taking on tremendous and inappropriate
investment risks. But that is exactly what they do through
public employee pension plans.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you.
Mr. Gold.
Mr. GOLD. The best financial theory, brought to our
attention by famous economist Fischer Black indicates that
pension plans should not be investing in risky assets but
should be investing in bonds. I have written that liability
measurement using the ``expected return on assets'' rather than
a bond ``reference portfolio'' does enable, at the very least,
and encourage, perhaps, risky investing which financial theory
would not support.
Mrs. BLACK. Mr. Kurtter.
Mr. KURTTER. Yes. We think that the preliminary review's
report of GASB, their project to review pension and accounting
standards for public-sector pensions, this bill, the many
reports that have been issued on this subject recently help to
increase transparency and improve the quality of the debate
between issuers and investors, thereby improving the amount and
the quality of information in the market. To the extent that
transparency is improved, comparability is improved, we think
this helps to create incentives to issuers to help address
funding shortfalls and improves the overall quality of
information available to investors.
Mrs. BLACK. Ms. Lav.
Ms. LAV. The fact is that over the last 20 or 25 years, the
funds have earned close to 9 percent. Over the last 10 years,
they have earned 5 percent. I didn't have that number in front
of me before. And over the last about 25 years, 60 percent of
the revenue to these funds has come from investing. It has been
investment income. So it does appear that the funds have
invested prudently. They have made very good returns. And I
think having them invested entirely in bonds would be wrong for
the taxpayers of the State who are missing out on the potential
of these returns to finance the pensions.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you.
Mr. BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will now go to Mr. Marchant for 5 minutes.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Lav, who in your opinion is the biggest loser if a
pension fund goes broke or is severely underfunded?
Ms. LAV. Well, ultimately, the pension funds are in essence
backed up by the full faith and credit of the State. So, in the
very unlikely situation that a major pension fund would not be
able to pay benefits, presumably they would pay it from current
tax dollars. That is how they paid--prior to the seventies, all
State and local pensions just about were paid on a pay-as-you-
go basis. There were not these forward-funded pension funds.
And then they started investing and prefunding their pension
funds around 1980, and they built up this $3 trillion fund in
the pensions.
And pensions are not in danger of not being able to pay
their benefits. That is just not the case in most situations. I
mean, if you want to look at the most extreme, even Illinois
will be able to pay its pensions.
Mr. MARCHANT. So you don't feel like there is any benefit
to an additional amount of transparency for the employees that
are going to benefit from the pension system?
Ms. LAV. Transparency is a word that is used in a lot of
different ways. And when what is called transparency puts up a
construct that is different from how much States and localities
have to invest in order to make their pension funds whole and
to pay their obligations, then you have confusion rather than
transparency, in my opinion, because you have two different
numbers and people don't know what to think about it. And if
they look at an inflated and a very large liability, then some
other things are going to happen. People are going to try and
raise taxes to fill it. People are going to cut other programs,
or they are going to say, oh, we can't keep this pension fund;
we are going to have to go to a defined contribution or
something else, because of the liability. It is confusion.
Mr. MARCHANT. So your theory is that transparency increases
confusion?
Ms. LAV. No, not necessarily any transparency. I am saying
that I don't think that what we are talking about here is good
transparency.
I think that what GASB is proposing in its new rules is
good transparency. It has a much more realistic view of the
funding level and the liabilities of pension funds.
Mr. MARCHANT. In my previous career in the State
legislature, I served on the Texas Pension Review Board. And it
was not a review board that took very seriously its
responsibility for years until we got a Governor that decided
that maybe we ought to meet and maybe we ought to actually do
our job. And our job was simply to just publish the same kind
of information that is in this bill. And we found that we got
the most resistance from the public entities that administrated
these plans, and we got the most enthusiasm and the most
inquiries from the actual employees that once they were able to
look at the disclosure and the comparisons of the Dallas Police
and Fire Pension Fund versus the El Paso Police and Fire
Pension Fund, that is when we began to--our main input came
from the employees.
And we found that the increased transparency benefited
really the employees because they then began to demand an
accountability from the pension funds that they were depending
on for their retirement.
I think your first answer was very telling in that, in your
opinion, the ultimate loser is not the employee but the State
or the entity. And I think that, at some point, the employee
needs to be more worried about the content and the investment
policies and the transparency of their pension planning and
cannot always rely on the State or the county or the city or
the school district in bailing a system out.
Ms. LAV. That would be a very rare situation. I think the
GASB rules will create the kinds of transparency and
comparability that you are talking about, which I think is good
and important and----
Mr. MARCHANT. We found that GASB was a reactive entity and
not a proactive entity.
Ms. LAV. Well, it has----
Mr. MARCHANT. That was our experience.
Mr. BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired. The
committee will stand in recess until we complete the round of
votes on the floor. I anticipate it will be about 20 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. BOUSTANY. The Committee will resume business.
At this time, Mr. Becerra is recognized for questioning.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your testimony today. I appreciate
that very much.
One of the things that I am sensing is that there is a
disconnect between what we are doing here in Washington,
including this conversation here, and what the American public
is feeling. In a recent survey of the public--and let me go
ahead and cite it, the National Institute on Retirement
Security's survey, that survey found that the vast majority of
Americans believe that the disappearance of pensions has made
it harder for them to achieve the American dream. Some 75
percent of Americans believe that. And it sounds like more and
more politicians are talking about eroding or eliminating the
opportunities for Americans to have these pension plans.
Sometimes the public conveys to us that they don't believe that
we are listening or that we understand how difficult it is for
them to prepare for retirement. Some 80 percent of Americans
responded to the survey saying that precise point. And they
responded by a percentage of 81 percent saying that they think
that we should make it a higher priority to ensure more
Americans, not less, that more Americans can have a secure
retirement. And so as we hear this discussion about public
pensions and we take a look at the real facts, I wonder if the
American public is actually not way ahead of us in talking
about this. Because if the public believes that we don't get
it, they might be right because my understanding is that the
average pension in America for most public employees is
somewhere in the low $20,000s. Not $80,000, not $150,000.
Now, they may be confusing that with the big parachutes and
buyout plans that they heard about during this Wall Street
scandal where executives were getting billions of dollars or
millions of dollars in buyout moneys, even though their
companies were failing. But these are public employees who put
in many, many years, most of them more than a decade or two, to
be able to collect some $20,000 to $25,000 a year in
retirement.
At the same time, my understanding is that for most States,
the cost of having these pensions for their public employees
translates to less than 4 percent of their State budget. Now, I
know my State is having a tough time. I know any number of
States have been having a hard time. But I daresay that
eliminating the pensions that have been paid into by employees
over decades and getting rid of the opportunities for American
workers to lead out their lives in retirement and dignity is
not what folks would expect of us. I have to believe that the
teachers who have been paying into the system who have been
working for so many years, the firefighters, the police
officers, the public employees throughout America who have been
working for less money than their private sector counterparts,
because pay scales in the public sector are a little lower, but
they get a little bit stronger and better protected pension
benefits; I have to believe that those American workers are
saying, you are not listening to us; well, we want some help,
but please don't target our pensions at a time when we want the
most safety.
So I have a question to ask. Is it the case that there is
any State that has said to us, we need to have a Federal
bailout of our pension system? I know Illinois was mentioned.
Ms. Lav, you may have already commented on this I was told.
But has Illinois requested a bailout from the Federal
Government for its pension program?
Ms. LAV. No, it has not. In a 472-page budget, there was
one phrase, not even a sentence, which says; ``significant
long-term improvements will come only from the additional
pension reforms, refinancing the liability and seeking a
Federal guarantee of the debt, or increasing the annual
required contributions.''
So there was that one phrase in which a Federal guarantee
was mentioned. But a couple of weeks later, The Wall Street
Journal asked Governor Quinn, and there is an article which
says he said, no, no, we are not planning on doing that.
Mr. BECERRA. Let me ask a quick question. Is there anyone
that challenges the figure that the average pension benefit for
public employees throughout America is around $23,000, $24,000
a year?
Ms. LAV. That comes from the U.S. Census.
Mr. BECERRA. So no one would question it.
Ms. LAV. No.
Mr. BECERRA. Does anyone question that the average cost for
a State throughout the country or the 50 States is somewhere
around 4 percent or less of their State budgets?
Ms. LAV. Right. The most recent data shows 3.8 percent.
Mr. BARRO. I would challenge that idea.
Mr. BECERRA. Okay. Mr. Barro.
Mr. BARRO. That is a measure of the actual cash payments
made by governments. That is not the cost of pension benefits
that are being provided.
Mr. BECERRA. Doesn't that go to the question of what we are
talking about in terms of a State's budget? A State is
budgeting for a fiscal year, not for 20 years from now.
Mr. BARRO. Well, that is part of the problem.
Mr. BECERRA. If I could finish my point. And so while I
think where you are heading is that we want to make sure that
these pension plans are solvent for years to come just the way
we want Social Security to be solvent, we wouldn't use today's
money that is contributed for a program we need today to pay
for a program that has to go long term. And so what we have to
do is deal with the long-term costs of the pension program
through--and I know my time is expired, if I could just finish
this point--we want to deal with the long-term costs of the
program through long-term solutions, not short-term solutions.
So the short-term solution of fixing a State budget should not
be foisted on a long-term program that has been funded for
decades and is supposed to last for decades to try to solve a
short-term State budget, which is caused principally by the
downfall, the economic recession and so forth.
So it could be in a few years we are doing very well, and
that means that pensions will be doing very well. So what we
want to do is budget long term for pensions, not have a short-
term sight and deal with State budgets through our pension
programs for our workers.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me the additional
time.
Mr. BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McDermott, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This morning we are gathered once again to watch the
Republicans attack the middle class and watch them ignore the
problem of jobs in this country.
Although there is a twist this morning because this is a
Subcommittee that has no jurisdiction whatsoever on pending
legislation. They had to find a Committee that would have the
hearing because other Subcommittee chairmen would not attack
unions, so they brought it into this Committee.
Now, we are sitting here while they cynically abuse the
Committee process to beat up on the working people of this
country. If the public wonders why our politics are polarized,
it is because of all of the incremental steps of abuse. This
morning is another example.
Let us be clear: The Republicans hate defined benefit
pensions, whether it is Social Security at the Federal level or
it is a public pension at the State level. They want rid of
them all.
That is what Wisconsin was about, and it is what this whole
exercise here today is. Now, instead of focusing on jobs, they
are going after their political enemies, once again, the
regular whipping boys, the unions. Let us drag the unions out
here and kick the living daylights out of them when, in fact,
they are not the problem.
Unions built this country. They built the highways, the
ports, the schools. They created fairness, the 8-hour work day,
safe working conditions, health care, pensions. They are not
the robber barons in this society. And union workers are under
attack because they haven't gotten poor enough. They are under
attack because they haven't given up, as they showed in
Wisconsin.
After two decades, the eighties and then the 2000s, where
the Republican policies led to huge deficits, transferring most
of the wealth to the top 5 percent in this country, you would
think they would be satisfied, but they aren't. Here we are,
back to the same old stand, attacking the pensions of policemen
and firefighters and teachers and sanitation workers. Now, it
is good that we found who the enemies are in this society; the
police, the firefighters and the teachers and the sanitation
workers. Let's take away their pensions. Let's destroy the
system we have developed in this country.
There is no problem with most State pensions. The State of
Washington is 99 percent financed. Wisconsin is 99 percent
financed. If you look at all the records that come from all of
the agencies, the Pew Foundation and others, and it is very
clear that these pensions are not in trouble in most places.
There are some States, but for the Federal Government to leap
in to fix New Jersey or Illinois or whatever and make
Washington go through that process is an abrogation of State
rights, and there is no sense in doing it.
Some of the witnesses here have said things about public
officials at the local level, which I think you ought to take
back, because some of them have been very responsible. In my
State, we have a functioning system that is well financed.
Now, the CBO put a report out and the chairman kindly put
it into the record.
And, Ms. Lav, I would like you to comment on this line in
this: It says, ``by indicating a larger amount of underfunding,
adopting a fair-value approach and reporting pension financing
could indicate a need for significant increase in funding which
would further strain State budgets, despite the fact that on
average a much smaller increase in funding might turn out to be
significant to cover pension plan funding.''
It sounds to me like what they are trying to do with this
bill is jack up the pressure on States; therefore, they will
dump the pension plans. Is that a fair reading of what this
bill is about?
Ms. LAV. Well, I think that is a pretty fair reading. I
think that some of the sponsors have said that, as is indicated
in my written testimony.
I think that what it will do is create this idea that there
is just this massive underfunding, and people will demagogue
that. You would have it all in one place. You have a so-called
transparent--maybe it is on a Web site and everything, and with
these very large liabilities, and people are going to demagogue
and say, oh, my God, we can't afford this, and it is going to
create pressure either to eliminate the plans or pressure to
cut other spending or pressure for higher taxes. And given the
volatility of the bond markets and people that invest in State
and local mutual funds that--mutual funds for State and local
bonds----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Let me stop you there, because you brought
up the bonds, the bond market.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to put into the
record the Huffington Post article called ``Credit Rating
Agency Analyst Covering AIG, Lehman Brothers Never
Disciplined.'' I think we ought to have a hearing on that.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Without objection, that report will be put in
the record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.041

Mr. BOUSTANY. I would remind the gentleman that it is a
little unseemly to impugn motives of Members of the Committee
and other Members of the House. The purpose of this hearing is
simply to explore the issue of transparency and whether or not
the accounting methods being used accurately depict
liabilities.
So, with that, the chair now recognizes Mr. Nunes.
Mr. NUNES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also would like to remind the Committee here that when
the public employee transparency bill was introduced in the
House, it was the House Parliamentarian that referred the bill
to the Committee.
Also, it amazes me that now CBO is part of the vast right
wing conspiracy to take out public employee unions. I have a
quote here that I would like to read from another far right
winger. Some of you may recognize the name of Mayor Willie
Brown, the Mayor of San Francisco. He was also the California
assembly speaker for many years. I guess he is now a right
winger because I am going to read this, and he must be against
unions. But here is his quote: ``The deal used to be that civil
servants were paid less than private-sector workers in exchange
for an understanding that they had job security for life. But
we politicians, pushed by our friends in labor, gradually
expanded pay and benefits to private-sector levels while
keeping job protections and layering on incredibly generous
retirement packages that pay ex-workers almost as much as
current workers. Talking about this politically is politically
unpopular and potentially even career suicide for most office
holders. But at some point, someone is going to have to get
honest about the fact that 80 percent of the State, county and
city budget deficits are due to employee costs. Either we do
something about it at the ballot box or a judge will do
something about it in bankruptcy court. And If you think I am
kidding, just look at the city of Vallejo.''
So when the bill was put together, it was put together to
protect the employees. And Ms. Lav, it amazes me that you don't
believe that transparency is good for the employees. Why is it
that you want to hide the numbers from the public employees?
Ms. LAV. I think transparency is very good.
Mr. NUNES. You said earlier that it would create confusion.
Ms. LAV. Well, because I am saying that I am not defining
forcing this estimation of liabilities at a riskless rate as
transparency because I think it is more in the category of
something that is not relevant particularly to the level of
contributions that State and local employees should be making
to their plans. And what should be disclosed to people is how
much it is that this State and this locality have to put into
their plans to reach full funding over the next couple of
decades as we recover from these back-to-back recessions.
And that is the amount that I think you should be
transparent about so people have an idea, so employees have an
idea, so the public has an idea, so the investing public and
everybody else has an idea what has to be put into those
accounts.
Mr. NUNES. The bill allows for basically two basic things.
One is for the pension plan to show how they feel they are
going to meet the needs. The other is this discount rate that
you seem to be fixated on and that the left seems to be fixated
on. And for some reason, you can't get off this fixation about
3 percent, 4 percent, 5 percent. The truth of why the rate was
picked is what I said earlier to Mr. Buchanan, is so that you
would have a conservative ability to compare public employee
pensions across the line. And I will also say that it amazes me
how this has now turned into a union-Wisconsin vast conspiracy
bill here when I think half of the public employee pensions are
actually for non-union employees. So, I think hopefully we can
just really raise the rhetoric level down a little bit here.
This is a good government bill. It is trying to create
transparency so that public policymakers can make better
decisions.
And with that note, Mr. Stapleton, could you just kind of
comment on--I know you didn't get a chance to respond to some
of the Members on the Democrat side and some of their
accusations, so I would like to give you an opportunity to
respond.
Mr. STAPLETON. Thank you, Congressman Nunes.
I would simply say that everybody benefits in my opinion
from greater information. I think that a risk-free rate of
return is absolutely as justifiable, if not more justifiable,
than assuming an 8-percent rate of return.
In Colorado, we had the market returns compounding--the
market compounding at nearly 18 percent over the last 20 years.
And as a result, our plan was only fully funded once. To assume
that we are going to have that type of run-up again over the
next 20 years is a complete fallacy. Also, the notion that
everybody is contributing the same amount is a fallacy.
Using Colorado as an example, Congressman, we have
government workers, who according to this year's budget, have
been asked to contribute a mandatory of 12.5 percent of their
paychecks into the pension system. The problem in Colorado is
that government workers only represent 15 percent of the
membership in the pension system. Everybody else, all 85
percent of other members, schoolteachers, higher education,
local government workers, they only have to contribute 8
percent, and they get the same benefits. So if we are talking
about fairness here, let's have everybody contribute the same
amount. Let's have everybody retire at the same age; not some
get to retire at 60, others get to retire at 58. There is no
uniformity, and Colorado is not alone. Many States don't have
uniformity in contribution levels or retirement ages. So this
is about economic fairness.
Mr. BOUSTANY. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Chairman, I would like to just thank all of
the panel for being here today and for their contribution. I
know they spent a lot of time on these public employee
pensions, and I appreciate the panel's time today.
And I appreciate your time, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
Mr. BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Let me just remind
Members on both sides that we want to try to keep from
impugning motives and stick to really what the heart of the
subject is. And it was really dealing with the transparency,
the accounting methods and ultimately, are these pension plans
fair to the workers at the end of the day? So we will continue
to work on this issue. And I want to thank the panelists for
joining us today. You all have been very helpful. Please be
advised that Members may have written questions that they will
submit to you. And those questions and answers will be made a
part of the official record.
With that, this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:27 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned]
[Questions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.044

[Submissions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 70881A.088


