- THE PENDING FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS WITH COLOMBIA, PANAMA, AND SOUTH KOREA AND THE CREATION OF U.S. JOBS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PENDING FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS
WITH COLOMBIA, PANAMA, AND SOUTH KOREA
AND THE CREATION OF U.S. JOBS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JANUARY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-02

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

67-469 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
DEAN HELLER, Nevada                  EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            RON KIND, Wisconsin
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois
CHRIS LEE, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee

Jon Traub, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of January 18, 2011 announcing the hearing..............     2

WITNESSES

Roy Paulson, President, Paulson Manufacturing Corporation, on
behalf of the National Association of Manufacturers............     8
Bob Stallman, President, American Farm Bureau Federation.........    18
Michael L. Ducker, Chief Operating Officer and President,
International, FedEx Express...................................    30
William J. Toppeta, President, International, MetLife............    42
Stephen E. Biegun, Corporate Officer and Vice President of
International Governmental Affairs, Ford Motor Company.........    56

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association............   102
Emergency Committee for American Trade...........................   113
National Oilseed Processors Association..........................   120
California Table Grape Commission (Colombia).....................   126
California Table Grape Commission (Korea)........................   127
American Forest & Paper Association..............................   128
USA Rice Federation..............................................   131
National Grain and Feed Association..............................   134
Distilled Spirits Council of the United States, Inc..............   141
National Pork Producers Council..................................   146
PepsiCo..........................................................   150
American Natural Soda Ash Corporation............................   151
Campbell Soup Company............................................   152
ConAgra Foods....................................................   155
American Association of Port Authorities.........................   159
International Dairy Foods Association............................   161
Intel Corporation................................................   165
Corn Refiners Association........................................   169
Herbalife Ltd....................................................   171
National Cattlemen's Beef Association............................   173
National Potato Council..........................................   174
Council of the Americas..........................................   175
California Coalition for Free Trade..............................   176
Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch..............................   179
American Meat Institute..........................................   189
Financial Services Roundtable....................................   193
National Milk Producers Federation & U.S. Dairy Export Council...   194
Retail Industry Leaders Association..............................   197
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition, National Textile
Association, U.S. Industrial Fabrics Institute, American Fiber
Manufacturers Association......................................   206
Association of Colombian Flower Exporters........................   210
Advanced Medical Technology Association..........................   211
American Apparel & Footwear Association..........................   220
Consumer Electronics Association.................................   223
California Chamber of Commerce...................................   224
Otis McAllister..................................................   225

THE PENDING FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS
WITH COLOMBIA, PANAMA, AND SOUTH KOREA
AND THE CREATION OF U.S. JOBS

----------

THURSDAY, JANUARY 25, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Dave
Camp [chairman of the committee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Camp Announces Hearing on the Pending

Free Trade Agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea and the
Creation of U.S. Jobs

January 18, 2011

House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp (R-MI) today
announced that the Committee on Ways and Means will hold a hearing on
the pending free trade agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South
Korea and the creation of U.S. jobs. The hearing will take place on
Tuesday, January 25, 2011, in 1100 Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

In 2007, the United States concluded trade agreements with
Colombia, Panama, and South Korea. Ways and Means has not held a
hearing on any of the three completed trade agreements.

Each of the three trade agreements would open new markets to U.S.
exports and, in turn, benefit American businesses, farmers, workers,
and consumers. The independent U.S. International Trade Commission has
estimated that the three pending trade agreements, combined, would
increase U.S. exports by at least $13 billion. The benefits of trade
agreements are also long lasting. Since 2000, U.S. exports to the 13
countries with which the United States has implemented trade agreements
have grown almost twice as fast as our worldwide exports.

Colombia, Panama, and South Korea have all concluded trade
agreements with major trading partners and export competitors of the
United States, so U.S. failure to implement our own trade agreements
with these countries could severely disadvantage U.S. exporters and
jeopardize U.S. job creation. For example, the Colombia-Canada free
trade agreement is expected to enter into force in July of this year,
removing significant Colombian tariffs for Canadian agriculture
exporters while similar tariffs remain in place against U.S.
agriculture exports. Colombia has also implemented trade agreements
with Argentina, Brazil, and the MERCOSUR countries. Similarly, Panama
has signed trade agreements with Canada and the European Union, which
remove a number of key barriers to their exports. The EU-Korea free
trade agreement is also expected to enter into force by July 2011 and
would provide European manufacturers and service providers with
preferential access to one of the most dynamic economies in Asia, to
the detriment of U.S. exports.

Over the years, several objections have been raised to these
agreements. With respect to Colombia, some have argued that sustained
progress to address violence against workers in Colombia and concerns
about Colombian labor law must occur before it is appropriate to
consider the agreement. However, supporters of the agreement argue that
passing the agreement will improve labor protections and express
frustration the Administration has not identified concrete steps for
Colombia to take to address concerns. Concerns have also been raised
about Panama's refusal to provide the United States with certain
information needed to enforce U.S. tax laws. In November, the United
States and Panama signed a Tax Information Exchange Agreement to
address that concern. With respect to South Korea, many stakeholders
argued that the auto provisions of the original agreement were
insufficient. In December, the United States and South Korea reached a
supplemental agreement addressing those concerns.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``Trade agreements
are a sure-fire way to support U.S. jobs and boost economic growth by
creating new markets for U.S. goods and services, particularly at a
time when unemployment is nearly ten percent. The United States cannot
afford to sit on the sidelines while the rest of the world is actively
concluding new trade agreements that leave us out. The first step to
getting back on the field is passing these trade agreements. It is time
for the President to submit the three pending trade agreements to
Congress for their consideration within six months.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The focus of the hearing is on Congressional consideration of the
pending trade agreements and the benefits these agreements will bring
to American businesses, farmers, workers, consumers, and the U.S.
economy. The hearing will also explore developments with each of these
countries that have occurred since the trade agreements were concluded.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word or
WordPerfect document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by the close of business on Thursday, February 8, 2011.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word or WordPerfect format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages,
including attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman CAMP. The committee will now come to order for the
previously scheduled hearing on our three pending trade
agreements and their job creation benefits.
I would like to welcome all of you to the first trade
hearing of the 112th Congress in which we will examine the
three pending trade agreements, agreements that were all
concluded in 2007, almost 4 years ago.
I also expect to have Ambassador Kirk appear before the
committee in the near future to talk about these agreements and
our trade agenda.
I would like to take a moment to welcome in particular
Ambassador Silva from the Embassy of Colombia, as well as
representatives from the Embassies of Panama and the Republic
of Korea. I thank you all for attending and for being such
strong advocates for these agreements because of the strong
ties they will create between our countries.
Given the delay in considering these agreements, I welcomed
the President's announcement last June of a clear timetable for
resolving the outstanding issues surrounding the South Korea
agreement. Mr. Levin and I worked closely together with
stakeholders and the administration to arrive at a compromise
that resolved the outstanding auto issues in the U.S.-South
Korea trade agreement. Unfortunately, the administration has
not taken the same productive approach to the Colombia and
Panama agreements; and I hope the President lays out such a
timetable in his address tonight.
I strongly believe that we should consider all three
agreements in the next 6 months. This deadline isn't being
driven by politics or posturing. It is driven by the need to
create jobs for American workers. The three trade agreements
are a sure-fire way to create American jobs by growing U.S.
exports of goods and services and does not require one dime of
new government spending.
The President has noted that the South Korea agreement
alone will create 70,000 American jobs. However, until Congress
passes the agreements, our workers can't realize these
benefits. Continued delay also hinders the ability of American
workers, businesses, and farmers to compete in these markets as
our competitors move ahead.
Last May, then agriculture Ranking Member Lucas and I
released a report documenting how the delay in implementing the
Colombian agreement allowed Argentina and Brazil to take market
share from U.S. farmers in the Colombian market as they
implemented their trade agreement with Colombia. I have just
released an updated analysis showing that the ongoing delay has
caused U.S. exports to Colombia to decline even further. This
updated report also demonstrates that in stark contrast, the
existing U.S.-Peru agreement has resulted in increased U.S.
exports and increased market share. If we implement the
Colombian agreement, we can enjoy similar gains as we are
seeing in the Peruvian market.
Other major economies, including the EU and Canada, have
signed or are poised to sign agreements with Colombia, Panama,
and South Korea. The EU-South Korea agreement is slated to
enter into force on July 1st of this year. The Canada-Colombia
trade agreement is also expected to enter into force this July.
Implementation of their agreements, and continued inaction on
our agreements, will result in further missed opportunities to
create U.S. jobs. America cannot afford to fall further behind,
and by standing still we are doing just that. In these
difficult economic times, Congress and the Administration owe
it to American workers, businesses, and farmers to take all
available steps to increase exports in the jobs they support.
These agreements create new exports and resulting jobs in
several ways.
First, they level the playing field for American workers by
reducing foreign tariffs on U.S. exports. In fact, we enjoy a
manufacturing trade surplus with our trade agreement partners.
For some partner countries, the trade agreements have taken us
from a deficit before implementation to a surplus afterward.
The simple fact is that nearly all imports from Colombia and
Panama already enter the United States duty free and U.S.
exports to all three countries pay much higher tariffs than
exports from those countries to the United States. These
agreements would eliminate or substantially lower the tariffs
on U.S. exports in all sectors, making our products more
competitive.
Second, the agreements remove existing non-tariff barriers
and go a long way towards ensuring new barriers do not emerge.
The agreements set standards to ensure sanitary and
phytosanitary rules in agriculture are not used for
protectionist purposes, provide strong protections for
intellectual property rights, and encourage greater regulatory
harmonization and the use of international standards.
Third, as I have noted, these agreements maintain and
improve U.S. competitiveness vis-a-vis exporters from other
countries. Failure to implement the three pending trade
agreements risks putting U.S. exporters at a competitive
disadvantage in these markets, costing American jobs and
slowing job creation.
Finally, I want to note that it is not just big companies
that benefit from these agreements. More than 80 percent of the
exporters to each of the three markets are small- or medium-
sized businesses with fewer than 500 employees. In many ways,
these dynamic businesses and their employees have the most to
gain from these agreements and the most to lose if we delay.
I would like to welcome our witnesses, who represent the
full spectrum of U.S. agriculture, manufacturing, and services
interests, including both large and small businesses; and I
look forward to your testimony.
At this time, I will yield to Ranking Member Levin for the
purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
While from the outset most Republicans have been calling
for immediate passage of all free trade agreements as
originally negotiated by President Bush, we have been working
hard at fixing them. Our approach on the Democratic side was
that each of the FTAs as originally negotiated did not embody a
trade policy responsible to the changing dynamic of a
globalized economy and to the best interest of the American
people. Trade agreements need to be shaped so that as trade
expands the benefits are spread more broadly.
The intervening period since the initial negotiation of the
FTAs has been for us in the Democratic ranks one of action, not
of inaction. It has been an intensive effort to get trade
policy right, and it has been working. We changed for the
better the Peru FTA before its passage. We have substantially
improved the Korea FTA, and we should have in the coming months
the implementation language for consideration and approval.
There is now the prospect of successfully addressing the tax
haven and labor law concerns with the Panama FTA.
With respect to the Colombia agreement, the new Santos
administration has now articulated a new approach which
provides an opportunity to address the serious concerns--and I
underline them--consistently expressed by us regarding that
FTA.
We believe that each trade agreement should be considered
on its own merits, not lumped together where key issues are
ignored, as some would be willing to do. It was because of our
efforts that enforceable worker rights and environmental
standards were added to the U.S.-Peru FTA. As a result, labor
conditions are improving in Peru. And while significant work
remains to be done to implement and enforce the agreement's
environmental provisions, as a result of that amended FTA Peru
has created a new Ministry of Environment, reformed its
forestry oversight agency, revised its criminal laws to
strengthen penalties for environmental crimes, deployed 3,000
police officers, and created new offices for environmental
prosecutors.
The agreement was also revised to balance the need to
encourage innovation with the need to provide access for
Peruvian citizens to affordable medicines.
Importantly, the Peruvian government made necessary changes
to its labor laws before the vote on the FTA, which was then
passed by Congress with bipartisan support and signed by the
President.
Because of our efforts, the U.S.-Korea FTA is finally being
fixed to open up markets where they were closed and to end one-
way trade. For decades, Korea has employed a unique and ever-
changing regulatory regime to discriminate against our auto
imports, while the U.S. market has been open to their goods. As
a result, U.S. automakers exported less than 6,000 cars to
South Korea in 2009. In contrast, South Korean automakers have
been able to use their historically closed markets to finance
an aggressive push into the U.S. market, exporting 476,000 cars
to the U.S. in 2009. The imbalance is so severe that automotive
trade accounts for 75 percent of the $10.6 billion U.S. trade
deficit with Korea.
The Republican majority long ago would have simply again
accepted a flawed agreement. Fortunately, last year, with the
support of Members of Congress, including our chairman, the
automakers, and the UAW, the Obama administration negotiated an
additional agreement that will provide U.S. automakers and part
suppliers with a real opportunity to compete and succeed in the
Korean market. With the changes achieved through the additional
agreement, the U.S. auto industry, Ford, Chrysler, GM, and the
UAW are supporting that agreement.
Because of our efforts, we used the intervening period to
address legitimate issues in the Panama FTA. Through the
intensive efforts led by Representative Doggett and Senator
Levin, the Obama administration successfully concluded a tax
information exchange agreement in November, 2010, to address
Panama's status as a tax haven. That agreement still needs to
be ratified by Panama.
This administration has also been working to ensure that
Panama's labor laws comply with the FTA obligations, a process
we started way back in 2007. Because of our efforts, there are
now important labor law changes pending before the Panamanian
legislature. If the approach had been followed by those who
pushed for the immediate passage of the Panama FTA, we would
have failed to address a tax haven country or to improve labor
standards in Panama.
A few days ago, I returned from 5 days of fact finding on
the ground in Colombia meeting with widely diverse citizen
groups and government leaders. I went 20 months ago, and I
thought it important to compare conditions then and now. It is
clear that the intervening period was important in focusing
attention on serious concerns standing in the way of support
for the Colombia FTA. Those issues include violence and
intimidation in cases involving the exercise of human,
political, and labor rights by workers and their leaders, a
high level of impunity in such cases, and the failure to reform
the legal and administrative structures relating to the
exercise of basic international worker rights.
Throughout my discussion, there seemed to be wide agreement
that the new Colombian government--the new Colombian
government--was expressing a different approach than its
predecessor on these critical concerns. I believe there is now
an opportunity for the two governments to work together
mutually to achieve real progress on the ground.
In closing, I say to the Republican majority, you may have
been willing to press flawed trade agreements, but we were not.
We went about fixing Peru, Panama, and Korea. It was time well
spent. Instead of criticizing, there should be acknowledgement
of the meaningful breakthroughs; and we should be working
together to implement the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement.
I close with this. Today's hearing is about trade policy
and jobs. Yet there are other trade initiatives that have a
serious impact on U.S. jobs. Much has been said in recent weeks
criticizing House Democrats' focus in particular on China's
currency manipulation. Well, we focused on it because it
matters. China's undervalued currency has been estimated to
cost the U.S. 500,000 to 1.5 million jobs.
According to the NAM--and I quote--the number one factor
affecting their exports is the value of the dollar. I was
pleased to work with Chairman Camp last fall on currency, an
effort that resulted in majorities of both parties supporting
the currency bill. I hope we can continue that effort this year
while we also work on China's other trade-distorting practices,
including its massive subsidies, its failure to enforce
intellectual property rights, its discrimination in government
procurement, and its indigenous innovation policies. Let me
repeat that we must address each trade issue on its own merits
and move forward to grow our economy and American jobs and to
compete internationally.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Today we are joined by five witnesses.
Our first witness will be Roy Paulson, who is President of
Paulson Manufacturing Corporation, a small manufacturing
business in Temecula, California. Mr. Paulson is also
testifying today on behalf of the National Association of
Manufacturers, and we welcome you to the committee.
After him, we will hear from Bob Stallman. Mr. Stallman is
President of the American Farm Bureau Federation and a rice and
cattle producer from Columbus, Texas.
Our third witness will be Michael Ducker, Chief Operating
Officer and President, International, at Federal Express.
Fourth, we will hear from William Toppeta, President,
International, with MetLife.
And, last, we will hear from Steve Biegun, who is a
Corporate Officer and Vice President of International
Governmental Affairs at the Ford Motor Company.
We welcome all of you, and we look forward to your
testimony. And I would ask that our witnesses keep their
testimony to 5 minutes.
Mr. Paulson, your written statement, like those of all of
the witnesses, will be made a part of the record; and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROY PAULSON, PRESIDENT, PAULSON MANUFACTURING
CORPORATION, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
MANUFACTURERS

Mr. PAULSON. Thank you very much.
Good morning, Chairman Camp, Ranking Member Levin, Members
of the Committee. I am Roy Paulson, President of Paulson
Manufacturing; and I am pleased to testify as a member of the
board of directors of the National Association of
Manufacturers. I have a prepared statement for the record and
some brief remarks to make at this time.
Paulson Manufacturing is a manufacturer of safety
equipment, specializing in eye and face protection. This is a
family business with about 140 employees, yet it is a high-
technology business that utilizes state-of-the-art equipment
and modern methods. You have seen our products many times as
the face shields worn on firemen's helmets and the heat-
reflective face shields worn by steelworkers in steel mills.
What you have not seen are the many forms of eye and face
protection used in so many ways from medical surgery to high
technology.
We have an expanding business that is thriving even in the
difficult economy. We design and manufacture our products in
California with domestic materials and local labor. I am able
to compete domestically and abroad with my product line as long
as I am selling innovative, cutting-edge products. The keys are
innovation, quality, and customer service.
As I moved into the international markets, I brought along
our business philosophy. I discovered that I could successfully
sell to most countries with the proper application of our
business methods and a large dose of patience. This helped to
develop our long-term relations with our foreign customers, and
we have been successful at building our distribution and
creating repeat sales in many countries.
Exports are tremendously important to my company. We export
to 80 countries, and exports are now one-fourth of our
business. I want to build on that, because markets around the
world are growing faster than the domestic U.S. market.
For small business to export more, foreign trade barriers
must come down. That can only happen if we get trade agreements
that will level the playing field and get rid of these
barriers. Tariffs on U.S.-made products, including my company's
products, are much higher in most foreign markets than
corresponding U.S. tariffs on the imports products. When we
enter a trade agreement, our barriers drop very little.
However, the other countries high tariff barriers drop a lot,
as they go to zero. That is why trade agreements are a no-
brainer to me.
I truly don't understand congressional reluctance,
especially since the Commerce Department's figures show the
U.S. has a manufacturing goods trade surplus with our free
trade partners. Over the past 3 years, that surplus has
accumulated to over $60 billion.
There seems to be a myth in Washington that trade
agreements caused the U.S. trade deficit and cost 5 million
jobs. Frankly, even spending 5 minutes with the statistics
shows that this is just plain wrong.
I am one of those people who hope that Washington will act
on facts, not on mythology. One good idea would be for this
committee to ask the Commerce Department to brief you on the
facts of trade, in fact, brief the entire House.
I hope that you will look more closely at my prepared
statement, which has a lot of facts about how these trade
agreements are helping manufacturing in America.
Now I would like to talk about my company, Paulson
Manufacturing. We sell to all three of the countries where the
U.S. has signed free trade agreements that have not yet been
passed by Congress. In Panama, I face a 6 percent tariff; in
Korea, 8 percent; in Colombia, 20 percent. I could sell a lot
more to my customers if I could get my products in duty free,
and I could find more customers in those countries. That means
my sales would go up. I would gain on my competitors and could
even be able to expand my workforce. My nightmare is that my
competitors will get free trade agreements first, get in duty
free, and I will lose out.
Some people think that trade only benefits large companies.
Absolutely untrue. I am here before you as an example, 140
employees and selling to 80 countries around the world.
A lot of smaller companies in the NAM also export. I am on
the District Export Council and many other export groups. We
all export, and we want to export more. Fully 95 percent of all
exporters, including to our free trade partners, are small- to
medium-sized businesses. We are all frustrated by this body,
and it has been keeping us from expanding our sales and our
workforce.
I need those trade agreements, and I want the government to
move ahead with the Trans-Pacific Partnership and open these
markets. I want you to also open up Brazil, India, and other
markets to me. I want my company and family of employees to
grow and prosper. To achieve that, I have to sell to more
markets.
Thank you very much for your time and for listening. I am
ready to answer your questions at the end of everyone's
remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Paulson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Our next witness will be Bob Stallman. You have 5 minutes,
and your written statement will be made a part of the record.

STATEMENT OF BOB STALLMAN, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN FARM BUREAU
FEDERATION

Mr. STALLMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Levin, Members of the Committee. I am Bob Stallman, President
of the American Farm Bureau Federation and a rice and cattle
producer from Texas. I appreciate the invitation to share the
Farm Bureau's views on the three pending free trade agreements
and their benefits to U.S. agriculture.
The Farm Bureau is the Nation's largest general farm
organization, with more than 6 million member families
representing producers of nearly every commodity grown or
raised commercially in all 50 States and Puerto Rico. We
support passage of the Korea, Colombia, and Panama trade
agreements with the United States. Combined, these agreements
represent almost $3 billion in additional trade for U.S.
agricultural producers, but that is only if they are
implemented.
The U.S. is facing a proliferation of FTAs, increasing the
export potential of our competitors while putting U.S.
agriculture at a disadvantage. Due to the administration and
Congress' inaction on these agreements, the debate is no longer
simply about generating potential export gains, but it is now
about how to prevent the loss of existing export markets.
These trade agreements are not only important to the bottom
line of America's farmers and ranchers. They are important to
the economic health of our rural communities and the overall
U.S. economy.
The USDA estimates that every billion dollars in
agriculture exports supports 9,000 U.S. jobs. There is a long
supply chain made up of American workers who get products from
the farm gate to our foreign consumers. A decline in our
exports means a decline in work for those that are a part of
that supply chain. Given the state of our economy, we must do
whatever we can to assure we are creating opportunities for
work, not taking them away.
The U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement provides a significant
opportunity for the U.S. agricultural sector. When the
agreement is fully implemented, we estimate export gains to
exceed $1.8 billion annually.
Korea has completed an agreement with the European Union
which is expected to be implemented by July of 2011. The Korea-
EU FTA in 5 years will eliminate 94 percent of Korea's tariffs.
In contrast, the KORUS would eliminate 94.5 percent of Korea's
tariffs in 3 years of implementation. If the Korea-EU FTA
agreement enters into effect before the KORUS, European
exporters will gain a significant competitive advantage over
the United States in the Korean market.
Loss of market share in Korea because of U.S. competitors'
preferential access has become a reality for some segments of
the U.S. agriculture. Wine consumption has been increasing in
Korea. During the 2000 and 2009 period, Chilean market share by
value rose from 2.4 percent to 21.5 percent, while the U.S.
share fell from 17.1 percent to 10.8 percent. This is believed
to be the direct result of the 15 percent import duty
eliminated on Chilean wine under the Korea-Chile Trade
Agreement implemented in 2004.
The Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement eliminates Colombian
tariffs on U.S. agriculture products, correcting the current
imbalance in agricultural trade between our countries created
in part by congressional passage and extension of the Andean
Trade Preference Act. Our analysis of the agreement suggests
gains in exports from this agreement of $815 million.
While U.S. agriculture continues to wait for passage of the
agreement, U.S. market share has been slipping in Colombia due
to our competitors implementing their own trade agreements.
According to the USDA, between 2008 and 2009 we have seen
almost a 50 percent drop in our exports, from 1.6 billion to
906 million. According to Colombia's National Department of
Statistics, our peak market share was 46 percent in 2008, while
in 2010 it dropped to 21 percent, being taken over by
Argentina. In other words, the United States has already blown
a major trade opportunity and will need to work hard to ever
return to our earlier status.
As a further example, traditionally, the United States has
been the top supplier of corn, wheat, and soybeans. In terms of
market share, Colombia statistics shows that the U.S. market
share went from a peak of 76 percent in 2000 to just 27 percent
in 2010, again being taken over by Argentina, with some
competition also from Brazil.
Under the Panama agreement, we estimate increased exports
for the U.S. agricultural exports to exceed $195 million.
Panama has completed a trade agreement with Canada. If this
agreement enters into effect before the U.S. agreement,
Canadian exporters will gain a significant competitive
advantage over the United States for many products we can
export.
Mr. Chairman, just to restate, these agreements contain
significant export gains for U.S. agriculture that will only be
realized by passage and implementation. Conversely, the
inaction has proven to result in loss of market share and
forfeiture of economic growth here. The U.S. government's
inability to move these agreements benefits our foreign
competitors and harms us. We urge that this Congress and the
administration support and pass these agreements now and take
full advantage of the economic opportunity they offer
throughout the United States.
Thank you for the opportunity to share our views.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stallman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ducker, you are also recognized now for 5 minutes; and
your written statement is part of the record as well.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL L. DUCKER, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER AND
PRESIDENT, INTERNATIONAL, FEDEX EXPRESS

Mr. DUCKER. Good morning. Thank you very much, Chairman
Camp, Ranking Member Levin, distinguished members of the House
Committee on Ways and Means.
I am Mike Ducker. I am the Chief Operating Officer and
President, International, for FedEx Express. I also serve as
the Chairman of the U.S. Chamber's International Policy
Committee and am a member of its board of directors. The
Chamber serves as secretariat for both the U.S.-Korea FTA
Business Coalition and the Latin American Trade Coalition,
which represents hundreds of American companies, business, and
agricultural organizations and chambers of commerce that
support approval of the pending free trade agreements.
As you have heard, I have submitted written testimony for
the record, but I am honored to be here today and would like to
take just a few moments to discuss our company with the
committee.
I represent nearly 300,000 FedEx team members. As I said, I
am honored to be here with my fellow panelists to have a
discussion with you about how we can pass the trade agreements
with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea but, as importantly, how
we can work together to position our businesses, our members,
our workers, and our communities to thrive in this century in
the global economy.
We all share the same priority, igniting economic growth
and job creation so we can leave the harmful effects of the
recession behind and move forward towards a more prosperous
future. Trade has to play a vital role in reaching our shared
growth and job creation goals.
The business community welcomed President Obama's call last
year to double U.S. exports within 5 years and the launch of
the National Export Initiative, and we all look forward to his
comments on trade and passing these trade agreements to enhance
U.S. competitiveness at tonight's State of the Union.
How do we accomplish the bold goal of doubling exports in 5
years? Well, the markets and consumers outside our borders
represent 73 percent of the world's purchasing power, 87
percent of its economic growth, and 95 percent of its
consumers. Let me repeat that, 73 percent of the world's
purchasing power, 87 percent of its economic growth, and 95
percent of its consumers. We have to harness these new markets,
this growth, and these new customers to lift our economy up and
create jobs.
Trade and trade agreements empower businesses of all sizes
and their workers. We in the business community must work
together, no matter our size, to ensure our suppliers,
customers, and business partners can benefit from growth and
trade as well.
Our FedEx U.S. operations and our 230,000 American team
members support our global express delivery network. Expansion
of global trade strengthens FedEx and enables continued growth
of our U.S. operations and workforce. As we grow and invest
around the world, we create jobs here in the United States.
Without global trade, FedEx would be a shadow of our current
operations and our domestic U.S. workforce would be
dramatically smaller.
But also consider this. As our global FedEx network
expands, we purchase new planes, such as our new fleet of
Boeing 777 freighters, new trucks, new equipment, supplies, and
services. Our growth abroad increases our demand for goods and
services from our suppliers and vendors here in the United
States, which helps them grow their businesses and create jobs.
We strongly support free trade agreements that create new
commercial opportunities for our customers and us. At FedEx, we
have seen the results from the free trade agreements currently
in force. After implementation, two-way trade volumes between
the United States and its free trade agreement partners
increase. Demand for our services to and from those free trade
countries increase. Our package volumes increase, and we expand
our operations to accommodate that growth. It is really as
simple as that.
I joined FedEx in 1975 and started loading packages on
small leased jets during the first years of the company when we
served only a handful of the cities in the United States. I
have grown with the company and worked here in the United
States and around the world as their operations have expanded.
I have seen firsthand how the global economy has developed,
spending much of my career in Europe, the Middle East, and
Asia.
Great opportunities are out there around the world for us
and our customers and there are great challenges, but we in the
private and public sector must act to seize those opportunities
and overcome those challenges. For too long, the United
States----
Chairman CAMP. I am afraid we are out of time. The
remaining part of your statement can be a part of the record,
your written statement. But thank you very much for your
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ducker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Now, Mr. Toppeta will have 5 minutes; and,
as with all the other witnesses, your full written statement
will be a part of the record of this hearing. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM J. TOPPETA, PRESIDENT, INTERNATIONAL,
METLIFE

Mr. TOPPETA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My company, MetLife is the premiere global life insurance
company, serving more than 90 million customers in over 60
countries. On behalf of MetLife, I offer today our strongest
possible support for the FTAs pending with Colombia, Panama,
and South Korea.
Let me begin with our own competitive situation overseas.
As an American company doing business in foreign countries,
we have certain competitive handicaps which can be corrected by
the FTAs. For us and for many in the services industries, the
most important challenge in doing business overseas is not
tariffs but nontariff barriers that exist in areas such as
governmental competition, regulatory restriction, and unlevel
playing fields.
Trade agreements are an important vehicle to rectify those
nontariff barriers to doing business abroad. Unlike here in the
U.S., where our competitors are other private businesses and
government is the impartial regulator, in some foreign markets
we actually compete against government-owned or government-
affiliated enterprises. So the foreign government is both our
competitor and our regulator. If I may use a baseball analogy,
this is like having the umpire playing for the other team.
In FTAs, foreign governments can agree to correct this
imbalance. For example, the KORUS FTA will allow U.S. insurers
to compete with state-owned enterprises such as the Korea Post
and other government-affiliated providers under essentially the
same regulatory requirements. Korea's commitments in the KORUS
FTA to a number of reforms are intended to level the playing
field between the government-owned Korea Post and the private
sector. These commitments are vital to the growth of MetLife
and other U.S. insurers in Korea.
There is another way in which we face competitive
disadvantages overseas. That is the case where our competitors
from other countries have an FTA, say, with Korea and the U.S.
does not. This is a clear and present danger in Korea. Korea
has already negotiated an FTA with the European union which is
on track to be implemented later this year. As you may know, we
have major European competitors. If the Korea-EU Free Trade
Agreement goes into effect this year and KORUS does not, we
will be at a competitive disadvantage to European insurers. To
use another baseball analogy, it will be as if the Europeans
are putting nine players on the field and we can only use six
or seven. This disparity can be avoided by passing the KORUS
FTA promptly.
My second point is to inform you about how growth of our
business in foreign markets, which can be aided by the FTAs,
creates and sustains jobs here in the U.S. The fundamental
point here is that MetLife as a global life insurance company
has businesses in many countries around the world, but we do
not export products. Instead, we export competencies and
expertise which come largely from the U.S., creating highly
skilled, well-paying jobs right here at home. Let me give you
an example.
When we create a new product to offer in Korea, the product
development and management are done largely in the U.S. The
most highly skilled actuaries, investment professionals, risk
managers, and others are here. So as we grow our business
internationally we are expanding employment of people in the
U.S.; and for each of these experts we employ in the U.S.,
there is a broad spectrum of U.S.-based support jobs behind
them in areas such as human resources, information technology,
and administrative assistance.
I would also make a related point. MetLife as a global
company has a highly diversified stream of revenues and
earnings. One of the ways in which we are diversified is
geographically. This year, more than 30 percent of our top-line
revenues and about 40 percent of our bottom-line earnings will
come from international business. This diversification is
important because, as we know, the world's economies do not
always move in lockstep.
Having diversified revenues and earnings from foreign
markets allowed MetLife to perform very well during the recent
financial crisis and to sustain U.S.-based jobs of employees
supporting our international business. Since the FTAs will
enable our growth abroad, they will have a direct and positive
impact on creating and sustaining U.S. jobs.
In conclusion, just let me say that American companies are
innovative, American workers are highly productive. Given a
fair chance, we can compete and win against anybody in the
world. It is within your power to put us on a level playing
field internationally. By passing these FTAs, you can make it
so we don't have to play against the umpire's team overseas and
you can let us play nine against nine on the foreign field. If
you give us that fair chance, if you will unleash us, we can
revitalize this economy and put Americans back to work in
record numbers. We are asking for your support.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Toppeta follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Biegun, you now have 5 minutes; and your written
statement also is part of the record. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN E. BIEGUN, CORPORATE OFFICER AND VICE
PRESIDENT OF INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS, FORD MOTOR
COMPANY

Mr. BIEGUN. Thank you, Chairman Camp and Ranking Member
Levin and Members of the Committee for the invitation to share
Ford Motor Company's views today on Panama, Colombia, and
Korea. Let me also say it is a real honor as a third-generation
Ford Motor Company employee to represent my company before this
distinguished panel today. Thank you.
Ford Motor Company has supported every free trade agreement
negotiated by the United States, including the three agreements
that are being reviewed by the committee today. I look forward
to especially discussing our views during the course of this
hearing on the renegotiated 2010 U.S.-Korea Free Trade
Agreement.
Since 2007, Ford has worked diligently to reach today's
position to say with confidence that the U.S.-Korea Free Trade
Agreement will open what has been to date the world's most
closed automotive market. We are now pleased to say that we
strongly encourage the Congress to approve this agreement in
its current form. Under it, America's automobile industry will
have far greater opportunity to expand the export and sale of
American-made automobiles to Korea.
This was not always the case. In 2007, a deal was
originally negotiated that fell far short of opening the Korean
market to U.S. auto exports; and, in fact, it would have locked
in a one-sided trade in automobiles, a trade that accounts for
75 percent of the $11 billion United States trade deficit with
Korea. This agreement, which hopefully will be before the
committee soon, is a significant improvement over the 2007
deal. This outcome would not have happened without the active
support and the leadership of the chairman and the ranking
member of this committee as well as the tireless efforts of the
U.S. trade representative and his team. On behalf of the more
than 150,000 men and women who work at Ford Motor Company, I
would like to say thank you.
Specifically, improvements have been made in key provisions
of the free trade agreement impacting car tariffs, auto safety,
environmental standards, taxes, transparencies, and a variety
of other issues, which I detail in my written testimony.
We had several strong partners in reaching this outcome,
certainly Chrysler and General Motors but also the United Auto
Workers; and the results speak for themselves. I cannot recall
in recent memory another free trade agreement moving through
the Congress with bipartisan support as well as the backing of
industry and labor.
And this is a big deal. Korea is an important automotive
market, with almost 1.5 million new cars sold every year. Ford
has operated in Korea since 1995, selling both Ford and Lincoln
brands. Almost all the vehicles we sell here are made here in
the United States. Despite the fact that Ford Motor Company
today makes cars and trucks that are best in class in safety,
fuel efficiency, and quality, in 2010 our total exports were
limited to approximately 4,000 vehicles. We look forward under
this new agreement to offering the Korean customer a choice of
vehicles that has never been available to them before; and we
are confident that, given the choice, like consumers around the
world, they will choose the best value for the money.
Mr. Chairman, though often overlooked, America's automobile
industry is one of the leading exporters in the American
economy. Over the past 5 years, automobiles and auto parts have
constituted nearly 9 percent of our total merchandise exports.
In 2009 alone, our company exported 270,000 American-made cars
to markets around the world. Including auto components and
parts, we exported a total of $9.3 billion from the United
States.
We likewise are major importers, sourcing from a global
supply chain that stretches across 90 countries and exporting
from place of assembly to point of sale nearly half of the 5.2
million vehicles we make worldwide.
We know that trade works. It should therefore not come as a
surprise that, as a global company, Ford Motor Company believes
that business is best where the trade barriers and tariffs are
least. These conditions produce a healthy business climate
benefiting all: customers, workers, and businesses.
The latest economic downturn has provided ample
illustration that manufacturing matters to American jobs,
investment, and economic growth. While U.S. manufacturing took
the brunt of the recession, there are now signs that it is
leading the way to recovery. Last year, the American economy
added manufacturing jobs for the first time in over a decade.
Ford is proud to be at the forefront of American
manufacturing's turnaround. We began our transformation before
the recession. We focused on the things that just made sense,
return to our core strength, matching capacity to demand, and
working with our employees to ensure that Ford not only
competes but wins globally. Ford's turnaround was its own, and
now we will all benefit from this success. We recently
announced that Ford will add 7,000 new American jobs over the
next 2 years. The men and women of Ford Motor Company are
working daily both for Ford and the Nation's recovery.
It has been a difficult and at times contentious effort to
get the U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement through. But now we
look forward, not back, to combining this agreement with our
own transformation to build the best vehicles in America and
deliver them around the world, including to Korea. That is what
free trade is, and that is what free trade agreements should be
about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Biegun follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much. Thank you all for your
testimony.
At this time, I have a question for all of the panelists
here today; and if you could just answer briefly because we are
all on the clock here on this.
Will the three agreements--Korea, Colombia, and Panama--if
passed help create jobs here in the United States? And if each
of you could answer.
Mr. PAULSON. Yes. Thank you very much.
If the three agreements passed, for sure it will create
jobs in the United States. I know that, in my own factory, for
every $150,000 of sales, we are able to hire another person to
the factory; and we not just will be hiring production people
but also people that will be in engineering and in the tool
building end of the business.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Mr. Stallman.
Mr. STALLMAN. Using our calculation that 9,000 jobs are
created by every billion dollars of agricultural exports, these
three agreements would add 27,000 jobs for Americans, assuming
$3 billion in increased exports. More importantly, passing
these three agreements will keep us from losing jobs that will
occur when our competitors are out there taking over our
markets.
Chairman CAMP. That $3 billion is in the agricultural
sector? Because I have seen higher numbers for the total
exports of all three agreements.
Mr. STALLMAN. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. Strictly for
agriculture.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Ducker.
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir. As I said in my testimony, Mr.
Chairman, we have about 300,000 employees worldwide; 230,000 of
those are in the United States. The U.S. is by far the largest
business; and by harnessing the global market, shifting more
into and out of the United States, we add employees here at
home. So the benefits of those trade agreements are clear in
our case.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. TOPPETA. Yes. I would say in our case the answer is the
same.
If I give you my personal experience going back 10 years
ago when we were much smaller, had virtually no business
outside the United States, we had only a handful of people
doing work internationally, and now we are probably at 2,000 or
so employees. So the answer is, over that period of time, all
because of international growth, we have increased jobs here
from close to 0 to 2,000; and I expect that trend would
continue.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Biegun.
Mr. BIEGUN. Mr. Chairman, we do business in all three
countries. We have a growing business in all three, and we
export U.S.-made automobiles to all three. And to the extent
that all three of these free trade agreements--well, the Korea
in its renegotiated form going forward--all three would
definitely help us expand our business, although the Korean
market is six times larger than the Colombian market. So that
is where the bulk of the opportunity is for us.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
A huge aspect of the trade debate is the unfair competition
we face with China. As the ranking member pointed out in his
opening statement, it is indisputable that China unfairly
subsidizes its exports, fails to protect U.S. intellectual
property, favors production by its own industries, and doesn't
allow its currency to reflect market realities. Our agreement
with South Korea would allow us a beachhead in Asia and provide
a counterbalance to China there.
We are also seeing a growing influence of China in Latin
America. Their reach is extending even to that part of the
world, deliberately using all of the tools they have been using
in the past to assist their companies in those markets.
My question for each of the panelists and I will start with
Mr. Paulson--is how will the three pending trade agreements
help you compete against China?
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you.
For years I used to think I needed to play defense when I
was working with foreign markets, and I would look at my prices
and I would say I couldn't compete on items, and I played
defense and set up these walls. Well, I changed my mind, and I
don't really like to play defense. I like to play offense.
When I could move into the offensive role and look to sell
to these countries instead of worrying about them with what
their activities were here in the United States, I found that
even in China I do not have a problem selling. They love my
products. They clamor for these items, and the issue about
these different countries not wanting U.S. goods is just a
misnomer. They want our products, and they will pay our prices
for quality items.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Stallman, just briefly.
Mr. STALLMAN. Agriculture is in a little bit different
situation with China. China has 7 percent of the world's arable
land, over 20 percent of the world's population. They need to
import food. They have moved into a position of being the
number two importer of U.S. agricultural products, and so our
flow is pretty good. There are specific areas that have created
problems in the past in some commodities, but, in general, we
view this as being very positive, even establishing a beachhead
in Asia and then how that will affect the China market.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Ducker.
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir.
China is a large and growing part of our global enterprise.
We do business in 220 countries and territories. We do think,
as Bob said, it is very important to establish the beachhead
there because many of the countries in Asia, are the largest
trading lanes within Asia. So this beachhead is very important.
It helps to put rules around how we trade and is a good, good
creation for our business in China as well as the countries
that are under consideration here.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
And Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. TOPPETA. Well, I would just give you the example of
Korea. I would say Korea is a huge market. It is a trillion
dollar economy. It is a fast-growing economy. It is the eighth
largest trading partner for the U.S. And if we don't fight for
that market, then it is clear to me that China and Europe
surely will. So it would seem to me that we would be at our
best advantage to get the FTA with Korea done so that we can
establish our position firmly there.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
And Mr. Biegun.
Mr. BIEGUN. Mr. Chairman, I certainly understand the
geopolitical argument that you are getting at in relation to
China. From a narrow Ford Motor Company perspective, I would
say the most important achievement in the Korea Free Trade
Agreement was the United States standing firm on principle. It
sends a message to the Asian economies across the board that
you have to open your markets if you want free trade with us. I
think that is beneficial for China and Korea and Japan and many
other countries.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you all very much.
Mr. Levin is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you.
We very much welcome your testimony. I really don't think
there is any disagreement about the globalization of the
economy and the need for us to participate and to compete. The
issue is under what standards and whether there are standards
that relate to making sure that the benefits of expanded trade
are expanded in terms of who benefits in this country in
creating jobs and in other countries, for example, helping to
develop middle classes there who can buy our goods.
Let me, Mr. Toppeta, ask you a bit of an unfair question.
You are sitting next to Mr. Biegun and you very graphically
spelled out about the opening of the market for your services,
the post owned by the government. If the free trade agreement
with Korea had not opened up the market for your services, as
Mr. Biegun has said it did not for automotive, would you be
supporting the free trade agreement with Korea?
Mr. TOPPETA. Well, the answer is, yes, but maybe not as
vigorously as I am. And I will give you the example.
Mr. LEVIN. Even if Korea continued to shut out your
services?
Mr. TOPPETA. Well, I think you have to look at this in two
ways. I think you have to look at this, first of all, from a
broader national perspective, right? The question is helping
the U.S. to compete better. That is where I think all of us
want to start our analysis. And so if we had an agreement in
which a lot of our industry, our agriculture would benefit and
my company wouldn't, I would say, sure, I still support a free
trade agreement.
Mr. LEVIN. How about not your company but the services--
your industry?
Mr. TOPPETA. Yeah, I think the same logic applies. I think
we want to get the market open. And if we can pry the market
open for one sector or two sectors or three sectors, that would
be a start. So my answer is I would still support and my
company would still support--and I will give you the example of
Colombia and Panama.
Mr. LEVIN. Let me ask you about Korea. What if your
services represented two-thirds of the deficit in trade with
Korea? Automotive is two-thirds of the deficit and so, in terms
of a closed market, Mr. Biegun has indicated it is the most
closed market in the world. So even if your industry
represented two-thirds of the deficit with Korea, you will
still say okay?
Mr. TOPPETA. Well, I think, sir, it depends on what the
rest of the agreement does and what it does for the U.S.
economy. You can't look at everything just from your own narrow
perspective. And the point that I was trying to make to you is
that, with respect to Colombia and Panama, we weren't even
doing business in Colombia and Panama until November of last
year; And we supported the free trade agreements in principle
because we thought they were a good idea for our economy.
Mr. LEVIN. You say the word ``narrow''. You talked about
nontariff barriers as the most important barrier.
Mr. TOPPETA. For my company and my industry.
Mr. LEVIN. Exactly. And the nontariff barriers in Korea
represented two-thirds of the deficit. We have a major deficit
with Korea. All right. Maybe we will leave it at that.
Mr. Paulson, I just want to say I am glad Mr. Camp asked
you the question about China. And while your company may be
able to benefit from their rules, a lot of companies don't see
it the same way. In many cases, the Chinese say we will let you
compete only if you transfer your technology to a partner. In
those cases, I think many, many companies in this country and
its workers say that is not trade the way it should be. So
talking about having a broader perspective, I think as we look
at our relationship with China--and I favor engaging in
expanding trade--we need to look at the rules of engagement.
My time is up.
Chairman CAMP. Your time has expired. But if you would just
like to make a brief comment.
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you very much.
It is interesting what you bring up with China. China asked
us to bring over the rules and regulations of safety businesses
for electrical safety workers to China so they could view those
rules and see how they could improve their own circumstances.
They didn't try and copy our product. What they did was trying
to learn from us how to protect the workers who are the highly
trained electricians. And in this way not only did we export
our products but we exported the knowledge of the National Fire
Protection Association codes for electrical workers.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Herger is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, this is indeed a critical hearing that has
been long overdue. I represent a district with very high
unemployment. I know that is characteristic throughout our
Nation. So I would like to thank you for making this a priority
and for giving us the opportunity to explore how these pending
FTAs will provide an immediate boost to our economy and create
much-needed American jobs.
Mr. Stallman, as a member who represents one of the richest
agricultural districts in the Nation, one that stands to gain
significantly from the tariff reductions included in these
agreements for products like almonds, walnuts, and dried plums,
I am interested in exploring how increased agriculture export
will benefit our local communities and the broader economy.
In your testimony, in answer to several questions, you
alluded to a comment in your testimony that the Agriculture
Department estimates that every billion dollars in agricultural
exports supports 9,000 U.S. jobs. The Farm Bureau estimates
that U.S. agriculture exports will increase by almost $3
billion, which would mean 27,000 jobs. Would you provide more
detail about how that supply chain works and how additional
agricultural exports benefit the broader U.S. economy? And
please also provide some insight as to how these exports might
be particularly valuable or helpful for small businesses that
support our agricultural sector or are part of the supply
chain.
Mr. STALLMAN. Certainly, I will try to do that. The entire
chain, the food chain, and--starts at the farm gate. And a lot
of times people think about agricultural exports only in the
context of what is being produced when it leaves the farm gate.
Well, the reality is we have transportation workers,
processors, packers, longshoremen at the port, sales and
marketing employees, administrative and clerical staff for the
companies involved. That whole chain that is necessary to move
that product from the farm gate to our customer in other
countries creates jobs, and it all starts at the local level.
The processing facilities many times, particularly for some
of the products that you talked about, are placed at the local
level. You have the transportation workers that ship from the
local level that probably live there, and they truck or load up
the products to be sent on further up the chain.
So this has broad benefits and a broad effect across all of
our economy, and those jobs are spread across that entire
supply chain.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
You also discussed in your testimony how exports of Chilean
wine into Korea have grown exponentially and clearly have
supplanted market share from U.S. wine exporters. You
attributed the decline in U.S. exports to the 15 percent duty
that was eliminated under the Korea-Chile trade agreement, but
remains in place for U.S. wine exporters. Do you have any other
examples of how we have lost market share while others gained
by having an agreement in place?
Mr. STALLMAN. Well, we have examples scattered--well, let
me start with the Korea agreement. And this is what I fear will
happen is that when the EU implements the agreement effective
in the summer of this year, their schedule applies to reducing
94 percent of the tariffs over a 5-year period, while our
agreement with Korea, if we get that implemented, we reduce the
same amount of tariffs over a 3-year period. So that gives us a
jump, and just like the Chilean wine agreement, any time you
have a tariff that is reduced for one country to the detriment
of another country that is putting that product in there, your
product is at risk. You are going to lose market share. It is
happening in Colombia right now with corn and wheat and
soybeans.
That will be the continued example that we will see if we
don't get these agreements in place to reduce the tariffs for
our products going into those countries.
Mr. HERGER. So what you are saying, as I understand it, is
that not only if we are not out signing and implementing trade
agreements with other countries, we are not just standing
still; we are actually losing market share and losing jobs by
not participating in these agreements.
Mr. STALLMAN. Absolutely. And in the past that has not been
a problem. We have always looked at moving forward with our
trade agreements. Other countries have caught on to this, and
they are creating their own free trade agreements with these
countries and getting into the markets that we have
traditionally had, and for us to sit back and do nothing puts
us at a continuing disadvantage.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ducker, in the 3 years before implementation of the
U.S.-Australia agreement, exports from Texas to Australia
averaged $800 million a year. And in the 3 years after
implementation, they went to $1.3 billion a year, or 66
percent.
And you know--and the U.S.-Chile thing was the same thing.
The agreement to--exports from Texas to Chile were declining,
and since implementation, the exports have increased by 107
percent.
I think the benefits of previous trade agreements are
really pretty obvious. And you are all over the world, so can
you see changes in the way people conduct business in these
countries as compared to exporting from the United States? Are
you now seeing exports coming from the rest of the world into
these countries that we don't have agreements with?
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir, Congressman Johnson. Having lived
outside the United States for a long time, at least half of my
career, I can unequivocally tell you that not only are other
nations taking advantage of the burgeoning global trade, but,
as my colleagues have mentioned here, moving rapidly to gain
access to these other markets through their trade agreements.
And there is no doubt that the numbers that you just mentioned
there, as well as some of the numbers that are in my testimony
regarding NAFTA, absolutely are indisputable that the world is
moving on and, in fact, taking a page out of our playbook about
these free trade agreements.
Mr. JOHNSON. You know, we have got to stop sitting on our
hands, don't we?
Mr. DUCKER. We have to move, sir. It is an imperative.
Mr. JOHNSON. You know, 26 percent of all manufacturing jobs
in Texas depend on exports. That is more than one in every four
workers. Between 2005 and 2008, the number of manufacturing
jobs in Texas dependent on exports increased from around
161,000 to 225,000, an increase of 38 percent.
Mr. Paulson, you rightly note in your testimony that
standing still on trade agreements is more accurately described
as falling behind. I couldn't agree more. How has U.S.
manufacturing in general been affected by the delay in
implementing these three trade agreements?
Mr. PAULSON. It is not just an effect with these three
countries; it is a vision to the whole world that the United
States turned off the sign that says ``We are open for
business.'' We want to turn that sign back on, because if we
are stalling out in these agreements, what are we going to
stall out next?
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Rangel is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and let me
thank all of you for sharing your views with us. While it is
true that there are a few Members that would accept any
agreement that we might come up with, or there are others that
no matter how good the agreement is, that they would be opposed
to it. But I think the vast majority of Members, Democrats and
Republicans, recognize that we have an excellent opportunity to
create jobs, to create competition, to have economic growth,
and that I think all of you would agree that having a
competitive educational system is important. So I do hope that
all of you would send to me what efforts you are making in
order to improve the quality of education of all Americans so
that indeed we can compete with international workers.
And I think you have to agree, too, that having an educated
and healthy workforce is helpful. And I would like to get your
views as to what role, if any, you think the United States
Government should play in making certain that all of our
workers have access to the best health care that is possible in
order to be competitive. So I hope that you would share those
things with me. I don't want to take the committee's time, but
I do hope that I do receive some very, very positive things
that you are doing.
Let me ask this as it relates to Korea. There are so many
reasons why we should support the free trade agreement with
Korea. Not only are they are our friends and, as people have
pointed out, a largest trading program, but they represent the
center of democracy in this part of the world. It is a part, I
think, about national security. We have had troops there since
I first went in 1950 to Korea, and they are still there after
60 years, and so, therefore, we do have a vested interest in
Korea.
I want to know whether anyone sitting at this table would
have supported an agreement with Korea that actually singled
out our automobile industry for exclusion, where they would
accept 6,000 cars and send over half a million cars. It is not
just automobiles in Detroit, it is the heart of American
manufacturing. Without the changes that I understand have been
made, would any of you have supported the Korea FTA? So I----
Mr. PAULSON. Excuse me. I would liked to answer you because
you did ask us a question.
Mr. RANGEL. I am waiting for an answer, Mr. Paulson.
Mr. PAULSON. Certainly.
The Korean FTA has more in it than simply automotives. The
NAM, National Association of Manufacturers, has consistently
said that an improvement to the Korean FTA in respect to the
automotive industry was needed, and as you have seen, the USTR
Kirk has done an excellent job of achieving this.
Mr. RANGEL. Mr. Paulson, that is a wonderful answer, and I
don't think anyone can challenge it, but my question to you is
that if these corrections had not been made in terms of the
barriers that Korea has put up to American-manufactured cars,
would you support that agreement, not the one that I am being
supportive of today?
Mr. PAULSON. I have to say that I was not particularly
privy to that.
Mr. RANGEL. Okay. You don't know. Okay.
Let me ask this, then, as it relates to Panama, because we
worked on all of these things, and so I am trying to shatter
the myth that one party is for trade, and the other party is
against trade. I think we have a great agreement with our
friends in Panama. But I ask the question would any of you
support the Panamanian FTA if you knew that they refused to
sign an agreement with us as it relates to them providing a tax
haven for billions of dollars from American taxpayers being
lost? Would you support the Panamanian agreement knowing this
and knowing that our government objected to their failure to
sign such a tax exchange--information exchange agreement? Would
you support that agreement knowing that it had this fault,
which I understand now, Mr. Paulson, has been corrected?
Mr. STALLMAN. Congressman Rangel, we would have. We view
trade agreements through the lens of--really two lenses: one,
what it does for U.S. agriculture; but then more importantly
what it does for the economies of the respective countries.
Because it is a very simple calculation. As economic growth
occurs, and as standards of living increase, that increases
opportunities to provide for food----
Mr. RANGEL. I understand that.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired, and at
this time I would recognize Mr. Brady for 5 minutes.
Mr. BRADY. First, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the
timeliness of this hearing. Trade has been locked away in a
closet for too long here in Congress. It is appropriate on the
day the President will address the Nation on the State of the
Union to focus on jobs and competitiveness that we are hearing
from leaders in manufacturing, in agriculture, in services, in
automobiles, real job creators who are telling us that trade
and these pending trade agreements are the answer, are one key
component, to creating new U.S. jobs and competitiveness, and
making the point, too, that clearly America is falling behind
our competitors, is costing us U.S. jobs, and, I think,
undermining the credibility as we go forward on the global
stage to level the playing field.
I credit the President and USTR for making a very solid
agreement even better and clearing the way for passage of that
agreement. I think it is important to make distinction between
improvement for the sake of passage versus improvement as an
excuse for further delays, which is what I see with the Panama
and Colombia agreements.
Clearly Panama, in the 4 years since the agreement has been
signed, has literally met every request that this Congress and
White House, frankly, could dream of, not only incorporating
the bipartisan May 10th agreement, but also passing tax and
labor laws to meet every request from the U.S. Government.
Panama is ready to go. We have the votes to pass it tomorrow.
It is time to open that market. No more excuses.
Colombia is the same. Colombia continues to make dramatic
improvements in human rights, labor rights, in protecting labor
leaders from violence, and protecting and creating rule of law
in their country. In fact, the independent organizations
looking at Colombia, the International Labor Organization,
recognizes the improvements Colombia has made by removing
Colombia from its labor watch list. The U.N. High Commission
for Human Rights has cited Colombia's improvements. The
European Union's latest report on human rights acknowledged the
evident reduction of cases of violence. And we have bipartisan
support from people like Senator Max Baucus, chairman of the
Senate Finance Committee.
Colombia is making remarkable progress, and I think the new
government is not a new opportunity for progress, but the
continuation of the same opportunity for progress and, unless
we move, the same opportunities for harm for our U.S. workers.
So I guess my question today with competitiveness as the
issue, from a jobs perspective, from a competitiveness
perspective, is it time, in your opinion, to move these three
pending agreements, and does the failure to move undermine our
competitiveness as a country? Mr. Paulson?
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you.
Yes, if we don't move, as I said previously, it shows the
world that we are not open for business in this country. But if
we do move, and we do it quickly and appropriately, we will see
that there will be more and more business that will come here
to the United States not just from these trade agreements, but
from our other trading partners.
Thank you.
Mr. STALLMAN. Absolutely we need to move forward. If we
don't, we will be at a competitive disadvantage.
Let me make one point about Colombia because I don't think
it has been talked about. People want to level the trade
playing field. Our Members want to do that. You hear that
continually. This Congress has passed the Andean Trade
Preferences Act and renewed it. That gives them access to our
markets. By them reducing tariffs when they already have access
to our markets, we are leveling the playing field, and that is
what the Colombia agreement is about for American agriculture.
Mr. BRADY. Two-way trade, not merely one-way trade.
Mr. STALLMAN. Absolutely.
Mr. BRADY. Mr. Ducker.
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir, Mr. Congressman, it is time to move.
We fly airplanes into all three of these countries. I have been
to Colombia several different times and note, as you do, the
improvements that have been made in that environment. And as my
colleague states, some of the tariffs that exist on American
exporters today into Colombia in particular would be eliminated
as a result of this agreement.
Others are moving rapidly to create their own agreements
with these countries, and I do believe it is urgent that we
move and pass these free trade agreements to the benefit of our
workers here.
Mr. BRADY. Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. TOPPETA. I agree. As I said in my testimony, we support
all three.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Biegun.
Mr. BIEGUN. Mr. Brady, we support all three agreements, and
we are confident that the committee will find a way to move
forward to get all three through.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Stark is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank the
panel for enlightening us today.
I would like to, as the chairman has, just go down the list
with you and say while I am encouraged by the idea of free
trade agreements, what are the pitfalls? What do we want to
watch out for? It can't be all 100 percent in our favor. Ford
Motor has an issue. I am sure that small manufacturers do. What
need we--you have all outlined for us the benefits. What, if
any, very quickly, are the dangers we have to watch out for?
Mr. PAULSON. Well, I think you just properly described the
free market, because there is always this situation that there
is a push-me, pull-you circumstance that occurs, and the cream
will rise to the top, and that will be us.
Mr. STARK. Ag?
Mr. STALLMAN. You always have to watch out for the details
of access basically, and I will give you an example with Korea.
Rice as a commodity.
Mr. STARK. That is important to California.
Mr. STALLMAN. That is why I mentioned it. That was taken
off the table during negotiations. The Koreans are extremely
sensitive about that. The reality is that is not going to be a
huge market for us. We have much better markets elsewhere. But
when you look at the package--and that is what we do as a
general farm organization--when you look at the package, it is
positive for U.S. agriculture.
Mr. STARK. Beef?
Mr. STALLMAN. The beef issue, we are getting beef back into
that market. We are still encouraging the Koreans to adhere to
international standards. They have continually said that when
their consumer confidence increases, they will. But beef is
flowing back into that market at a rapid rate from the U.S.
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir, Congressman, I think one of the
things that you have to be careful of in the trade agreements
is a balance, and striking the proper balance. That is why it
is a negotiation. Not everybody is going to win on every point,
but as long as the broader perspective is maintained and we get
good balance in the free trade agreements, then I think the
country is best served.
Mr. STARK. You are suggesting that we win in one free trade
agreement but maybe give up in the other, and the balance ends
up----
Mr. DUCKER. I am suggesting that in all of those free trade
agreements there is a balance in a number of different
technical points. So in one agreement there may be agricultural
provisions that need assistance; in others there may be service
agreements. But I am saying the balance on both sides.
Mr. STARK. Could you give me an example of a State law or
regulation that hurts the life insurance business? Specific?
Mr. TOPPETA. Sorry, Congressman? A State law in the U.S.?
Mr. STARK. No, no, in Korea or wherever.
Mr. TOPPETA. That hurts? Oh, yeah. I can give you lots of
examples of that. I think that in the current situation in
Korea, one of the things--we take for granted here in the U.S.
that you know what the rules are. You know what the law says.
You know what the regulations are.
In Korea, we are frequently subject to what I would call
``desk drawer'' rules, which means the regulator has got
something in his desk drawer, you don't know what it is, and at
the appropriate moment after you have done something, he pulls
it out and says, oh, by the way, this is the rule.
Notice and comment provisions, due process provisions are
extremely important. They are actually in this agreement, so I
think that is a plus for us. But right now there are a number
of these things which regulatory transparency is a big issue
for us in Korea.
The other thing I would say, you asked a question about
things to watch out for. I think the big thing to watch out for
in all agreements are the follow-throughs. I agree with Mike
that, you know, in any agreement you are going give something,
and you are going to get something, but once you get
commitments, you have to make sure that there is a follow-
through. Again, in the KORUS agreement we have established an
insurance working group between the two countries to work out
these differences.
Mr. STARK. Can their life insurance companies sell in our
country?
Mr. TOPPETA. Yes, they can under the agreement.
Mr. STARK. Thank you.
Mr. BIEGUN. Mr. Stark, in the automobile sector, tariffs
generally--except in exceptional cases, tariffs are not the
barrier to imports. It is the nontariff barriers, The
regulatory differences often created specifically to impede
imports. So you have to build in the market to that standard.
So in the FTAs that is the fine print that we really have to
spend a lot of time looking over.
Mr. STARK. You will have to explain to me later what a
third of a car is.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nunes is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. NUNES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I do want to remind the committee that it has
been 4 years these trade agreements have been pending, more or
less. We had President Bush, who was willing to sign free trade
agreements for the first 2 years. The last 2 years, we had
President Obama and the Democratic Congress, who for the most
part has said he supports moving these agreements; however, we
have not seen the agreements move. And despite the sluggishness
in our economy, despite all of these fine gentlemen here saying
they would benefit from these agreements, we still have yet to
see any real movement.
This President's National Export Initiative--and I know we
politicians love to come up with these wonderful names--in
2009, we had $1 trillion in total trade in this country. This
initiative set out by the President wants to double U.S.
exports. And I guess my question to the panel--and this is open
to anyone who wants to answer it--is this a reasonable
expectation to be able to double our exports in the near term,
to go from $1 trillion to $2 trillion? And how far down the
line would these three agreements get us? I guess we will go to
Mr. Paulson first.
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you.
I really do feel that the NEI is an achievable goal for our
country, and it also puts us into the position that we are
striving towards that goal instead of just letting things
happen as they may occur over time.
Mr. NUNES. But, Mr. Paulson, can we get there by not
passing trade agreements?
Mr. PAULSON. We must pass the trade agreements, and work
towards the trans-Pacific agreement, and work towards other
trade agreements, not just these three. We have to go beyond
that. You can see how other countries, like the cooperation of
the EU, is working to establish trade agreements. We have to do
the same type of work.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Stallman.
Mr. STALLMAN. Well, I don't think we can do it without
passing agreements and negotiating new agreements, reducing
tariff barriers and nontariff barriers. But I am encouraged. I
think we can accomplish the goal. Agriculture already has very
significant exports. But if you look at the numbers between
2010 and 2011, we are projecting basically a 20 percent
increase in agricultural exports, and as world demand
increases, I think that number will continue to go up. So if we
keep working at it, keep enforcing current trade agreements, I
think we can do it.
Mr. DUCKER. Congressman Nunes, the answer is unequivocally
yes, that we can achieve that initiative. If you look at the 5
years between 2003 and 2008, we increased our exports by 79
percent. The global economy is expanding. People want to do
business with the U.S. And I would also point out that during
that 5-year period, that we implemented free trade agreements
with 10 countries, and we also saw earlier agreements like
NAFTA attain full implementation.
So I think the lesson is we can do it, yes. We cannot do it
without free trade agreements and an opening up of our trade
platform.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. TOPPETA. Yes, I believe we can do it with the FTAs. I
think it is a matter of record that the first letter sent from
the President's Export Council to the President himself was in
support of the three FTAs. So I think the President's Export
Council believes that we need to get the free trade agreements
in order to do this.
The other point I would make is that I think you can't
really do it without services. And the reason I would emphasize
that is services are 75 percent of the U.S. GDP, and they are
40 percent of our exports. And I think that tells a big story.
There is a huge opportunity to increase our exports of
services.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Biegun.
Mr. BIEGUN. Yes, sir, I agree with what the other witnesses
have said, and I would add the emphasis of quality agreements.
So the renegotiated Korea Free Trade Agreement does offer us
this opportunity, in our estimation. But it is a total effort.
It is also enforcement. It is competitiveness of the economy.
And, frankly, the lion's share of the responsibility is ours,
as leaders in our companies, to be able to build the highest
quality, the most desirable products and get out there in the
world and sell them. And that is our job, and we are willing to
take that on.
Mr. NUNES. Mr. Stallman, I am going to submit a question
about nontariff barriers to trade specifically dealing with
agriculture. As you know, some agricultural products do very
well, especially when those countries need those products like
corn and wheat and other products. And then when it comes to
certain types of fruits and vegetables, they tend to put up
nontariff barriers to trade. So I will address that in writing.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you all for being here. I come from Ohio. We have
lost 400,000 jobs over the last 4 years in Ohio, many in
manufacturing, not all manufacturing.
But in your testimony, Mr. Paulson, you express a number of
different things, and one was frustration with this body, and
one was talking about the mythology of trade. I do want to
remind you that some of us up here have supported free trade.
Some of us have supported more trade and are just as
frustrated, but from a different perspective, as well. Let me
give that to all of you.
As part of the President's Export Council, as was just
mentioned--Mr. Reichert and I serve on that--a year ago the
President talked about doubling exports in the next 5 years.
This is the same President who, as a candidate in Ohio, less
than a year earlier campaigned in Ohio about repealing NAFTA.
Now, in Ohio, NAFTA means also trade with Canada, which has
created a whole lot of jobs for Ohioans. Now, that is a big
change, from repealing NAFTA to doubling exports, our largest
trading partner being Canada in Ohio, in the next 5 years.
In the fall of 2010, after the President, before the export
council, talked about doubling exports, we saw a record number
of advertising by a lot of different people who were antitrade,
including the Democrat Congressional Committee, Democratic
Governors Association, labor unions, millions and millions of
dollars. I had conversations with your association in Ohio,
your association in Ohio, the Chamber in Ohio, a number of
different folks who say trade is good, and not one, not one,
zero associations, zero employers, did anything to counter the
millions of dollars in negative advertising on trade.
And this has been building over years, and 2010 saw the
record. What I would say to all of them is if this is so good,
why aren't you countering to the American people, to the
Ohioans in this case, why trade is good? When you open a new
plant and say to me it is because of exports, why aren't you
calling the local TV stations then and saying these 100 jobs
are because of the trade agreement with CAFTA; these 25
additional jobs are because of what we are doing because of
NAFTA or whatever else it is?
There has never been an answer, yes, we have done that;
yes, we are educating the public. So my question for you, Mr.
Paulson, and for the entire panel is, number one, why are your
associations--I understand you as public companies may have
other things to do, but you are a board member of NAM--why
aren't you more engaged in communicating to the public the
benefits of trade? It is great that you are here today, but if
this is so good, why are all of these associations not doing
what the protectionist side does in saying this is good for the
American economy, this is good for the American worker, this
creates jobs? Why aren't you doing that?
And when you expand--because you all said if these three
trade agreements pass, we will have more jobs in America--are
you going to put out a press release saying that these jobs are
directly responsible to this trade agreement?
And number two, are you communicating with your employees
that trade is good?
I would like to hear from all of the gentlemen.
Mr. PAULSON. I will try to be quick. First of all, if you
go onto export.gov Web site, you will see that I am on it
promoting trade. On the U.S. Chamber Web site, Paulson
Manufacturing is listed as Faces of Trade for California. And
on NAM, we have been doing one heck of a job of trying to
communicate the advantages of trade.
Mr. TIBERI. Zero TV ads, sir. Nobody in downtown Columbus
is seeing it.
Mr. PAULSON. In Ohio, having just been there visiting my
customers, I went into one of my customers that works with me
over there. I sell to him my products, and he says to me 13 to
30 percent of the products I ship to him he reexports with
value-added products, sewn goods in that particular case. And
that fellow needs a new factory because he has no room in his
factory anymore because he has got so many people.
Mr. STALLMAN. We don't have the resources to do national TV
advertising campaigns, but we are very active in editorials,
press conferences, news releases, and not only at the national
level. That spreads down to our State and local levels. I
personally try to get editorials in major newspapers around the
country. So we have been very active. We have a complete
educational campaign called Trade Matters, which is once again
spread out around the country through our grass-roots network.
I think we are fully engaged. And I don't know what to say
about TV advertising given today's media and communications
systems as they exist. I am not sure that national TV
advertising necessarily is the sole answer to this educational
issue.
Chairman CAMP. The time has expired, but if the remaining
three would just give a quick answer, we will move on.
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir, I will be very quick.
We are committed to educating our workers and our
customers. Our Web site blogs extol the virtues of global
trade. Our relationship with the Commerce Department that has
been ongoing for many years, helps small and medium enterprises
to find new export markets. And our Faces of Trade program,
which was just mentioned, with the Chamber. So there are a
number of activities there. And even in our global advertising,
it takes a particularly global tone about trade and the
benefits of that to our viewers. But we don't do major campaign
ads about trade.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. TOPPETA. I would second what Mike has just said in
terms of what we have done. We have done internal communication
with our own employees.
But to your point, I certainly would concede that we could
do a better job of communicating with the public on these kinds
of issues.
Mr. BIEGUN. Congressman, we love trade. We sell trade. We
benefit from trade. When we launched our 2011 Ford Explorer,
the 2010 truck of the year, the central message was this
vehicle is going to be exported to 90 markets around the world.
It created 1,200 new jobs in a Chicago assembly plant, 600
supplier jobs in Indiana, Ohio and Michigan. And it is an
exciting opportunity for us, and as we see the successes from
this renegotiated Korea Free Trade Agreement, we are looking
forward to sharing those not only with the committee and the
Congress, but also with our partners in the UAW to show that
quality trade agreements can work for America.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. McDermott is recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have sat on this committee since 1991, beginning with
NAFTA and the World Trade Organization and China accession. I
have listened to panels like there over and over again, and I
have heard promises, and we saw side letters on NAFTA and other
things.
I want to ask a simple question of all five of you. Is
there any problem you have with taking the time to negotiate
labor and environmental provisions in these trade agreements?
Is that something that you think was a useful thing to do?
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you for the question. The NAM's point of
view is that social portions of the trade agreements should not
be part of the trade agreements, but should focus more on the
trade issues that are associated. But if I may please add in,
don't forget that our influences of working with these
countries on a business-to-business value or business-to-
business circumstance will have a huge change within these
countries over a period of time, because while you are our
Representatives, when we go into the field, we are the
representatives of the United States.
Mr. STALLMAN. We have much the same view, that trade
agreements need to be focused on economics because of the
benefits that that brings and also the increased standard of
living. The increased standard of living, you reduce political
strife and improve labor conditions. But we have accepted and
probably think it is a good idea that in agreements that
countries should state that they will adhere to international
standards and international conventions, which is the level at
which we think it is appropriate for labor and environmental
agreements to be included.
Mr. DUCKER. Very similarly, as I said a little bit earlier,
there should be balance in the trade agreements. If there is
time that needs to be taken to balance some of those
agreements, yes. But the bulk of the agreements should be on
the economic benefits of free trade on both sides. And so we
have had, as I think one of the Members pointed out, a 4-year
hiatus in terms of moving some of these agreements forward.
Mr. TOPPETA. I would echo what my colleagues have said. I
think again Mike is right. It is a question of balance. You do
have to address concerns about worker protection and
environment. The question for us would be how long does that
take to accomplish, and what is the balancing act in terms of
what may be lost in other areas during that process?
Mr. BIEGUN. We, too, support as my colleagues here on the
panel do, I want to single out the Congress for its ability to
achieve an agreement just a few years ago, a bipartisan
agreement with the administration and the Congress, to pursue
this exact angle. But I should also say that it is not by
virtue of agreements alone, but as a global company and for
reputational reasons, we also strive to provide those labor
protections and environmental standards on an equal basis
worldwide regardless of whether or not they were required in
the free trade agreement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It strikes me that none of you said we
should have just taken the Bush ``slam, bam, thank you, Ma'am''
agreements and pass them. You said you thought it was useful
that we waited and worked out some of these problems. Is that a
fair characterization? You all would have passed the Bush ones
as they came out of the White House without any consultation
with anybody in the Congress and passed them immediately? That
is basically what you would say, right?
Mr. PAULSON. I wouldn't want you to put words in my mouth,
but I would say that the agreements that were worked out with
the previous administration were certainly striving towards a
goal that would then come to this panel for review.
Mr. STALLMAN. We are on record as supporting those
agreements as passed, and we were involved in the negotiations
of those, working with our trade representative's office. And
when they were completed, and we did our analysis, we supported
them.
Mr. DUCKER. As did FedEx support those agreements in the
past. And I think there is a certain question of timing in
this. Many of the--it is 4 years hence now, and countries are
roaring ahead that are not the United States with free trade
agreements around the rest of the world.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I am going to interrupt because my time is
just about up. It strikes me that some people think that these
agreements for labor and environment on these are the only ones
they will ever be on, and that in the future they won't be
considered. But I don't hear anybody here saying that this is
of legitimate concern to have about every trade agreement, no
matter which ones we make in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to briefly echo
a comment Mr. Tiberi made regarding the communication at the
grass-roots level. I would have to say personally, also living
in the Ohio Valley, the business community in general, and NAM
specifically, were absent from the critical political
discussions.
The reason I bring that up is we get into this constant
battle--in fact, I was told once by a senior NAM staffer that
NAM is not a political organization, to which I responded, how
do you want to get your policy done?
That brings me to the crux of this. We have a much bigger
stake in these free trade agreements than simply doing
business, than simply creating jobs. There is a huge national
security and international security component to this,
particularly with the Latin American agreements with Colombia
and with Panama. When I think of Hugo Chavez aiding and
abetting terrorist activity in his own country, dealing with
direct threats to Colombia, as well as trying to destabilize
the Latin American republics in Central America; Evo Morales in
Bolivia; Rafael Correa in Ecuador, among others, dominate this
political landscape.
These trade agreements largely keep us out. And the reason
that I bring up the issue of communication, not preaching to
the choir, Web site to employees who obviously know that their
goods are going overseas doesn't tell the person one block
away. And I see this in my manufacturing-centric district all
the time.
Here is the real question: I was flabbergasted by the irony
a couple of years ago when labor leaders from Colombia came
here to meet with their brethren, labor leaders in the United
States, as well as with the then-majority leadership in the
House, pleading for the signature on the Colombia Free Trade
Agreement. And I guess the question that concerns me here is
they were turned down by the people that said they were
fighting for their interests, and it became a matter of raw
politics where in many ways I think we squandered a lot of
opportunity.
Here is my question: In light of this strategic interest
that spans not only our businesses, but our ability to protect
those and our friends, will the failure of these agreements
precipitate a longer and much bigger setback for the United
States? I open that to any participant.
Mr. STALLMAN. We think it will, because it will send a
message. It will send the wrong message, as my colleague says,
that we are not open for business. It will send the message
that, well, you may want to engage in negotiation with us, but
at the end of the day, once we agree that we have an agreement,
what are you going to do to pass it? Are we going to put our
gives on the table, if you will, out there where we have to
take political heat in terms of what the other countries are
thinking, and then the U.S. takes it back, and the agreements
are not passed? And when you are involved in trade negotiations
and know trade negotiators, that sends a real message.
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir, Congressman Davis. I would agree with
my colleagues on the open-and-ready-for-business piece is a
very important part of this. I have been to Geneva many times
meeting with the trade delegations of the WTO, and always I am
struck by the fact that they want American leadership in terms
of the negotiations and moving things forward. And I believe
establishing that leadership and reinvigorating our trade
agenda is very important for our country and the world writ
large.
Mr. DAVIS. Following on a point, FedEx is kind of at the
tip of the spear with where you take and pick up many of the
parcels that are in transit. Do you feel that this lack of
absence on our part of activating these free trade agreements
would, in fact, cause a significant setback to the larger
interests of the country besides business?
Mr. DUCKER. Yes, sir, I do. And I would point out that
several of my colleagues have talked about the global supply
chain. Today's business has changed so radically. Really if you
have the Internet and FedEx to deliver to almost anywhere in
the world, you can be in business. That helps small business.
That helps innovation. That helps entrepreneurship. And frankly
speaking, removing trade barriers, whether they are tariff or
nontariff, around the world puts people in business. And I
think it is very helpful to move the trade agenda forward on a
positive basis.
Mr. DAVIS. Your actuarial analysis, Mr. Toppeta.
Mr. TOPPETA. What I would say is this: The country of these
three that I know the best is Korea. I have been working with
the Korean market for the last 20 years, and that is a
strategically very important country for the United States. I
don't think there is anybody who would debate that. I can tell
you that our friends in Korea, the Korean Government, will be
very disappointed, very disappointed, if we can't make this
free trade agreement happen, and I think that will hurt us.
Mr. BIEGUN. Certainly we are not oblivious to the
geopolitical considerations in these free trade agreements. All
three countries are good friends of the United States of
America, and every effort should be made to find a way forward.
But I am also encouraged that, in fact, we are on the cusp of
moving forward with one of the agreements, the Korean Free
Trade Agreement, that through a good process in this committee
has produced a good outcome. So we want to encourage the
committee along these lines. We think that it produces a good
outcome.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Lewis from Georgia is recognized.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I thank
the members of the panel for being here.
Mr. Biegun, I have two brothers that worked for Ford for
many, many years in Detroit, hosts of other relatives, and many
are retired. I want to thank you for your leadership of Ford
and for all that you do. But I want to ask you a simple
question. Do you think it is more important to rush to get an
agreement signed into law, or is it better to take our time and
try to get it right?
Mr. BIEGUN. Thank you, Mr. Lewis, and thank you for your
brothers' service to the company.
Obviously our track record speaks for itself. We fought for
3 years to get the Korea Free Trade Agreement right, and we
felt that was critically important to the people of Michigan
and to the people of the Ford Motor Company on a global basis,
and also to the principle of free trade. Free trade agreements
should open trade between markets.
But again, as I said a moment ago, we are quite encouraged
by the outcome, that through a thorough effort, through the
leadership of the members of this committee, we got to that
point.
So, yes, we should get them right. There is a balance in
getting them right, and getting them through, and getting them
on a timely basis, but the committee in the recent past has, I
think, demonstrated the right formula for that, and I encourage
that to continue.
Mr. LEWIS. I want to go back for a moment to the question
that Mr. McDermott raised. Do you think that--and I was
somewhat not necessarily disturbed, but the way some of you
responded. You are not suggesting that we have a double
standard when it comes to trade; that we have one standard in
America and one standard abroad? Do you believe or feel that
trade agreements should be a reflection of the core values that
we have as a Nation and as a people?
Mr. PAULSON. I would like to answer that in the sense of
that as these trade agreements have lingered and laid about, we
have had a lot of opportunities to second-guess the hard work
that was put in to develop these.
I suggest that the stakeholders such as yourself, Mr.
Lewis, would be involved with the new trade agreement formation
right at the beginning so that you can form your ideas and
bring those in with our U.S. Trade Representative so he knows
how to focus his direction, and not look back so much on we
could have, would have, should have. Let us move forward with
new ideas.
Mr. LEVIN. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. LEWIS. Yes.
Mr. LEVIN. I just want to tell you, Mr. Paulson, we
actively engaged the USTR on these issues in the previous
administration, and there was simply a disagreement whether
core labor standards and international environmental standards
should be in trade agreements.
It wasn't the lack of engagement on our part, and as soon
as we had the power to make it happen, it happened. It is true
in Peru, and it is true in Korea. The previous administration
and the Korean Government would simply not negotiate changes to
open up their market, the most closed automotive market in the
world.
We were engaged endlessly, as we have been relating to
conditions in Colombia. It is not a lack of engagement; it was
a lack of willingness on the part of the previous
administration to tackle these issues. The Korean Minister told
Mr. Rangel and me, we will not discuss. Then we had a new
administration that said, in order for that agreement to move,
you have to open up your market and have two-way trade. And if
you gentlemen believe in two-way trade, and I hope you do, and
standards as reflecting American values, remember we have been
trying to bring that about. With Korea it finally, I think, is
happening. And to simply say you balance, we don't want to
support imbalanced trade agreements in terms of two-way trade
or in terms of basic international standards on worker rights
and the environment.
Mr. BRADY. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. LEWIS. Yes.
Mr. BRADY. I was just going to make a point that I really
think the breakthroughs on these two agreements, Panama and
Colombia, came several years ago when Republicans and Democrats
in Congress sat down together and came forward with a May 10th
agreement that addressed issues like labor rights, environment.
And the result, Colombia has adopted eight of the ILO
conventions, six more than the United States itself has
adopted.
Mr. LEWIS. I take back my time. And----
Chairman CAMP. The time has expired.
Mr. LEVIN. That is just not----
Chairman CAMP. I would just say I am not sure that the
characterization of the back and forth is really particularly
helpful to the debate here, because, as Mr. Brady pointed out,
there is a May 10th agreement. And frankly, the real effort on
Korea occurred after November, the intense discussions. The
President made the announcement in July or June, but the real
effort occurred after November.
But at this time I would yield to Mr. Reichert for 5
minutes.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will just mention briefly that I also am from the State
of Washington, as is Mr. McDermott. Unlike Mr. McDermott,
however, I have only been on this committee for 2 years, and I
have been waiting for a hearing on trade agreements.
I am pleased to have you here today, and excited about
having our first trade hearing, and am looking forward to
Korea, Colombia and Panama all being brought to the House floor
for our votes.
As you can see it, if we work together, we can get this
done. And you have a responsibility, as has been mentioned, and
each of us here at the dais have our responsibilities, and
hopefully together, Democrats, Republicans and the community in
the business world out there across the country, can all work
together to accomplish our goals of creating more jobs and
spurring this economy on.
And one statistic that I want to refer to that was
mentioned in the panel is this doubling export initiative. As
was mentioned, Mr. Tiberi and myself are members of the
President's Export Commission. We want to double exports, but
at the same time if you look at the figures, the last time we
did that was between 1995 and 2007, and, again, there were nine
trade agreements that were passed during that period of time, I
think, that made that possible. So I think it is absolutely
critical, and I think everyone in the hearing today and
everyone in this room and everyone of us sitting here knows it
is absolutely critical, that we pass these agreements, we have
fair agreements and move forward with these agreements to
create jobs. Not only at an economic level is it important, but
also as we look at our security across the world.
So I really want to focus on what we lose as we have
languished somewhat. And specific to the Korean agreement, we
know that the EU and Korea has an agreement that will take
effect on July 1st, and here we sit. If you could explain--and
any one of the panel members, please--what will the losses be
as you look forward to our inability to--and what have your
losses been--in jobs, in dollars, in the economy here in the
United States as we have not been able to pass these
agreements, and other countries have moved forward with their
agreements, and we are losing market share? Mr. Ducker or
anyone who would like to respond to that.
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you.
The International Trade Commission has estimated for the 3
agreements, 13 billion in new U.S. exports. So if we divide
that, considering that Korea is the largest of these, there
will be a huge amount of loss and jobs that will occur. It also
gives an opportunity in the case of the EU to enter in in the
sense of that--and I often use standards, and actually
standards for employees' safety and health. They will bring in
these EU standards, which are in my business, very critical,
and then we will be having to fight against those standards
versus, for example, the steel industry that is begging for our
products in Korea. So it will be a change of focus aimed at
looking towards Europe as opposed to looking towards the United
States.
Mr. REICHERT. Mr. Ducker, you mentioned the Chamber of
Commerce numbers of losing 380,000 jobs and $40 billion worth
of business. Specifically how does that affect us in a negative
way as we look forward into the future as these agreements are
not made and other countries are moving forward?
Mr. DUCKER. That is a widely used model, but the chamber
did, in fact, estimate 380,000 jobs, 40 billion lost. And
frankly we operate in a fiercely competitive world, and the
industrial strength of other countries is growing, and they are
aggressively pursuing trade agreements to expand to the
economic benefit of their workers and their populations, the
benefits of free trade.
Mr. REICHERT. So it means fewer products sold across the
country because other countries are selling their products, and
we can't sell the cars, we can't sell----
Mr. DUCKER. Absolutely, sir. It is, as I said, fiercely
competitive, and American products do have alternatives
manufactured in other places. And a lot of what has been
discussed in terms of speed in these trade agreements, FedEx is
in the speed and reliability business. So we think there has to
be balance, but due speed with passing free trade agreements
and moving the trade agenda forward because others are not
standing still.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
holding this hearing, and I look forward to many more hearings
on trade policy as we go forward.
Over the past 2 years, the Secretary of State, Hillary
Clinton, has traveled around the globe and based our foreign
policy on three pillars: diplomacy, developmental aid and
defense. It has now become glaringly apparent that we are
missing something, and it is a trade agenda, and the failure to
move forward on these three agreements puts American prestige,
American leverage, American credibility at stake, at risk. And
nothing short of American competitiveness is really the issue
here.
Now, speaking of American competitiveness, I want to drill
down to something earlier, because we need to make sure that
everybody is included in this in this country in this equation,
which means rural America. Mr. Stallman, you mentioned earlier
some numbers, and you mentioned the fact that with the $3
billion in exports in agricultural trade, we would see perhaps
27,000 new jobs created as a result of that. Now, I take it
those are direct jobs, jobs that are directly involved in the
production of commodities, the shipment of commodities and so
forth.
But if you drill down even further and take a look at the
indirect jobs, take every small community. I live in Louisiana,
rural Louisiana. I have got rice farmers, soybeans. Take a
community like Crowley, Louisiana, or Abbeville, Louisiana,
very dependent on agriculture and agricultural exports for the
entire economy of that small town. You are talking about jobs,
you know, convenience stores, dentists' offices, small rural
hospitals. Do you have a sense of what number of indirect jobs
we would see either protected or created as a result of just
doing these three free trade agreements?
Mr. STALLMAN. We have not analyzed that to give a specific
number, but I think it is obvious. I drive through Crowley,
Louisiana, at least twice a year. And, for instance, just take
rice; the local rice dryer that employs some people, the
equipment dealer, the suppliers. If you don't have the ability
to export in this case rice specifically, which we export
roughly half of our rice in this country every year, all of a
sudden you don't have those jobs, you don't have that business.
So it is a direct impact on rural communities in America. And
you can just spread that same principle across all of the
production areas of agriculture.
Mr. BOUSTANY. So it is critically important that we make
the case that job growth is linked to exports. And the case can
be easily made, I think, in rural America, and as we try to
build consensus to move forward on these trade agreements and
future trade agreements, we have to get the American people on
board with this. And I think focusing on rural America,
focusing on small business development is going to be critical
in this.
I don't think there is any way we can actually double
exports in the time period that the President is describing,
the 5-year time period, unless we include small businesses and
medium-sized businesses and their connection to the modern
supply chain. And I have seen some of the figures related to
all three of these agreements where a lot of the exports will
be on the part of small- and medium-sized firms, and I would
welcome any of you to comment on that.
Mr. DUCKER. Congressman Boustany, I would just give you one
small example, if I could. And I couldn't agree with you more.
Small and medium enterprises are going to drive a large part of
that.
I would just talk for a moment about the Memphis hub, and
it is like a small city at night, perhaps 10,000 employees
working in one small area at night. And U.S. exports are one of
the fastest-growing parts of our business. But Memphis is the
number one cargo airport in the world, and Memphis is not the
number one large-sized city in the world. We outpunch our
weight in the global economy because of exports and connecting
the world with what we deliver. And the benefits of that flow
through, as you say, to the dentists' offices, to the grocer
and to many parts of the economy. So that is one small part
where facilitating trade and facilitating global markets to
small and medium enterprises has a dramatic impact locally.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Neal is recognized.
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
panelists as well.
I think the argument that is being offered here is that
sometimes to subordinate human rights concerns and others in
terms of getting some sort of economic liberalism a foothold,
that that in turn will bring about greater demand in heretofore
closed societies for more free choice not only in the
marketplace, but, just as importantly, in the polling place and
other endeavors.
Now, I think that it bears the reminder, however, that with
NAFTA and China, that we were instructed that they could not be
amended. I think that is a part of the conflict here today. We
were instructed that they could not be amended, that it was all
or nothing. And here comes the Peruvian bilateral in which we
demonstrated that you could, in fact, amend that agreement,
which I supported for the purpose of including human rights,
the right to organize, and environmental concerns, and the
Peruvian Government adopted it with little fanfare.
Now, Mr. Toppeta, I have been very supportive of your
industry's efforts, as you know, over the years to expand
globally, but I think as part of this discussion, there ought
to be at least some reasonable discourse about the following
idea. It has been difficult, has it not, for your industry in
China? That is a fair assessment, isn't it?
Mr. TOPPETA. Yeah, I think that is a fair assessment, sure.
Mr. NEAL. And the idea of a forced partnership in a
sovereign capitalist nation where you can never control more
than 49 percent of your industry, and they really make a lot of
basic decisions. And, in fact, without saying so, there is one
of your large competitors that has decided to back away in
recent weeks.
How do we get their attention if we don't make the argument
here that economic liberalism, including those basic tenets of
the Peruvian agreement, the right to organize, campaign for
human rights and environmental concerns--how do we get them to
move the argument forward?
Mr. TOPPETA. Look, it is a great question. I am not sure
that I have the answer to it, Congressman. I think that in each
of these cases, we fully understand the need to address a
number of different concerns. The issue that presents itself is
can you solve all of the problems in one trade agreement, and
if you attempt to do that, you probably wouldn't get the trade
agreement.
And with all due respect, I think we have to recognize as a
country that these are negotiations, these are negotiations,
and negotiating with a country like Peru may not be the same as
negotiating with a country like China. So I think there are
difficulties in a number of these markets. We are correcting, I
think, some of them in some of our agreements, but we are
certainly not getting at all of the issues. The question for me
is do you want to make some progress with the prospect of
making more later?
Mr. NEAL. Fair enough. But it also, I think, notes
reminding ourselves that in Panama, the reason that the
Panamanian bilateral did not move forward is because the Bush
administration took the position that I believe the speaker of
their assembly had been involved in the murder of an American
soldier, I believe, the result of which was it was the Bush
administration that pulled back the Panamanian bilateral. It
wasn't the slowness of this committee, whether our Republican
friends were in the majority or we were in the majority. That
was an administration position not to submit that proposal, I
believe.
Mr. TOPPETA. The only thing I can say about that is I am
not here certainly and my company is not here blaming anybody.
What we are talking about is let us move forward. Let us move
forward. We have three good agreements. We think we should move
forward on those, and we think it would be beneficial for the
country to move forward on those.
Mr. NEAL. The last point that I will make is this. China
has not proved to be quite what the industry assumed that it
would be, has it?
Mr. TOPPETA. I think China has a lot of challenges, and it
is not alone in that. It is an attractive market for a lot of
people because of its size, because of its growth, but it does
present difficulties, no doubt about it.
Mr. NEAL. One last comment, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. The committee needs to move forward.
Mr. NEAL. If we don't pursue this here, then your job
becomes more difficult, isn't that so, by pushing them?
Mr. TOPPETA. Our job is difficult already. There is no
doubt about that.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
And I would just say that the ILO core labor rights found in
the Panama agreement are also the exact same language found in
the Korea and Colombia agreements as well.
Mr. NEAL. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Yes.
Mr. NEAL. That wasn't the point that I tried to make. The
point that I tried to make, it was the Bush Administration that
pulled back on Panama; isn't that true?
Chairman CAMP. I think that this idea of which
Administration did what isn't particularly productive. I think
we can find certainly gaps in both--certainly the Bush and
Obama Administration on these issues. And I just think we are
here to talk about what is before us, which is how do we move
forward now on these agreements.
Mr. NEAL. I agree, Mr. Chairman. The point that I am making
is that there has been some testimony or some inquiry this
morning from members of the panel that have suggested that
there was foot dragging on the part of the minority with some
of these bilateral proposals, and I think that the point that I
tried to make, which I assume is based on fact here, and that
is that it was the Bush administration that pulled back----
Chairman CAMP. The fact is we have had no hearings on trade
over the last 2 years, and that is not an Administration issue;
that is a committee issue. I wish we had. We didn't. We are
trying to have hearings now. I think these are productive
discussions. But it really is Mr. Smith's time, and you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the panel, thank
you for sharing your expertise and insight.
Obviously we are talking about opportunities for the future
here, and I am intrigued as we do have this discussion. And I
don't want to repeat what my colleagues have said about losing
market share to our competitors around the world, but we do
know that it is happening.
Mr. Stallman, if you could reflect a little bit for
agriculture on the nontariff trade barriers and how these trade
agreements will help address that.
Mr. STALLMAN. A lot of the problems with agricultural
trade, as in other industry sectors, are the nontariff
barriers. For agriculture particularly you have the sanitary
and phytosanitary barriers. In many cases a bilateral agreement
is much more able to address those issues between two countries
in terms of health standards, food safety standards, those
kinds of things, than depending on the WTO. So in that respect
many times in bilaterals you can more directly address those
issues than you can with the international agreements.
Mr. SMITH. Anyone else wishing to respond?
Mr. DUCKER. Well, I am just going to add a comment that
many of the provisions in these FTAs level the playing field.
And if you are in our business, you compete against non-U.S.
large companies which don't operate under the some of the same
provisions. But these trade agreements prevent cross-
subsidization by government-owned and -assisted competitors.
They define contours of postal monopolies or fees that can be
assessed to serve markets. They provide expedited customs
procedures. It really simplifies and codifies doing business in
many of the foreign countries, and that is a great benefit of
the FTAs.
Mr. SMITH. Mr. Biegun.
Mr. BIEGUN. Mr. Smith, in the case of the Korea Free Trade
Agreement, in the renegotiated text, it is some of the most
far-reaching effort we have seen in free trade agreements to
create a level playing field on standards. We are now expecting
adequate notice in advance of new regulations, transparency in
how those regulations are implemented, and there are
enforcement mechanisms in the FTA that will be meaningful if
those regulations are used simply to exclude imports. So we are
encouraged that with the shoulder to the wheel, we can get
agreements like this that will open the market.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Becerra is recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you very much for your testimony and your
work.
I would like to just begin by acknowledging that I don't
think there is an American that wouldn't believe that trade is
essential for us to continue to be a growing and vibrant
economy. What makes us strong is the fact that not only do we
sell to Americans, but we sell to everybody in the world, and
everyone loves American products. In fact, everyone loves
America, and that is why so many people wish to come to this
country as well. So our brand is good not just in terms of our
product, it is good in terms of our country and people wanting
to be here.
The difficulty I think we get into is we try to ignore that
trade causes consequences, and they are not always the
greatest. And Mr. Tiberi tried to point that out in terms of
Ohio. I can point it out in terms of southern California, where
we depend so dramatically on trade because we have the largest
ports in the Nation right there in Los Angeles. But to the
degree that we try to make it sound like every trade deal is a
good trade deal regardless of what it says, that is where we
lose, I think. That is where we lose Americans. So when they
hear that in 2009 we got to sell to Koreans 6,000 American
vehicles, yet they got to sell to us--in other words, they
exported to us, we imported from them and bought 476,000
vehicles, they don't need to have degrees in rocket science or
in trade to know that something is wrong. And they just simply
want to know that it will be level trade, that it will be a
fair deal for Americans.
When you take a look at these deals, whether it was the
situation for the auto industry with regard to Korea or, as we
pointed out, the difficulties with Panama being a tax haven,
there are reasons why some of these deals haven't gone through
as quickly as we might like. But let us not just say willy-
nilly we must have a trade deal, because a bad trade deal has
major consequences. And if you think about our recent past in
the last decade or so, American multinational companies have
reduced the size of their domestic workforce by about 1,900,000
Americans, yet their foreign employment has gone up by 2.4
million in that same time. Americans aren't dumb. They see that
we are exporting as many U.S. jobs to places as we are
products, and what they want to know is that as we export those
products, we want Mr. Paulson and his company and everybody
else to continue to create jobs here because you are exporting
more.
And so I think what is important to remember is that we are
trying to make sure that this is a good deal, not just a trade
deal, and if we do that right--well, not just for one industry,
but for every industry.
Now, I have a question for all of you gentlemen. If you
could just give me a quick answer. Currency manipulation. We
have heard a lot about it. We know some countries devalue their
currency. That makes their products cheaper to buy. It also
makes our products more expensive to buy because it makes the
U.S. currency look like it is valued at a higher price than it
should be. Do you believe that we should tackle the issue of
currency manipulation? And obviously the focus has been on
China. But do you believe we should address the issue of
currency manipulation now?
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you.
I do not----
Mr. BECERRA. Just a quick yes or no, if you could. I tried
to make it a very direct question because I know that we could
go into that forever, but I am going to lose time, and I want
to get back to the trade deals.
Mr. PAULSON. I don't think we should address the currency
manipulation within the trade agreement.
Mr. BECERRA. And I don't mean within the trade agreement; I
mean just address it generally as quickly as we can.
Mr. PAULSON. Yes.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you.
Mr. Stallman.
Mr. STALLMAN. Not in trade agreements, but in the context
of international agreements with our countries.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you.
Mr. Ducker.
Mr. DUCKER. I would agree with Bob. I mean, that is just
one of many issues.
Mr. BECERRA. Yeah. And by the way, I am not asking that we
address the currency issue in these trade deals. I am just
asking if we should tackle that as an issue of importance to
American consumers.
Mr. TOPPETA. I would agree with the other panelists.
Completely agree.
Mr. BECERRA. I know the estimates are out there that we
lose somewhere between a half a million to 1.5 million jobs
because of this currency manipulation that goes on throughout
the country, so I hope we can deal with it and deal with it
immediately.
I have one final question I would like to ask. Mr. Toppeta
was extremely virtuous a moment ago in responding to some
questions by Mr. Levin. You mentioned that even if these trade
deals had left out your industry and your company, that you
think that we might still want to go forward and approve these
deals.
Now, we are going to probably, I hope soon, in this
committee and in this Congress deal with the issue of tax
reform. And I would like to know if you would like to be as
noble as well with regard to tax reform and virtuous so that if
tax reform occurs, and we by chance don't deal with your
particular industry or company, that you believe that we should
still do the tax reform if we don't tackle the issues that are
most important to your company and to your industry. I will try
to leave it brief. Now my time is expiring, so if I could just
get a quick yes or no from the panel.
Mr. TOPPETA. I will say that one is way beyond my
competence. So I have no answer for you.
Mr. PAULSON. I believe tax reform is important for
manufacturers.
Mr. STALLMAN. Our policy indicates we should work on tax
reform, but we will wait to see the details.
Mr. BECERRA. I see you all tap dancing very, very well.
Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Has everyone had a chance?
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Ducker and Mr. Biegun.
Mr. DUCKER. I was just going to say, yes, I think tax
reform is important in many different aspects. But corporate
taxes are among some of the highest that we deal with in the
world and--so, yes, we should deal with tax reform.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you.
Mr. Biegun.
Mr. BIEGUN. We will be here.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Buchanan is recognized.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing today.
As we work to get our ailing economy back on track, I
believe it is crucial that we work to expand our exports. I am
pleased that the administration is pushing harder, appears to
be pushing hard, to get the Korean agreement done as well as
the others that we are working on.
But I guess this is to all of the panelists. Last year the
President stated that he wanted to double U.S. exports by 2014.
I support this goal. Would you agree that enacting these three
trade agreements is an important first step in reaching that
goal?
Mr. PAULSON. It certainly is an important first step, but
we also have to say that the U.S. manufacturing base needs to
become fully engaged with not just the trade agreements, but
also with improvements to financing for us and improvements to
taxes.
Mr. STALLMAN. Yes, passing these agreements is essential as
a first step. We need to continue to focus on enforcement and
continue to negotiate other agreements to further open up
markets.
Mr. DUCKER. Every long journey begins with a first step,
and this is a darn good one, and we are strongly encouraging
that. But we need to move forward after the passage of these
into other very important markets.
Mr. TOPPETA. I would agree with that.
Mr. BIEGUN. And I would just like to repeat what I said
earlier, that we bear responsibility, too. It is not just the
policies of the government, but it is the job of our companies
to make these work, and we look forward to doing so.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you.
Mr. Stallman, my State that I represent in terms of my
district is in Florida, but looking at Florida in general, we
have a big area of agriculture, citrus, cattle. How do these
trade agreements affect the State of Florida, in your opinion?
And I would be interested in anybody else's comments as it
relates to that.
Mr. STALLMAN. Well, I don't have the State-by-State
breakdowns in terms of benefits, but in general all agriculture
will benefit from these agreements based on the opening of
markets. We know beef in particular, which I am a little more
familiar with, these agreements--but the enforcement of current
agreements, the work with--the work that we are doing to open
up markets now in China and Japan and keep the market for beef
in Taiwan, all of those things will be beneficial to beef
specifically. But in general these agreements are what is
necessary to improve agricultural market access for our
products.
Mr. DUCKER. I cannot speak specifically to the agricultural
aspects, but I would point out that we have a very large
international hub in Miami which serves most all of Latin
America, and trade with Latin America certainly benefits the
area in and around Miami and all the catchment areas that that
Miami hub services.
Mr. TOPPETA. I would say something similar. I cannot give
you an agricultural angle on this, but for us, we have a large
financial center in the State of Florida, and there is no
question that there are a lot of jobs sustained and created in
that area because of this. It is a finance center for us.
Mr. BIEGUN. We have Ford stores across the great State of
Florida, and our dealer partners in your State benefit as we do
when the company is more prosperous and successful. They have
been having a very good year, and we look forward to working
with them to have more good years. Corporate health will
definitely be improved by the ability to export our vehicles
around the world.
Mr. BUCHANAN. I guess the other just general question is
this thing has dragged on. I have been here 4 years and have
been talking about it for 4 years, these trade agreements. It
seems like it is a big disadvantage to our companies compared
to other people that are doing business on a partnership with
these countries. What are your thoughts on that? My sense is we
are losing ground and losing jobs in America.
Mr. PAULSON. I would like to say if we put ourselves in the
perspective of being in Colombia, and this was a promise, a
golden promise, that was given to the Colombian people, and
they had to make the changes, and then every day that this
drags on, over in Venezuela somebody is laughing. And I can
hear him all the way, sitting here.
Mr. BIEGUN. Mr. Buchanan, in the case of Korea, the good
news is that while the Koreans are negotiating free trade
agreements with a number of other countries, Canada, Australia
and Europe, none of those agreements have been completed either
precisely because of the same issues that held ours up, because
their market was closed to imported automobiles. Should the
committee be able to move with some alacrity on the
renegotiated free trade agreement, it will be timed so that we
should not lose any ground in relation to other countries. But
it is important that that deal come before the committee and
get approved by the end of the summer.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lee is recognized.
Mr. LEE. Thank you. And I appreciate all the speakers being
here today.
I know a lot of the questions have been brought up, but the
positive theme that I keep hearing here is that trade is a good
thing; that these three trade agreements at the end of the day
will do what the American people are demanding out of Congress,
help us create an environment where we can start employing
American workers again. It is very simple.
And for my colleagues, as you know, I spent my entire
career in manufacturing up until 2009, so I am a huge advocate.
We exported products to all over the world, including South
Korea, and I am truly a proponent.
And ironically we have the State of the Union this evening,
and I am sure we all want the President to talk about economic
issues, talk about putting people back to work. One thing I
learned from my father, however, was that it is your report
card that counts at the end of the day, and it is easy to give
lip service to the fact that we want to say we want to double
exports over the next 5 years. However, unless you put tangible
items into place, in this case free trade agreements, will have
a significant impact.
It is known by experts and obviously by this panel here we
can start doing the right thing, but we are out of time. And to
have these trade agreements that have sat on the shelf here for
the last several years in Congress and had inaction, and the
President talk about this for 2 years and move none of these
forward, I think it is very hard for us to look at the American
people. We are not doing our job.
Again, I hope tonight we are going to hear a different
story from him, and that we here in this committee--there were
several opportunities over the last few years for this issue to
be debated if there had been concerns so that we could help
push this along. But now at the 11th hour, trying to slow this
up is reckless, and the American people shouldn't put up with
it.
We need to start moving forward on trade. There is nothing
here that I've heard today that would stop us from doing what,
again, American people want, allow them an opportunity to make
a good living and take care of their family.
So with that I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Blumenauer is recognized.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess I would like to focus for a moment on the role
agriculture will play in our opportunities going forward. And I
appreciate, Mr. Stallman, your being here and your testimony.
If my Republican friends are serious about addressing spending
and the deficit, and I think they are, we are going to have to
deal with the rather expensive support that we provide to
agriculture in this country. I want to be clear that I am not
referring to assistance that is not trade-distorting. I am not
talking about marketing; I am not talking about paying farmers
to help them comply with clean water and other environmental
requirements, marketing. These are areas, research and
marketing, I think it is legitimate for us to help and in some
cases maybe do more.
But since I have been in Congress and on this committee,
and before that, trying to work to move forward with a
bipartisan trade agenda, I have watched as our agricultural
subsidies got in the way of moving these programs forward. I
watched how a tiny loosening of sugar subsidies was a serious
problem with CAFTA. We had problems with our Australian
agreement because of sugar again and beef restrictions where we
just simply were not going to allow free trade to operate. More
recently we are paying--the American taxpayers are paying
Brazil $143.3 million a year because of our lavish cotton
subsidies, which are illegal under our agreements, in order to
forestall retaliatory actions for intellectual property and
other goods that would have been close to a billion dollars. We
are going to pay that every year.
I am very interested in wondering if the panel thinks that
we need to continue these agricultural subsidies. Can American
farmers compete in a global market without lavish subsidies? I
would start, Mr. Paulson, with the National Association of
Manufacturers. Do you support reforming our foreign policy to
reduce costs and to avoid these international trade
complications?
Mr. PAULSON. Since I am a manufacturer and have been
focused on that my whole life, I really do have to pass on this
question.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. I would respectfully request that maybe you
check back, because you as a manufacturer could be hit because
of retaliatory actions when we violate our WTO requirements.
And as I mentioned, these are things that have gotten in the
way of other trade agreements.
Mr. PAULSON. I certainly believe that you have brought up a
very important point. I am not trying to say anything about
that. But I will say that it is just one that I am not well
prepared to answer.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. I am just requesting that maybe you could
check and find out what the association's position is and maybe
make that part of the record?
Mr. PAULSON. Certainly.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Mr. Ducker, FedEx, do you have any thoughts
about potential retaliation because of lavish foreign
subsidies?
Mr. DUCKER. Having spent most of all of my life in the
services industry, I am going to refer this to Bob, who has
much greater expertise in this area than I.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Would you mind if lavish farm subsidies
resulted in retaliatory trade actions that affected FedEx?
Would that get your attention?
Mr. DUCKER. If people aren't living up to their agreements,
and there are retaliatory measures, I think we should live up
to the agreements that we have--that we have signed.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Like Brazil and cotton?
Well, Mr. Stallman, I don't want the time to run out
without turning to you. I am wondering if the Farm Bureau feels
that we need to have the current level of subsidies for our
agricultural products to compete internationally, like, for
example, the illegal cotton subsidies that we are now paying
Brazilian farmers to avoid Mr. Ducker and Mr. Paulson having
retaliation. What is your feeling on that?
Mr. STALLMAN. Yeah, a couple of quick points, Congressman
Blumenauer. First, with respect to the degree of subsidies we
have as you designate them being lavish, had we reduced our
entire Federal budget to the extent to which those payments had
been reduced over the course of this last farm bill, we would
not be talking about budget deficits in this country if that
same percentage reduction basically occurred across the board.
Secondly, with respect to the Brazilian cotton agreement,
that $143 million first is not going directly to Brazilian
farmers. The second point is that was a negotiated agreement, a
temporary agreement, if you will, while the Brazilians are
waiting to see what we do in the context of the negotiation of
the 2012 farm bill and in terms of nontrade distorting, the
direct payment component in the Title I of the farm bill is
considered to be green-boxed under WTO trade rules.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Do you feel that American agriculture can--
--
Mr. BRADY. [Presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Blumenauer. Mr.
Blumenauer, all time has expired.
The chair recognizes Ms. Jenkins for 5 minutes.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Agriculture is obviously important to the great State of
Kansas in my district. Back in 2009, experts in ag products
from our State, they valued the exports at more than $4.7
billion. The pending free trade agreements are especially
important to our farmers, who traditionally lead the Nation in
wheat production. Kansans know the importance of international
trade in these markets. In 2007 and 2008, the U.S. wheat
industry dominated the Colombian wheat market with almost 70
percent of the market share. It was valued at $330 million.
So delaying the Colombian Free Trade Agreement has already
hurt Kansas and American farmers. While the U.S. waited,
Argentina and Canada began their own negotiations. And, of
course, by 2009-2010, the U.S. wheat industry's market share
had fallen to 46 percent, a 24 percent loss. U.S. Wheat
Associates estimate that if the Colombian Free Trade Agreement
is not signed, U.S. wheat producers will lose up to $100
million per year.
So considering the impact on the wheat industry alone,
could you all remind us what the economic impact on your
business or industry will be if we fail to implement the three
free trade agreements?
Mr. STALLMAN. Well, I think, if I understood the question,
it was broader, it was beyond agriculture that----
Ms. JENKINS. Yes, I would like to hear from each one of
you.
Mr. PAULSON. Excuse me. I thought that you were just
talking in agriculture for that. So if we don't get these free
trade agreements through, naturally those are estimates that
are how much loss will be made over a period of time and the
number of jobs. We are using again the International Trade
Commission's estimate that it is 13 billion. I believe that
what we will see, though, is that there will be greater losses
beyond this because it isn't just these trade agreements. The
whole world is watching. The world is watching what we are up
to right at this moment. And these trade agreements have taken
on a greater impact than just dollars and cents going back and
forth. They become the image of how well the U.S. embraces
other countries throughout the world, how are we out working
with others.
Mr. STALLMAN. You stated the case for agriculture very
well. You used wheat specifically. I lumped in corn and wheat
and soybeans with the particular example of Colombia and the
fact that other countries have stepped in and begun to take
those markets to the detriment of our agricultural producers,
and that is why it is critical that we move forward and go
ahead and get us back in the game.
Mr. DUCKER. I would not put it in an agricultural context.
You have done that quite nicely. But I would say that just one
simple statistic that exports from this country support one in
three U.S. manufacturing jobs. The markets are huge and immense
outside the United States. Eighty-seven percent of the growth
is occurring there. Ninety-five percent of the world's
consumers are there. And one of the great vehicles to get at
those consumers, at that economic growth, is through free trade
agreements.
And so I believe that while we delay, others are moving,
because their calculators work the same way that ours do in
terms of the numbers and the economic power that exists in
global trade.
Mr. TOPPETA. Thank you.
As I said earlier, I think the main impact for us of delay
will be in terms of Korea and the fact that the European Union
will have an agreement going into effect in the middle of the
year. That will mean that those competitors from Europe will be
able to get their products to market quicker in Korea. They
will be allowed to do more things than we are allowed to do in
the markets. They will be subject to different rules and
regulations, which will be to their advantage, frankly. So
there is no question that if we don't get this Korea agreement
done, it will hurt the insurance industry competitively in
Korea. No doubt about it.
Mr. BIEGUN. We support all three agreements, but in
particular I would like to repeat what was just said. On Korea,
the good news again is that we are on a timetable now to have
the Korea agreement passed as soon as, if not earlier, than
some of our major competitors.
But I would also be remiss if I didn't point out that had
the Korea Free Trade Agreement gone through in its previous
form before these provisions were renegotiated, it actually
would have had a punishing effect on our industry. So we are
very supportive of the agreement. And the timing still affords
us the opportunity to move, moving with alacrity, to get it
through in time to realize that benefit.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you. Time has expired.
The chair recognizes Mr. Paulsen for 5 minutes.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
also for your leadership at the subcommittee level and being a
part of this hearing today, and for all of the witnesses for
their testimony.
There is no doubt that all the trade agreements--we have
heard about Panama, Colombia and South Korea, of course, which
is the latest that has had the most discussion from the
administration standpoint and now the support from a lot of our
colleagues from both sides of the aisle. It is very important.
I really believe free trade is a very simple concept that
is a natural proven stimulus. It is a cost-free job creator. I
can look at Minnesota, my home State. And we talked a little
bit about services having 75 percent of U.S. GDP. Well, in my
district I have got 80 percent of services occupying that
portion of the economy, and there is a lot of jobs that are
connected directly with that. Seven hundred forty-one thousand
jobs in Minnesota depend on trade independently. It covers
manufacturing. It goes all the way to services.
And I just want to go back to a little bit of the services
testimony, Mr. Toppeta, if that is okay, because you mentioned
earlier--you had identified some key nontariff barriers;
regulation, investment restrictions, due process, regulatory
transparency, data management rules, for instance. And you
talked a little bit about how trade agreements very importantly
touch on those issues, because the average person doesn't
understand that or doesn't relate to that. They always think of
tariffs. Can you just expand a little bit about what signs you
have seen in different markets as these implemented trade
agreements have gone forward and actually taken place?
Mr. TOPPETA. I am sorry. What signs I have seen?
Mr. PAULSEN. Some of the progress, I think, within the
markets and some of the good things that have happened.
Mr. TOPPETA. Maybe I could--Korea specifically--here again,
let me give you an example that I think is important, and this
one relates to data management, and it covers really two points
about Korea. One is this question of the desk drawer rules that
I was talking about before, that you sometimes don't know what
the rules of the road are.
We had an experience in Korea where we wanted to do data
management in a more centralized location. We believed that
that was permissible. We had discussions with regulators about
whether that was permissible. We were allowed to go ahead and
do our data management outside of Korea. There was a change of
people in the regulatory body that regulates us. They came back
and said, sorry, you have to move your data center back into
Korea. Now, that is an example of tremendous expense on our
part that we had to go through partly because we didn't know
the rules, partly because they had restrictions on data.
I think with these kind of issues, and this is directly
addressed in the Korea FTA, we will be able to do data
management outside of Korea. I think that is going to be very
useful for some companies. They may do their data management
from here in the U.S., and that will again create jobs here in
the U.S.
The second thing that I would say is this will also give us
the ability to do really a good job of data privacy protection,
because when you have small data centers all over the world, it
is much harder to bullet-proof those, the phrase that is used,
to make sure that they are protecting the consumers'
information. So this is an example where the Korea FTA, I
think, can give us both better efficiency, but also better
effectiveness. So that is a positive sign, I think, going
forward.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stallman, let me just quickly follow up on a question
with you, because Cargill is based right in my district, and,
of course, you think agriculture right away. And Minnesota
exports quite a bit, $6 million worth of wheat and corn, I
think, to South Korea currently. Is it possible to estimate the
effect of an increase in opportunities for one large exporter,
what that can be on the local economy? I think you mentioned
9,000 jobs earlier. But for a company like Cargill, the supply
chain and the agriculture, how many new jobs locally might be
added?
Mr. STALLMAN. It is awfully hard to get those numbers
precisely at the local level. But just assume that Cargill
exports an additional billion or some fraction of that at the
rate of 9,000 jobs per billion--those are direct jobs, not the
indirect effects--will definitely help the local economy where
those facilities are located.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Chairman, one more point I want to make is
that in Minnesota in particular, we have seen successful
exporting both in services and with manufactured goods. But the
reality is that with our FTA partners, where we have got FTA
partners that currently exist, there is actually an exponential
increase in exports that have gone on. In fact, I think there
is a 103 percent increase overall in terms of Minnesota exports
since 2002 with the FTA partners that we have. So I think if we
look at expanding in Korea and Panama and Colombia, we are all
going to benefit, and it is going to open the door to China and
other countries down the road.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
The chair recognizes Mr. Pascrell for 5 minutes.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank each member
of the panel.
I am a skeptic on these issues. I must say this to begin
with: Free trade agreements through the last 4 Presidents--so
this is not a partisan statement I am making--I personally
believe have contributed to the job loss in this country and,
worse, contributed to the minimizing of the dignity of the
American worker. I did not come and rush to that conclusion. I
have voted for trade agreements.
But I do know that free trade is not simple, not at all.
And I would like to start by saying to those who say that the
jobs that will come out of the Korean FTA are going to spread
throughout the land and contribute to our recovery, well, the
International Trade Commission has found that net job creation
from the Korean FTA will be negligible, while independent
estimates have found, for instance, a subject already brought
up, that stopping Chinese currency manipulation would create up
to 1.2 million jobs.
As that is my preface, I would like to ask Mr. Biegun, the
European Union recently completed its own free trade
negotiations with South Korea and was able to secure a 55
percent minimum rule of origin requirement, which is a major
problem in many different areas, not just automobiles, and a
cap on duty drawbacks. So our agreement, on the other hand, one
we are examining right now, contains only a 35 percent rule of
origin and no limits on the duty drawbacks, none.
Is Ford concerned that what I see as a major disparity,
which would allow a Korean car company to assemble over 65
percent of the value of a car in a regional country like China,
will put the United States auto industry at a disadvantage
compared to our European competitors?
Mr. BIEGUN. Thank you, Mr. Pascrell.
Breaking down the two issues, on the issue of duty
drawback, the approach in the U.S. free trade agreement and in
the EU free trade agreement are largely the same. So in that
case there is not a significant difference. However, in both
cases, Ford and other automobile industry companies fought very
hard to put limits on the degree to which the Korean Government
could use duty drawback, because, as you point out, it allows
the import of content from outside the free trade areas.
Mr. PASCRELL. Does that concern you?
Mr. BIEGUN. It certainly is a concern. It is one of many
that we have had.
Mr. PASCRELL. What is the concern? What is your actual
concern with what I just said specifically?
Mr. BIEGUN. Specifically it will allow manufacturers in
Korea to import content from third countries and then reexport
to the United States duty free. We in the United States do not
enjoy that privilege, so we would import the same product from
the same country to put it in our automobile, and we would pay
a tariff on it. So it is something of a competitive
disadvantage.
However, as in any free trade negotiation, it is a package
of gives and takes. Ultimately Ford Motor Company's principal
concern in this agreement was opening the Korean market to our
goods. The Koreans are already well represented in this market,
and it is our estimation that this free trade agreement will
not sizably increase their imports, although the duty drawback
is a competitive advantage for them.
Mr. PASCRELL. I have folks coming into my office every day
because we were once a great manufacturing power in New Jersey.
Paterson, New Jersey, was the original manufacturing city in
this country, the cradle of the industrial revolution.
Alexander Hamilton went there, debated very severely Thomas
Jefferson over whether we should be an industrial or--and we
decided we needed to be a multifaceted society.
We made the decision 35 years ago. The problem of trade
didn't just start in the last 10 years, did it? The problem of
trade existed now for many, many years. We lost our textile
business 35, 40 years ago. We were the silk city of the world.
So this didn't just happen.
But here is what comes into my office, and I will conclude
with this if I may, Mr. Chairman----
Chairman CAMP. [Presiding.] Yes, you may conclude.
Mr. PASCRELL. Folks who import--who are trying to make
stone and send it to other places, parts manufacturers come
into my place every week. They can't stay in existence--we are
talking about trading products? You have to have a product to
trade. If we don't do something about manufacturing in this
country, if we don't do something about that phase of the
economy, these trade deals only make certain people affluent
and bury other people. And bury other people. And that is what
has happened in the United States. And I would look at that
very carefully because I think we are being put out--and I only
use this as one example.
My time has run out.
Chairman CAMP. The time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Berg is recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank everyone that
has come here for this hearing.
In 2004, I guess, compared to this year, North Dakota's
exports to South Korea have doubled. And those exports,
primarily in agriculture, are wheat, peas and soybeans. In
fact, right now we have a delegation in South Korea trying to
expand that. And one of the questions that I have is--there is
a lot of these other trade agreements that are in the mix. And
I am assuming that every country in the world is trying to
increase its trade so it can pull itself out of the same
environment that we are in. So I guess my question is if we do
nothing and say for 2 years--and maybe this is for you Mr.
Stallman. If we do nothing for 2 years, this component of North
Dakota's increased trade with South Korea, will that stall, or
will that continue if we do nothing?
Mr. STALLMAN. Well, it is hard to speculate totally, but
the bias will be for it stalling and not moving forward,
because you have an EU agreement with reduced tariffs that will
be put in place, you have other countries negotiating free
trade agreements, and if those are implemented before ours, and
those tariff reductions occur before we have a chance to
implement our agreement, that puts our shippers of any
agricultural products and many other products at a competitive
disadvantage. And the Koreans aren't going to buy from us just
because we are nice people. We are going to have to have a good
deal.
Mr. BERG. That kind of leads to another question. But I
have heard the hearing today, and I have kind of thought about
a water tank that is up on stilts that is leaking, and we are
trying to figure out what is the best way to fix this water
tank, or how can we have the best water tank. That water tank
is full of our trade and our export, and my thinking is if we
do nothing, we may come up with a great water tank, but there
will be no more market share. It will all be drained out of
that tank.
So I guess, continuing with what you said, I would just
like a--it is going to be a tough question probably, but if we
do nothing, and we assume that these other countries are
engaging in free trade agreements and expanding their trade,
what will we lose in terms of jobs in these sectors over the
next 2 years if nothing is done? So in manufacturing, just kind
of what is your feel and what would we lose in agriculture? Or
in the service industry what would we lose by standing still
and watching others take our market share in these three
countries?
Mr. Paulson.
Mr. PAULSON. Thank you.
I know we have talked about the jobs, the dollars and the
totals. And not to avoid your question, but I want to
overemphasize, please, that the commercial diplomacy of the
U.S. businessmen entering these markets will by far exceed what
all of these calculations that have been made, because as I
move into a market and I go into Colombia, I bring with me all
other companies that I know about and have them entertain the
idea of also selling there.
So again, I am trying to be clear, let the U.S. businessman
do his job. He will bring prosperity to our country here, but
he has to have that opportunity and level that playing field.
Mr. STALLMAN. If we don't move forward and pass these
agreements, work to open up other agreements, what will happen
to U.S. agriculture is that our competitors will step in. They
will begin to take more market share, as they already are in
many countries, and thus, since American consumers won't be
eating more, we will be backing up our supply. We will be
filling up our domestic supply, increasing that supply, and
with stagnant demand what happens is basic economics: The price
of the product goes down.
So that is a real concern. We won't stand still. We are
either going to move forward, or we are going to fall backward.
Mr. BERG. Please go ahead.
Mr. DUCKER. I was just going to say one thing about that,
Congressman Berg. If we do nothing, we do something, because if
we do nothing, others continue to move. We lose market share,
we lose jobs, we lose the future prosperity. I mean, if you
look at NAFTA as just one data point, since NAFTA was created,
4 million U.S. jobs have been created. There is $1 trillion a
year in trade, in that NAFTA trade. So if we do nothing, we do
something.
Mr. TOPPETA. Yeah. I mean, I will second the motion. I
think that one of the other consequences will be we will not be
able to meet this goal of doubling our exports in the next 5
years. I think that goal will go by the wayside if you don't go
forward. So I think that is a significant detriment.
Mr. BIEGUN. Since no importer sells any significant volume
of cars into Korea, currently it is all upside. But with a good
deal, the sooner the better. And it is a good deal.
Mr. BERG. Thank you.
Mr. BRADY. [Presiding.] Thank you.
Mrs. Black is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank all of you
for being here today and helping to enlighten us on the trade
issue.
I want to, first of all, thank you, Mr. Ducker, and how
proud I am to have FedEx in our State and the amount of jobs
that it has supplied in the--how it has helped our economy
there in the State of Tennessee and particularly there in
Memphis. As you recognize, there is almost a city there of
itself with FedEx. So thank you for that.
Mr. Paulson, I was interested as I read your written
comments about your enlightenment about how trade really did
increase your opportunity to be able to grow your business, and
in particular you said, there was a time that I viewed foreign
countries as competitors, and I made a whole series of
defensive moves to protect my sales in the market, in the
domestic market. And then you said you changed your
perspective.
I know one of the comments that you also made that
intrigued me--and I do believe that being a small business
person, that I agree that innovation, quality and customer
service are three very, very important pieces of what makes you
successful as a business and makes you stand out from other
businesses. But what made you change your mind? And what were
those factors that made you then decide to move forward in
being a strong competitor in the international market?
Mr. PAULSON. It didn't happen overnight; it took quite a
while actually for me to change from a defensive position to an
offensive position. However, I was always making some--I call
them opportunistic exports, and it was not really a planned
event.
So as I started to go around the world, going to the trade
shows, working actually with the U.S. Commercial Service, who
is a very strong element in the United States for teaching
people how to work outside the country, and then working with,
like, the senior commercial officers in these foreign
countries, I was imbued with this whole new world of
opportunity in front of me, and through that I started making
sales. And it was my good success and fortune that really
turned my mind, because all of a sudden I could see there was
so much opportunity, and the sales--I can say the sales in the
most unusual places also through the help of the U.S.
Commercial Service.
Mrs. BLACK. Is your trade organization helping those
manufacturers who have had great difficulty and some of them
just not being able to be successful with their product; are
they helping them to get into these foreign markets?
Mr. PAULSON. Absolutely. The National Association of
Manufacturers offers free help to open foreign markets and
teach people how to work in those markets. And I can also say
that I personally spend a lot of my own time as--and volunteer
time of teaching others how to enter a market. One of the
things I like to say is if you put me to work at your business,
within just a couple of years, you will also have 25 percent of
your sales in foreign markets.
Mrs. BLACK. My final question may be for any of the other
panelists. In looking at innovation, quality and customer
service, would you say that that is the key for why other
countries may want our products as opposed to the product being
made in their country and the competitiveness of that?
Mr. TOPPETA. I would comment on that. I think that is
absolutely right. We see in all of these markets that customers
are looking for innovation in products, and frankly, doing
business with a global company and a U.S. company is something
that they very much desire because of the innovativeness and
because of the quality of the service that is provided. So I
think it is definitely an advantage.
Mr. BIEGUN. And, Congresswoman, this is where I keep coming
back to our responsibilities. And that is our responsibility.
But I can tell you that Ford Motor Company in our 106 years in
business around the world has never found a customer that wants
to pay more for less quality or for a lower--less desirable
product. We are absolutely convinced that given the opportunity
to present our vehicles to customers around the world, they
will make a choice based upon best value for the money.
Mr. DUCKER. Congresswoman Black, I would like to thank you,
first of all, for your service to our State and to our country.
But I would say personally about our trade missions, India is
one great example. Most of the group is dominated by small
companies, and while we were there, many trade agreements
signed and the fortunes of those small businesses greatly
enhanced by being open and exposed to innovative, new American
products that they could take to market in India. So, yes, I
would definitely agree that innovation, certainly creating
value, is one of the greatest things that we bring.
Mrs. BLACK. So if we can remove barriers, we have the
products with the innovation, the customer service and the
quality that will make us very competitive. Thank you.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you.
Mr. Roskam is recognized for the final question.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Those of us who are speaking late feel a little bit like
the Jimmy Stewart character in ``Mr. Smith Goes to Washington''
when the Chamber clears out. So thank you very much for your
patience and the patience of our colleagues.
It seems like one of the subtexts of today's hearing is
that you have one side that has been making an argument or a
suggestion about the cost of waiting, and another that is
making an argument about the cost of moving forward. And those
are very thoughtful questions, and you can kind of weigh them
out. On Korea, as Mr. Rangel alluded, there was kind of a
negotiation technique and so forth on moving forward and
creating more opportunities for Ford Motor Company, for
example, and other manufacturers. There is also a notion, well,
as it relates to Colombia and Panama, there is a human rights
element that I think most largely recognize have been remedied
and so forth.
But I just want to share with you an experience of a group
that came in to see me, and it gets to this idea about no-cost
job creation that I think is very powerful and something that
can bring us all together to Mr. Camp's point on moving
forward, moving this debate forward.
I had a group come to see me sort of with talking points
over at the Cannon House Office Building just a couple years
ago, and they were against the Colombia Free Trade Agreement.
And I kind of shrugged them off and I said, I don't really want
to talk about Colombia. Let me tell you about something that I
just heard about. And I began to explain to them--I said, hey,
there is this opportunity for us as the United States to create
changes within the Tax Code that actually get our manufactured
products in a better position vis-a-vis another area in the
world that is actually four times the size of Illinois. And I
asked them if we were able to do that, were able to change the
Tax Code so that Illinois manufacturers had an advantage in
selling and taking things then to O'Hare Airport on trucks and
flying them down to this other market that is four times the
size of Illinois, would you all be for that? They looked around
and kind of crumpled up their talking points, and they said,
yeah, we are for that, that sounds good. That is the Colombia
Free Trade Agreement. And it was sort of a revelatory moment
for them. Now, they didn't give me the satisfaction of telling
me that I persuaded them, but I think that the way that was
framed up was a little bit different.
So I guess the challenge that we have--my staff sometimes
will come to me, my kids will come to me, and they will ask me
a question, and sometimes I will say, well, let me think about
it. Now, as we all know, ``let me think about it'' means one of
two things; it either means no, and I just don't want to deal
with it, or it means let me think about it. And I think that we
are upon this time right now as a committee, as a Congress, and
as a country where sort of the thinking is done. We need to
make decisions moving forward to try to create an environment
where worldwide American companies or little American companies
are in the best possible footing to be competitive and dynamic,
and that is no-cost job creation, and that is something I think
we can all agree on.
Mr. Biegun, let me just ask you one sort of closing
question, and that is sort of relating that experience that I
had with this group in my office about Colombia and the type of
manufacturing that you mentioned when you were having a
conversation with Mr. Tiberi a couple of minutes ago, can you
comment on what the Colombia FTA agreement means in terms of
Ford Motor Company production opportunity and how that ripples
out in jobs from a no-cost job creation point of view?
Mr. BIEGUN. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Roskam.
As I said earlier in the hearing, we source a number of our
vehicles that we sell--the vast majority of the vehicles that
we sell--in Colombia from the United States, and this will
increase our exports from the United States. So it will be
entirely beneficial as Colombia doesn't manufacture any cars,
and none are coming--or any cars are exported to the United
States anyway. So none are coming the other way.
Let me also add in the case of Korea, had you presented me
with the Koreans' 8 percent tariff was going away, it would
have been of no benefit to us, but we would have seen a sizable
advantage to the Korean importers. So, there is a formula that
we have to get right.
But let me end with this note, that we worked through that
with this committee, with the leadership and the chairman and
the ranking member, and we are very encouraged with the outcome
of this. And in conclusion we have bipartisan support; we have
industry and labor all supporting the Korea deal. I think that
is a model of success, and I think it shows that we can
together, private sector and government, work these things
through, and I think that has been a great experience for us.
Mr. ROSKAM. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. [Presiding.] Thank you. I thank the
gentleman for yielding. And I want to thank--sincere thanks to
all of our witnesses for their excellent testimony and to the
Members for their thoughtful questions today.
Let me note for our witnesses, Members may submit questions
to you for the record. If they do, I hope you will respond
promptly in writing.
Chairman CAMP. Our witnesses today made clear that all
three pending trade agreements offer significant benefits for
agriculture, manufacturing and the services sectors of our
economy, all without requiring any new government spending.
Continued delay will only harm the ability of American workers,
businesses and farmers to compete in these markets as our
competitors move ahead.
Tonight we have an opportunity to hear from the President.
I hope we will hear about these agreements and that he lays out
a clear action plan and timetable for considering all three of
them. I strongly believe that we should work together and
consider all three agreements together, and hopefully within
the next 6 months. I hope that we can continue to work together
to make that happen.
I again want to thank all of you for spending time today,
and the committee is about to adjourn, but we will hold.
Mr. RANGEL. I just want to remind the panel--and I really
thought it was a great panel--of my request as to your feeling
as to whether or not our great country is meeting your
standards in terms of education and also health care. It is
very, very important to many of us that we find out what your
position really is and what are you doing about it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you very much. The
committee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:14 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


