- PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRADE POLICY AGENDA

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRADE POLICY AGENDA

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 9, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-04

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-569                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, Jr., Louisiana  JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
DEAN HELLER, Nevada                  EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            RON KIND, Wisconsin
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            BILL PASCRELL, Jr., New Jersey
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois
CHRIS LEE, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee

JON TRAUB, Staff Director

JANICE MAYS, Minority Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published
in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the official
version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare both
printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of
converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of February 9, 2011 announcing the hearing..............     2

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Jim McDermott...............................................    29
Ambassador Ron Kirk, U.S. Trade Representative...................     7

WITNESSES

Hon. Wally Herger................................................    16
Hon. Kevin Brady.................................................    33
Hon. Devin Nunes.................................................    38

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Questions for the Record.........................................    74
National Pork Producers Council..................................    84
National Association of Manufacturers............................    89
National Association of Wheat Growers............................   101
U.S. Chamber of Commerce.........................................   107
Emergency Committee for American Trade...........................   119
American Jewish Committee........................................   129
National District Export Council Inc.............................   130
California Table Grape Commission-1..............................   133
California Table Grape Commission-2..............................   134
National Oilseed Processors Association..........................   135
National Potato Council..........................................   142
California Chamber of Commerce-1.................................   144
California Chamber of Commerce-2.................................   149
Retail Industry Leaders Association..............................   150
United States Council for International Business.................   159
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association-1..........   164
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association-2..........   175
International Dairy Foods Association............................   188
Association of Global Automakers, Inc............................   194
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America.............   195
General Electric Company.........................................   203
American Federation of Labor & Congress of Industrial
Organizations..................................................   208
Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch..............................   212
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition....................   222
U.S.-China Business Council......................................   232
Intel Corporation................................................   242
UPS..............................................................   255

PRESIDENT OBAMA'S TRADE POLICY AGENDA

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Dave Camp
presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

Chairman Camp Announces Hearing on President Obama's Trade Policy
Agenda

Wednesday, February 02, 2011

House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp (R-MI) today
announced that the Committee on Ways and Means will hold a hearing on
the status of President Barack Obama's trade policy agenda. The hearing
will take place on Wednesday, February 9, 2011, in 1100 Longworth House
Office Building, beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear the witness, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from the invited witness only. The
sole witness will be United States Trade Representative Ron Kirk.
However, any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral
appearance may submit a written statement for consideration by the
Committee and for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

International trade has been vital to U.S. growth and prosperity in
the post WWII era. The United States is the world's largest economy,
manufacturer, and trader. The future success of American workers and
business, and the growth of America's economy, require continuing
America's strong commitment to finding new markets and expanding
existing ones for U.S. goods and services.

The United States signed trade agreements with three close allies
in 2007--Colombia, Panama, and South Korea--and all three are still
awaiting Congressional consideration. The independent U.S.
International Trade Commission (ITC) has estimated that the combined
effect of the three pending trade agreements would increase U.S.
exports by at least $13 billion. President Obama has repeatedly stated
that increasing U.S. exports by 1% could create 250,000 jobs. The ITC
has also estimated that implementing the three pending agreements would
increase U.S. exports by at least 1%. The hearing will provide an
opportunity to address the resolution of the outstanding auto issues in
the U.S.-South Korea trade agreement and to discuss plans and timetable
for consideration of all three of the agreements. The hearing will also
provide an opportunity for the Administration to explain its response
to China's trade restrictive practices and non-tariff barriers that
prevent U.S. companies from competing on a level playing field. The
hearing further provides an opportunity to monitor progress in areas
such as the National Export Initiative, the Trans-Pacific Partnership
negotiations, the Doha Round of World Trade Organization negotiations
and WTO accessions, as well as other efforts to open new markets to
U.S. agriculture, goods, and services and address bilateral and
multilateral trade disputes and concerns.

In announcing this hearing, Chairman Camp said, ``In these
challenging economic times for Americans, opening new markets to U.S.
exports provides a proven way to fuel economic growth, create well-
paying jobs here at home, enhance consumer choice, and raise our
standard of living. An important first step is to consider all three
pending trade agreements in the next six months. In this increasingly
globalized economy, we must work together to maximize American
competitiveness and prevent us from falling behind. I look forward to
hearing Ambassador Kirk in his first appearance before the Committee as
he lays out the President's trade priorities.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on current trade issues such as: (1) the
pending trade agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea; (2)
addressing the full range of issues impeding American companies from
selling U.S. goods and services in China and distorting trade flows
through unfair trade practices; (3) the ongoing Trans-Pacific
Partnership negotiations; (4) the prospect for trade expansion in
agriculture, industrial goods, and services through the Doha Round
negotiations at the WTO and the issues surrounding Russia's efforts to
accede to the WTO; and (5) management of trade disputes and concerns
and other trade issues.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Wednesday, February 23, 2011. Finally,
please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S.
Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman CAMP. Good morning. The committee will come to
order. We are opening the hearing on President Obama's trade
policy agenda. I want to welcome everyone here, and also extend
a special welcome to our guest, United States Trade
Representative Ambassador Ron Kirk.
Ambassador, this is the first time you have been invited to
appear before this committee, so we are looking forward to a
thorough discussion of the Administration's trade policy
agenda, and particularly the path you see forward on the three
pending trade agreements.
International trade has been a cornerstone of United States
foreign policy for the past 60 years. We must have a robust
trade agenda to ensure our economic future and create U.S.
jobs. While the President has often spoken about the merits of
trade over the past 2 years, there is little to show for it.
The American people are demanding more and more, and deserve
more from this Administration when it comes to the job-creating
potential of our trade agreements.
Now, we have seen some steps in the right direction in
recent months, and I appreciate your work and the President's
work on the South Korea agreement. But there is much more we
need to do, and I fear we are ceding our influence and
authority to the European Union, China, and countries that
don't have our best interests at heart, diminishing our
influence on the international economy, foreign policy, and
security issues.
Most pressing on the trade agenda are the pending
agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea. As I noted,
the President's leadership has helped move the South Korea deal
forward. But there has been no similar action with regard to
the Colombia and Panama agreements.
Where is the path forward for these agreements? Why isn't
there a clear identification of the outstanding issues, an
outline of reasonable steps that must be taken to address those
issues, a time frame for resolution, and a commitment to
action?
While the President made positive reference to completing
the agreement with South Korea in his State of the Union
address, Colombia and Panama were mentioned only briefly,
almost as afterthoughts, with no action plan or commitment,
characterizing them as items the Administration intends to, and
I quote, ``pursue.''
But we already have trade agreements signed three and a
half years ago. And Ambassador, I hope you will provide clarity
on what the President meant and lay out today a concrete
timeline for consideration of all three agreements. And as I
have said repeatedly, I would like to see all these three
agreements considered by July 1st.
And frankly, the lack of commitment on these critical, job-
creating agreements is hindering the rest of our trade agenda,
most notably ATPA and TAA. The President's unwillingness to
engage, especially on Colombia, has ground everything else to a
halt and our workers are suffering as a result.
The Administration's strategy makes no sense. These
agreements are important to U.S. strategic and economic
interests, and they will help support jobs here in the United
States--250,000 jobs, according to the President's own measure.
And given that our unemployment rate has been at or above 9
percent for the last 21 consecutive months, we must explore all
possible opportunities to sell to the world and create and
support existing jobs in the United States.
I am equally concerned that the failure to move these
agreements will severely disadvantage U.S. business, workers,
farmers, and ranchers who now sell their products in these
markets. Other countries recognize the value of these markets
and are signing agreements that lower barriers for their
exports and seize our opportunities.
In addition to our pending trade agreements, we must focus
on enforcing our rights worldwide. Take China. It is now our
second-largest trading partner overall and our third largest
export market. While China presents the potential of 1.4
billion customers for our exports, China purposefully impedes
market access for U.S. goods and services, and blatantly steals
the intellectual property of American businesses. The litany of
China's trade-distorting policies is deeply troubling and
cannot be allowed to stand.
Part of our strategy for addressing these issues should
include resumption of our bilateral investment treaty
negotiations. I strongly support the Administration's efforts
to promptly conclude an ambitious Doha Round of negotiations at
the World Trade Organization, and hope that renewed efforts
over the past few months will lead to success.
I also strongly support the Administration's efforts to
negotiate the Trans-Pacific Partnership. I hope the President
will be able to conclude a high standard agreement when he
hosts the APEC leaders in nine short months. Such an agreement
would show our commitment to the fast-growing Asia-Pacific
region as well as create American jobs by opening markets. A
robust trade agenda puts U.S. business, workers, farmers, and
ranchers back on the offense. Let's seize this opportunity.
I look forward to hearing your testimony, Ambassador Kirk,
on the Administration's ideas on how to kick-start the U.S.
trade agenda. I will now yield to the ranking member, Sandy
Levin, to make an opening statement.
Mr. LEVIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Ambassador.
I am disappointed that we start today's hearing without
action to extend the Trade Adjustment Assistance program
scheduled to expire in just a few days. TAA has been a good-
faith effort for nearly 50 years to assist workers who have
lost their jobs through trade and globalization.
As a result of the 2009 reforms, an additional 170,000
workers are eligible for TAA, which will help them secure new
good-paying jobs. Starting Tuesday, tens of thousands of
displaced workers in our country will be affected, and I
strenuously urge my Republican colleagues not to let this vital
program lapse.
Congressional Democrats have been actively working to shape
a new trade policy that is responsive to the changing dynamics
of a global economy. We rejected the passive hands-off approach
of the last Administration by embracing expansion of trade in
ways that assess its impact and broaden the benefits from
expanded trade.
Carrying out this new policy, we succeeded in pushing for
the inclusion of enforceable worker rights and environmental
standards, beginning with their incorporation in the Peru FTA.
We have fought for vigorous enforcement of basic rules of
competition with our trading partners. We have insisted that
trade must be a two-way street, not a one-way street, in
critical areas of trade.
This is in sharp contrast to the approach of the last
Administration, whose view was that trade was good in and of
itself and that more trade automatically was better, regardless
of its terms. As President Obama responded, and I quote, ``We
just went through a decade where we were told that it didn't
matter. Just keep on importing, buying stuff from other
countries, and everything is going to be okay. But it was built
on a house of cards.''
The Obama Administration has undertaken a vital effort to
implement a new and improved trade policy, for example, a
commitment to the enforcement of existing trade agreements and
trade laws. That was clear from the China safeguard action on
tires. The previous Administration, on four occasions, refused
to use that safeguard. Recent data indicates that the safeguard
action has helped to make possible an increase in U.S.
production and employment in U.S. tire manufacturing.
The commitment to enforcement is also clear from the filing
of the first case ever on labor provisions in the trade
agreement with Guatemala.
A commitment to two-way trade was embodied in the
President's insistence that we go back and change the Korea
Free Trade Agreement to finally knock down the barriers there,
where automotive trade accounts for 75 percent of the $10
billion U.S. trade deficit with Korea. This would not have
happened if the Republicans had succeeded in their earlier
insistence that flawed agreements be approved.
Likewise, in the case of Panama, the Administration pushed
for an agreement to address Panama's status as a tax haven, and
we understand Panama is working to ratify and implement that
agreement now. This Administration has also been working on
efforts started several years ago to ensure that Panama's labor
laws comply with basic international standards and with its FTA
obligations. Because of our efforts, there are now important
labor law changes pending before the Panamanian legislature.
With regard to Colombia, as we have pointed out repeatedly
and as indicated consistently in the State Department and ILO
reports, there are serious outstanding issues relating to the
Colombia FTA. Colombian labor laws fall short of ILO norms, and
workers struggle to exercise their rights to associate and
collectively bargain.
Persistent problems include abuse of cooperative and other
forms of contracting, employers' direct negotiation with
workers when unions are present, and prohibitions on the right
to strike. Moreover, enforcement of labor laws is weak.
Union worker violence in Colombia remains unacceptably
high, if not the highest in the world. Limited progress is
being made in the investigation and prosecution of those
responsible. Additionally, reports indicate that threats
against union workers and others have increased. To date, there
has been little concrete action to date to pursue these cases.
As I observed during my five-day fact-finding trip in
Colombia last month, the new Santos administration has now
articulated a different approach from its predecessor that
provides an opportunity for serious discussions between the two
governments on these concerns. But we should be very clear that
the burden is on the Colombian government to act and address
these concerns that have been made abundantly clear to them for
years. The only adequate measuring stick is progress on the
ground.
There are other areas where I believe we can do more to
change U.S. trade policy. Mr. Camp, the chairman, has talked
about China's distorting, trade-distorting policies. I also
urge that the Administration take a more assertive stance to
address China's currency manipulation.
As I conclude, let me just say that we are already taking
action on many fronts. Republicans have expressed impatience
with changing U.S. trade policy and have called for us to
return to the failed policies of the past and approve flawed
trade agreements.
So let me be clear. We will not go back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Today we are joined by Ambassador Ron Kirk, the United
States Trade Representative. Prior to his work in the Obama
Administration, Ambassador Kirk had a distinguished career in
both the private sector and government. Notably, he was the
mayor of Dallas from 1995 until 2001, at which time, I should
add, he saw firsthand the benefits of trade agreements and was
a strong proponent for NAFTA.
Ambassador Kirk, we welcome you and look forward to your
testimony. I would ask that you keep your testimony to 5
minutes. And Mr. Ambassador, your full written statement will
be made part of the record. And you are recognized for 5
minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF AMBASSADOR RON KIRK, UNITED STATES TRADE
REPRESENTATIVE

Ambassador KIRK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Levin, members of the committee. It is indeed an honor for me
to have an opportunity to visit with you today.
In his State of the Union address, President Obama told
America that the future is ours to win if we rise to the
consulting. To compete for and win the jobs and industries of
the future, America must out-innovative, out-educate, and out-
build the rest of the world.
USTR is doing our part to keep America globally
competitive, and our work is producing results. U.S. goods and
services exports through the first 11 months of 2010 were up
$239 billion over the same time period in 2009, and we are on
pace to reach or exceed President Obama's National Export
Initiative goal of doubling exports by the end of 2014.
To ensure that American firms continue to generate jobs and
economic growth, opening global markets and efficient America's
trade rights must remain key components of our economic
recovery effort. After extensive consultations with the
business community, with labor, Members of Congress, in
December we concluded a U.S.-Korea trade agreement that is
better for America's auto industry and better for America's
auto workers, and it is winning widespread support here in
Congress.
To bring home its promise, which is billions of dollars in
exports and tens of thousands of jobs here at home, the
President will submit the U.S.-Korea trade agreement to
Congress in the next few weeks, and looks forward to working
with you to secure its approval this spring.
But we aren't going to stop there. With that same
engagement and cooperation, we want to work to address
outstanding concerns relating to the Panama and Colombia trade
agreements. If we are successful, we will move these forward as
well.
I can tell you today that the President has directed me to
immediately intensify our engagement with our partners in
Colombia and Panama with the objective of resolving the
outstanding issues as soon as possible this year, and bringing
those agreements to Congress for consideration immediately
thereafter.
But I must make it clear. There remain serious issues to be
resolved before these agreements can be submitted for
congressional consideration, and some of these issues go to our
core U.S. values and interests, such as the protection of labor
rights. Any timetable will be contingent on the successful
resolution of these issues.
For example, with regard to Colombia, it will be imperative
to resolve issues regarding laws and practices impacting the
protection of internationally recognized labor rights, as well
as issues concerning violence against labor leaders and the
prosecution of the perpetrators.
Colombia and Panama have begun to take important steps, and
we think that is a good signal. But more remains to be done. We
will be consulting closely with you and major stakeholders,
including labor and human rights groups, throughout this
process.
We will not be left behind, however, as others open markets
and take our market share. The President has made one thing
abundantly clear, however. We will not sign agreements just for
agreements' sake. They must be enforceable and of the highest
standard and in the interests of America's workers, farmers,
businesses, and entrepreneurs.
In the Trans-Pacific Partnership, now the world's most
dynamic regional trade negotiating market, we are moving
forward to unlock the Asia-Pacific through a 21st century trade
agreement. In the Doha talks, we seek an ambitious outcome in
which all countries, including the advanced emerging nations,
provide market access commensurate with their global economic
roles.
And our efforts to bring Russia into the World Trade
Organization will include working with you this year to grant
Russia permanent normal trade relation status so that U.S.
firms and workers fully benefit from Russia's accession to the
WTO.
This year, the United States will host the 21 economies of
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum. With them, we will
work to make it cheaper, easier, faster for our firms to trade
in a greener regional economy. And we are doing the same with
our partners in Europe and throughout North America.
Aggressive enforcement will continue to accompany these
efforts. We have kept our promise to hold our trade partners
accountable, from steps to address a harmful surge of Chinese
tires, to important wins at the WTO for our aerospace and
agricultural sectors, to the first labor enforcement case ever
brought under a U.S. trade agreement.
Our agenda will only succeed if we make clear to the
American public what is at stake in global markets and if we
keep faith with America's workers, including renewing trade
adjustment assistance. We are also asking Congress to keep
faith with some of the world's poorest economies and create
American jobs by renewing the generalized system of preferences
in the Andean Trade Preferences Act, and let's do so for a
longer period of time than a few months.
I believe, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, that
we can use common sense to find common ground on trade. And I
look forward to working with you, and I look forward to taking
your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of The Honorable Ron Kirk:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.004

Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you very much, Ambassador.
As I listened to your testimony, I first want to say I
appreciate your comments on the South Korea trade agreement. It
was signed in June 2007. Korea is the world's eighth largest
economy. The E.U. agreement with Korea is expected to be
effective July 1st, so I think your timeline of a few weeks is
a very important one.
In terms of the other agreements with Panama having been
signed in June of 2007--they have signed this tax information
exchange agreement--they recently signed trade agreements with
the E.U. and Canada.
With regard to Colombia, it was signed in November 2006.
Since that time, our exporters have paid over $3 billion in
duties to Colombia. Canada will implement a trade agreement in
June. The E.U. is soon to complete. Colombia is our largest
export market in South America.
So with regard to those agreements, I appreciate the
language that you want to complete those by this year. But
frankly, those are statements I would have expected two years
ago. We are seeing other countries move forward dramatically.
We are losing market share in those countries as they develop
trade relationships with other places. We need specific,
concrete steps.
Can you tell me what specific things or items need to occur
with regard to the Colombia and Panama agreements that would
allow the Administration to move forward?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, let me
assure you we share your concern with respect to the
competitive market that is developing in South America and
their very aggressive efforts to sign other free trade
agreements.
But we also share a very firm belief, and an unshakeable
belief, that the only way we can go forward in a manner that I
think all of us would like to is that if we work together
collaboratively, just as we did on the Korea FTA, and not just
hear from those that, frankly, want me to cut the gas line and
put the pedal to the metal and go forward; and not just those
that, frankly, are stomping on the brake and say, do nothing.
We have got to find a way to find common ground on some of
those core values that, at least for the Obama Administration,
we won't compromise on.
And we want to get these done, but we want to get them done
in a way that we address the underlying concerns about labor
rights. This is a little bit different than Korea in which,
frankly, we were addressing issues of market access. These are
more fundamental issues.
But what we want to do, and what we will do, is intensify
our engagement over the next several weeks, I am sending a team
to Colombia next week. As you know, Ranking Member Levin, I
think, visited Colombia during the January recess. Finance
Committee Chairman Baucus is going to go down. We will then
meet with all the stakeholders, human rights groups, and come
up with a workable plan, and sit down with our partners in
Colombia to address those.
Chairman CAMP. When you say ``we,'' are you planning to go
to Colombia and Panama as well?
Ambassador KIRK. I don't know that I am going to go. USTR
is sending a team. I may go, and I may wait and see what the
plans are, as they evolve, for the President's visit to South
America later this spring.
Chairman CAMP. Well, I guess my point was that the time for
generalities has passed, to say, we need to continue to work
forward on these. We really need specifics. And we need an
action plan of benchmarks that we can meet to move this
forward.
I think these have languished long enough, really far too
long. And to the extent you can shed light on any specific
items, I think we would all be enlightened.
Ambassador KIRK. Well, I want to do that, Mr. Chairman. But
we are using the same approach as we did last year when--I
think it was in June at the G20 Forum--President Obama directed
our office to sit down and negotiate with our partners in
Korea. We were able to do that in a reasonably efficient period
of time.
We want to take that same approach with respect to Panama
and Colombia. The issues are different. As I said, in Colombia
there are longstanding concerns in terms of the rights of
workers and violence against union organizers. In Panama, we
have made good progress on a number of the issues in terms of
addressing some of their labor law concerns.
As I understand, they have worked with our Department of
the Treasury to address the issues of their having been labeled
a tax haven by OECD, and are moving on the tax information
exchange agreement.
Chairman CAMP. With Panama, is there anything left for the
Panamanians to do?

Ambassador KIRK. There are still a couple of concerns over
some recent changes to their labor law. But we have been in
consultation with the Panamanian government in trying to get
those resolved to our satisfaction.

Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Levin may inquire.

Mr. LEVIN. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I think that your
question has helped to frame the issue. You said, ``the time
for generalities''. They weren't generalities. The issues with
Korea were very specific.
The way it was negotiated did not assure access to the
market for our automotive goods. You worked on this. It was
very specific. They were shutting us out, shipping 500,000 cars
a year. We were shipping 5,000. Hyundai has 1500 dealerships
here, I think. Ford has one. Our automotive producers and their
suppliers insisted that trade be a two-way street. It was very
specific.
If the Republicans had had their way, or the Bush
Administration theirs, we would have approved the Korea Free
Trade Agreement essentially having a major part of our economy
shut out from their market when they had complete access to
ours.
As for Panama, we started discussions. The issues were very
specific. They related to the violation by Panama of basic
international standards, as outlined in our State Department
reports and in the ILO reports, in terms of worker rights, and
its states as a tax haven. We tried to work with them, but then
they elected someone as the Speaker of the House who had an
arrest warrant out for him for killing an American, and those
discussions stopped. It was very specific.
When it comes to Colombia, Mr. Ambassador has laid out the
areas where there are issues. And we have been discussing these
for years with the Colombians. The ILO and State Department
reports have spelled these out year after year after year.
Now, there is a new administration in Colombia which says
that it now wants to address these issues that were not
satisfactorily addressed by the previous administration. And
now the Ambassador has said that there is an effort to see if
common ground can be reached.
So I think there isn't a lack of specificity. There has
been a lack of a willingness to work with us to resolve basic
important economic issues.
Let me just ask you, if I might, Mr. Ambassador, about TPP
and proceeding. You intend to table something next week, do
you, in terms of TPP? And I think it is important we proceed,
but in the right way. There will be a tabling of some proposals
next week?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes, there will. As you know, we have had
four rounds of talks. We are moving very aggressively to meet
our own goal, which is aspirationally, to craft a trade
agreement for the 21st century with the highest standards in
every area across the board. We will be meeting in Chile next
week for the first round of more intense negotiations, and we
will begin tabling proposals in certain categories at that
time.
Mr. LEVIN. Everyone should note that we have trade
agreements with most of the participants in TPP. It is the
newcomers in terms of a trade agreement, Vietnam and now
Malaysia who raise some important issues, not only in terms of
worker rights, which is important, but in terms of agriculture,
et cetera.
And as we have discussed, I hope very much that before
those proposals are tabled, that there will be further
consultations with this committee regarding the specifics,
including those relating to investment.
Ambassador KIRK. We will. And we have--and I think as you
know, Mr. Chairman, we have had the most extensive
consultations with this committee and your companion committee
of jurisdiction in the Senate, as well as all of the
stakeholders on TPP as we have ever done before, and we will
continue that.
But this is an opportunity in which, one, I think we have
all benefitted from the fact that we are starting with a blank
sheet of paper, so to speak. We aren't burdened by some of the
arguments that have derailed some of our trade agreements in
the past.
But it is an opportunity for the United States to be in the
lead in crafting the architecture for what we hope will be the
most advanced trade-liberalizing free trade agreements in one
of the most dynamic regions of the world.
Mr. LEVIN. More consultation is needed. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. I just want to comment that I was
concerned about market access on the South Korea agreement from
the beginning. But that really sort of begs the question. I am
not really interested in why these agreements weren't passed
two and a half years ago. I am interested in why they are not
being passed now, given all that has happened.
So with that, I will recognize Mr. Herger for 5 minutes.
Mr. HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a timeline here of key President Obama
Administration statements regarding the Colombia trade
promotion agreement. Unfortunately, I won't have time to go
through all of it in my 5 minutes. However, I will like to have
it included in the record, and I will just touch on some
highlights.
[The information follows The Honorable Wally Herger:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.013

Mr. HERGER. Ambassador Kirk, the President's 2009 trade
policy agenda released in February of that year two years ago
stated, ``We are in the process of developing a plan of action
to address the pending trade agreements in consultation with
Congress. We plan to establish benchmarks for progress on that
Colombia FTA.''
In April of 2009, during a speech at Georgetown University
School of Law, you stated, ``We are looking for new solutions
to the issues that have dragged on in existing free trade
agreements. At the Summit of the Americas, President Obama
instructed me to lead a review of the Colombia agreement to
deal with outstanding issues there.''
Now let's skip to about a year later, in March of 2010, and
your testimony at Senate Finance hearings. You stated that the
pending FTAs were a priority, and that USTR was working to
resolve the outstanding issues so that they could move forward
with the agreements.
And in response to a question on the Colombia FTA, you
stated the following: ``We are hopeful we can come to some
solution with Members of Congress over the next several months
so we can go back to Colombia with specific goals. What we
don't want to do is keep moving the goalpost. This agreement is
almost singularly to the benefit of the United States.''
Moving forward a few months to July 2010, in announcing the
establishment of the President's Export Council, the President
again reiterated that the Administration was working to resolve
the ``outstanding issues'' with the pending FTAs with the goal
of submitting them to Congress ``as soon as possible.''
Now, in 2011, during a speech at Third Way, Mr. Ambassador,
you stated, ``We took the time to do the Korea FTA right. And
so we think it is important: Just as we have done with Korea,
let's not short-circuit that process with Panama and Colombia.
They are just as important to us.''
Mr. Ambassador, how much longer will the wait continue
until the Colombia agreement is ready for Congress? It has been
two years since the Administration announced its plan to
develop benchmarks on Colombia. We waited a year. And then the
Administration again stated that it is working on a list of
recommendations for the Colombians.
Where are these recommendations, these benchmarks that the
Administration wants to see in place? And again, how much
longer do we have to wait until the Colombia agreement is
ready?
Ambassador KIRK. I appreciate your recitation of our
commitment on that. We are firm in that. And hopefully, Mr.
Herger, it won't be much longer.
We share your concern. We want to move forward on these
agreements. But the reality is there is a very wide--you can
tell from this committee, there has been a very wide divergence
of thought as to how we ought to proceed. And one thing
President Obama instructed me was to sit down with those on
both sides of the aisle, stakeholders of every opinion, about
how we are to go forward and see if we can't find a common way
forward.
But we also made a firm commitment, when we came into
office, that we didn't feel it was our responsibility just to
pick up all of these trade agreements as they were and move
forward. We took the time to take a step back and take a
strategic look at how we wanted trade to fit into our overall
economic policy and our number one goal. And that is how we get
this economy going and how we create jobs.
And that included not only looking at and examining these
free trade agreements, but the work that we have done on
enforcement, the work we have done to engage labor and
communities and business to come up with a plan that will allow
us to do as we have done with Korea. And as I announced today,
the President has directed us to do that same thing in the
coming months with our partners with Colombia and Panama.
As Ranking Member Levin noted, we have new leadership in
Colombia. Vice President Garzon was here last week. We have met
with him. There is a renewed sense, I think, of urgency on both
parts. And we will be meeting with them in the coming weeks and
months to address those issues.
And it is different in the case of Korea because it isn't
just related to market access. It goes to some of those core
values that I think many Americans want Congress to take into
account as it relates to how we treat and respect the rights of
workers. And that is an issue that, at least for the Obama
Administration, we won't compromise on.
Mr. HERGER. Well, Mr. Kirk, I appreciate that. But that
sounds very much like we have been hearing for the last two
years.
Chairman CAMP. And the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Johnson is recognized.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First I want to
welcome my friend from Dallas. Too bad you weren't there; the
Super Bowl might have been a better place to go.
Ambassador KIRK. Unfortunately, I was there, sliding
around. But I didn't go to the game.
Mr. JOHNSON. God bless you. Ambassador Kirk and I have
known each other for a long time. I am glad he has finally had
the opportunity to visit here on this committee. I would like
the committee to know, for the record, he and I used to bet
dinners, and he still owes me one.
Now, Mr. Ambassador, as a former Dallas mayor, I know you
are well aware of the benefits of trade to our area. And I am
sure you know the Dallas area is the ninth largest metropolitan
exporter in the United States. In 2008 alone, Dallas exported
almost $7 billion to both NAFTA and CAFTA. The numbers go on
and on.
In 3 years before the U.S.-Australia agreement, exports
from Texas to Australia averaged $800 million. In the three
years after that trade agreement, Texas exports averaged $1.3
billion per year, an increase of 66 percent.
Before the U.S.-Chile agreement, Texas exports to Chile
were declining. Since the agreement, Texas exports to Chile
have increased by 107 percent.
You know, those numbers just tell me that we are spinning
our wheels. This agreement was signed in 2007, and this is
2011, and we still haven't finished them. Now, I would like to
know why we are delaying because other nations in the world are
taking our place in the trade environment. And it is because
you haven't been able to finish the job. And most of it, you
are telling me, is labor-related.
I would like to know your opinion on that and what you
intend to do. And I will tell you what. You get these three
agreements done, you don't have to buy me a dinner.
[Laughter.]
Ambassador KIRK. Sam, I have enjoyed your friendship, and
we have shared a lot of plates of Mexican food over the years.
And it would be loath for me to quarrel with a good friend in
public, but I am not so sure who holds which last dinner. But
we won't make dinner contingent on these agreements.
Let me say this. I was incredibly honored and humbled when
President Obama asked me to serve the Administration in this
capacity. And frankly, Sam, you know there were a lot of people
who were a little bit skeptical of me coming from Dallas, for
the reasons you articulated.
We believe in trade. We understand it. We have seen the
impact of it in our city and our state. Texas is the number one
exporting state in the country. So you don't need to convince
me how important these agreements would be to our economy.
But when I raised my hand and took that oath, I agreed to
be United States Trade Representative for the entire country.
And like the congressman over here, my wife is from Detroit.
And so I brought with me not just our passion for exports that
we have in Texas, but I also brought with me the concern and
frustration of all of my in-laws in Detroit, in Cleveland, in
Pittsburgh, who when I showed up and told them I was going to
be the Trade Representative, thought I was a two-headed monster
because they believe they haven't benefitted from trade.
And so what we have committed ourselves to doing is trying
to find that common ground because the only way we can go
forward in a way that allows our farmers and ranchers and
manufacturers and states that want us to go is we have to keep
faith with the rest of America that wants to know we have a
trade policy that works for everybody and not just for some of
us.
You know I like African proverbs, and one of my favorites
is pretty simple. And it says, ``You should take no comfort
from the hole in my end of the boat.'' And the problem of too
much of our trade debate is in places sometimes like Texas or
Florida or Washington, we just look at our heads and say, poor
Pittsburgh. Poor Carolinas. Poor Detroit. And we aren't going
to get there.
That is why these agreements were stalled. I don't have to
tell you there are strong differences on this committee whether
we go forward or not. What we have been doing is trying to not
only craft trade policy that allows us to have open, fair
access to these markets, address that asymmetry we have with
many of them, but also helps us restore the American public's
faith that trade can work for us, that we can create jobs here.
That is what we did successfully, I think, with Korea, and
that is what we are working to do with Panama and Colombia.
Mr. JOHNSON. It will create jobs. Right.
Ambassador KIRK. It will create jobs. But----
Mr. JOHNSON. But how about getting it done, all three of
them? All three of them. Can you tell us you will do that?
Ambassador KIRK. I can do it if I can get this committee to
come together and agree that just as important as it is to open
up markets, it is equally important to make sure that we keep
faith with America's workers and we don't compromise on our
core values of standing up for workers' rights. If we can come
together on that, we can do anything. We did it on Korea. We
need to do it on Panama and Colombia.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. I would yield to Mr. McDermott.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome,
Ambassador. Good to see you here. On a historical note, I would
point out to the Members of the Committee, who want specifics.
In 5 days, the TAA program ends. 150,000 American workers will
be ending their trade adjustment assistance. Now, I wonder if
you are serious. It was on the calendar yesterday, but you took
it off the calendar. It is not on the calendar today. This is
Wednesday.
Is it going to be on Thursday or Friday, and be passed
through the Senate by Monday, so that 150,000 workers in this
country do not lose their assistance? If you are serious about
trade and you want to make it all about somebody else out there
and ignore the people in the United States, the workers, you
are going to have a tough time.
But let me move to another issue because there are other
things besides Colombia and Panama. How are we going to work
and move forward on intellectual property protection in China?
How are we going to keep the focus on this issue in China? I
know when the Chinese were here, with respect to the piracy of
business software, they continue to be long on promises and
very short on performance.
It practically didn't come up when President Hu was here,
and it doesn't appear that the Chinese are stepping up to
address the massive piracy which is underway in their
enterprises, including the state-owned enterprises which put
U.S. companies at a competitive disadvantage.
It seems to me that the Chinese are very clever in how they
have moved around. The Chinese audit authority has the ability
to track how much money in the China procurement system is
being spent. That is helpful, but it doesn't end the piracy.
They don't check as to whether or not the software used in
their government is legal.
Now, what is the plan? What do we need to do to help you
enforce the good words that come out of Beijing? They are nice
words. I appreciate them. But we would like to have some help
from you about how we can help to enforce that.

STATEMENT OF HONORABLE JIM MCDERMOTT

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.029

Ambassador KIRK. The issue of piracy and copyrighting of
America's intellectual goods and work product is one of our key
concerns at USTR. It is a key component of our enforcement
efforts, and it is a key part of our dialogue with China.
And I would only add one correction, perhaps, to your
introduction of this subject. This issue did come up in
President Hu's visit with President Obama. He addressed it
directly.
As you know, we recently concluded the Joint Commission on
Commerce and Trade, which Secretary Locke and I take the lead,
in December. We did get a commitment from the Government of
China to begin to address more rigorously the absence of using
legitimate software in their government procurement.
During President Hu's visit, we got two additional
important commitments that, one, they are going to provide
money for it. The Chinese have said they would do this a number
of times, but they didn't give their governments and sub-
governments any resources to purchase legitimate software. For
the first time, they have committed to do that. And secondly,
we did get them to make a commitment to audit that.
But as you know, our engagement with China is important. It
is complex. There is a reason that we have regular engagements
with China through the JCCT as well as strategic economic
dialogue. And we will be as diligent as you say the Chinese are
crafty in pressing them to make sure they honor and respect
American intellectual property and copyrights because that is
an extraordinary opportunity for our industries to grow into
that market.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. I would like to also just thank you. I
appreciate that. If there are things that we can do, I hope you
will let us know because I think this committee would be
interested in trying to support the USTR in their enforcement
efforts.
We know that the Bush Administration, Peru passed, the free
trade agreement, after the agreement made on May 10th by Mr.
Rangel and Mr. Levin with the President and the USTR in that
Administration.
You are about to table something in Chile, and I hope that
you don't weaken the things that were agreed upon in that May
10th agreement that made possible the Peru agreement,
particularly the access to medications. I think that is one of
the issues that gets slipped under the table. We think of
environment and we talk about labor, but sometimes the access
to medication provision in there gets lost. I hope that that
will be a part of what you table on Monday when you get to
Chile.
Chairman CAMP. If you could just respond briefly because
time has expired.
Ambassador KIRK. I would say I don't know that we are to
that point we are tabling on access. But I would say, for us,
the value of our Administration, the May 10th agreement
represents a good, sound bipartisan agreement among Democrats
and Republicans. And that is certainly something that we are
going to reach for in every one of our agreements.
Now, we have the opportunity, from what we have learned
over the last 7 years, that there are some areas that weren't
addressed, like indigenous innovation and state-owned
enterprises. But that is something that we are using as
something we are striving for, certainly in something as
aspirational as we hope to achieve through the Trans-Pacific
Partnership.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
The Chairman of the Trade Subcommittee, Mr. Brady, is
recognized.
Mr. BRADY. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would like to ask
consent to insert my statement for the record.
Chairman CAMP. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of The Honorable Kevin Brady.]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.015

Mr. BRADY. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing. The way you build bipartisan support for trade is
by shining a light on this job-producing issue. And House
Republicans, especially this committee, are going to conduct a
very aggressive trade agenda, focused on three areas: finding
new customers, and opening new markets in a level playing field
for American workers and companies; secondly, resisting
protectionism, both here and abroad, so that we can tear down
barriers for American producers and companies; and thirdly,
working both within the United States and with our trading
partners to find innovative ways to move goods and services
faster, better, and cheaper around this world.
Your presence today, Ambassador, we think is key to those
goals, and we look forward to you as a partner in all of those.
We will be not just a willing partner but an insistent partner
moving forward on trade.
I appreciate, one, your openness and willingness to consult
and listen and talk about all of these issues these past 2
years. I congratulate you on successful improvement of the
South Korea Free Trade Agreement. I very much applaud the
joining of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. I think that is key
to both job production, setting a state-of-the-art agreement,
and getting us directly into China's back yard in that growing
market.
Three points I hope you will take with you today from this
committee. One, the time is up for Colombia and Panama. They
have not only done all that we have asked, they have gone far
beyond it, signing the original agreement with the United
States, a contract with us.
Then they amended it at the direction of Democrat members
and Republican members in a bipartisan May 10th agreement. Both
agreed to improve labor standards, improve environmental
standards, improve intellectual property rights standards, a
whole host of demands that have been levied upon them, and they
did it.
Then both went beyond that, reaching in Panama to the tax
information treaty addressing more labor issues. They have done
everything we have asked of them. It is time for Panama.
Colombia has done the same, spending a decade improving
their rule of law, their labor rights, creating a peace where
there was violence. They too have been waiting to jump,
frankly, to meet our demands so that we can be actual trading
partners. And I think it is embarrassing that we have not moved
forward on them.
And so I hope you will understand, this isn't about--these
three trade agreements need to be submitted in the first six
months. It is not about embarrassing any party or the White
House. It is about making sure America doesn't further
embarrass itself by turning its back on our trading partners
and our workers in the meantime.
The second point is that Russia, indeed--I think there are
tremendous benefits to moving them into a rules-based global
system, and I applaud your work in that area. But as a
priority, I think it is important to know that there is
virtually no chance that a Russia PNTR will be moved ahead of
Panama and Colombia.
I think it is critical that those be signed by the
President before we take that up. Russia's progress can be
measured in months. Panama and Colombia's efforts can be
measured in years and years, and they deserve movement now.
Final point. The Administration is looking at
reorganization of trade and exporting efforts. I think that is
very important. But USTR is unique. It is a very lean,
entrepreneurial, nimble agency in an economy worldwide that
requires all that.
I am not interested in turning USTR from a cougar into a
hippo on trade issues. Stay nimble. You will get great support
from all of us.
I would like your comments on those points, and as well on
TPP as a job opportunity looking forward. I know you are
working hard on that. Can you address any of those issues?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes. And I am aware of the time
constraints, Mr. Chairman. Just let me say, Congressman Brady,
we very much look forward to working with you and your
leadership on the subcommittee.
Being from Houston and understanding the importance of that
port, the one thing I would tell you, in TPP, also with our
partners in North America, we really are looking at the
logistics side of all of these, those non-tariff barriers, to
make it easier and cheaper to move those goods around. So that
is a big part of what we are doing on that.
I hear your concerns and those of members of both sides on
Panama and Colombia. I assure you we are ready to get started.
We want to try to get those resolved.
With respect to USTR, I am exceptionally privileged to
lead, I think, an agency that provides the best bang for the
buck to the American taxpayers. There are only 230 of us. We do
an extraordinary service in negotiating agreements, enforcing
America's rights. And that does make our work special and we
want to keep that.
But at the same time, having been in business, you and I
know if you don't examine how you do what you do every three or
4 or 5 years, you are losing ground. So we welcome this review
under the President's commission. But we will also make sure
that we don't lose what makes USTR special, and our ability to
help go out and create jobs with what we do.
Mr. BRADY. As a fellow Texan, thank you very much.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Nunes is recognized.
Mr. NUNES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kirk, welcome to the committee. And here, virtually
everyone on this side of the aisle has asked you about
specifics as it relates to Colombia and Panama. And we still
haven't heard any specifics. The ranking member, Mr. Levin,
mentioned that these specifics do exist, although we still
don't know what they are.
I did hear you specifically say--you mentioned something
when Mr. Johnson was questioning. You mentioned the communities
of Pittsburgh, Detroit, and the Carolinas as not benefitting
from trade. So I thought that was getting close to specifics.
And I just wondered, how do those communities not benefit
from the Colombian or Panama trade agreements?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, first of all, if I said that, I
misspoke myself. I think all Americans benefit from trade
because, first of all, every family benefits when we make it
easier and cheaper to put food on the table to feed your
families, when we make it easier to provide the most advanced
electronics to help your kids with their education.
But there are communities--and I know you won't find it a
surprise--that feel like that our trade policy has not operated
to their benefit, that they have been harmed more than they
have been helped. And it is a very broad brush. You get west of
the Mississippi River and most of the members that I talk to,
Democrat or Republican, are wanting me to move forward. You get
into the Rust Belt and there is a little more cynicism about
it.
And it isn't just that. Our concern is an overwhelming
majority of Americans now disagree with the proposition that
trade has been good for us. We have to work----
Mr. NUNES. Right. But when it comes specifically to Panama
and Colombia, those countries have access into our market and
we do not have access into their market. We would under these
trade agreements if they were advanced.
Ambassador KIRK. That is correct.
Mr. NUNES. So if that is true, then why don't we--all we
want are specifics. I think all Colombia and Panama are asking
for is, specifically, what do you want us to do? They have gone
beyond the labor chapter in the Andean Trade Preference Act.
They have explicitly incorporated the International Labor
Organization declaration into this agreement.
So all we want are specifics as to what is the Obama
Administration asking Colombia and Panama to do before the
President will submit these trade agreements to be approved by
the Congress?
Ambassador KIRK. Let me make it plain. There are different
elements involved in Panama and Colombia. They are not the
same. With respect to Colombia, we are decidedly focusing on
the issue of labor rights, the violence against workers. There
has been some progress, and obviously some of you are reading
from perhaps different hymn books. But I would say there is a
fairly strong divergence of thought on this committee, and
among a number of our stakeholders, how much Colombia has--the
progress they have made in putting in place the necessary
changes to their labor law to just provide those basic rights,
to organize and such--we are not asking them to mirror our
rules here in the United States--and to strengthen their
judiciary, and the law enforcement, to bring those that have
perpetrated this violence to justice.
Those are the issues that we are trying to focus on. We
want to take advantage again of the fact-finding mission of
your ranking member. Again, Chairman Baucus is going to go
down. We are sending a team. We are going to do everything we
can to expedite that, Mr. Nunes, so that we can agree what----
Mr. NUNES. But Mr. Ambassador, aren't these matters outside
the confines of the trade agreement that was signed on May 10,
2007?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes. In many cases, they are. But I think
they are issues that the American public believe are sacrosanct
for us. I mean, again, the reason I gave you that recitation
about my experience around the country, part of the American
public's frustration, the biggest thing I have heard, is one,
nobody else plays by the rules but us. And it wasn't just
China. They felt like our trading partners weren't playing by
the rules, and we wouldn't stand up and enforce our rights. We
have addressed that.
But the other thing is people's concern that we will sign
an agreement with anything. If somebody has benefitted, we will
sign it, and we don't care how they treat their workers or if
it undercuts our workers or creates an unlevel playing field.
And that is why we think it is important to address that,
not just to find a way to go forward, but to begin to get
Americans' confidence that trade works for us. We can create
jobs here, and we aren't creating incentives to just move
production to another country that may not respect the rights
of those workers.
Mr. NUNES. Well, I know that President Obama is going to go
down to South America. He is going to visit Brazil. And I just
think before we go on--and I don't have a problem with him
going to Brazil; I think it is a positive step.
But with Colombia still sitting out there, and he is going
to that hemisphere, and for that trade agreement to be sitting
out there, I just don't know what credibility the President
will have or the Administration will have when we still have
pending trade agreements from 2007 and we are operating outside
of the confines of those trade agreements asking for things
that, quite frankly, Mr. Ambassador, go outside of all the
rules of engagement on making these trade agreements.
And I will submit--I want to thank you, Ambassador, and I
will submit, Mr. Chairman, for the record a question on the
Mexico trucking issue.
[The information follows The Honorable Devin Nunes:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.026

Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. Mr. McDermott is
recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Stark, for giving me another 5 minutes.
I would like to go on with the question of China. In
Section 301, the green technologies issue, there was a letter
from us, 178 Democrats and three Republicans, asking you to
look into what was going on there in terms of their green
technology and wind turbines.
It is my understanding you have decided to find a case on
the wind turbine issue, and we are very much pleased by all of
that. You said, in doing that, that you lack the tools and the
resources to uncover all the evidence within the statutory time
frame.
Tell us what you need to make it possible for you to do
this in other areas and in a more timely fashion because we
want to work hand-in-glove with you to make these things work
for our workers, for our economy.
Ambassador KIRK. Well, first of all--and we do appreciate
your letter, and as you know, a 301 petition was filed last
fall regarding China's industrial policies in a number of the
energy areas. There were five different complaints alleged.
The good news is we were able to successfully resolve the
overwhelming majority of those by directly engaging and
confronting China through our office at USTR, but also through
JCCT. We did initiate consultations through the World Trade
Organization on China's, we think, illegal subsidy of projects
in the wind area. We are beginning consultations there.
I want to be careful in this environment in which I know at
the same time this committee is meeting, your budget committee
is meeting. And you are in a horribly constrained environment.
And we are asking American families to tighten their belt and
make decisions, and I know it is too easy sometimes for all of
us to just come and say, give us more resources.
Now, having said that, we have a very strong team at USTR,
but we are not all lawyers. That 223 employees is everybody,
from top to bottom. And if we are going to have the robust
enforcement that we have committed ourselves and engaged on,
one of the things we are going to be looking, perhaps, through
this organization is how we can strengthen our resources there
because we have great legal talent that understands the law and
can prosecute cases.
We are woefully short, frankly, on the investigative side,
so in many cases, we have to rely on the resources of other
agencies. Something as simple as when we take on a case with
China--in the tires case that Congressman Levin mentioned, we
exhausted our translation budget in three months on one case
with China because of the amount of money we had to spend on
translators.
But we are working with other agencies to see if we can't
address that, and we will be happy to come back and visit with
the committee on ways that will add the resources to make sure
that we can stand up for our rights and America's workers.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Can I ask further? We have talked a little
about the Korean Free Trade Agreement, and I would like to hear
from you what you think the positives impacts were. We are
arguing or fussing about the timeline and when will it be up
here and all that. When it happens, give us an idea what you
anticipate will be the positive impacts on the economy.
I understand you estimate $10 billion as opposed to $1
billion in Colombia, so it seems like a much bigger deal. But
where is that going to happen in the economy?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, first I want--and I do appreciate
that. The $10 billion number is one that the ITC estimates. We
don't do the economic estimates. They take that away from us.
We think that is a fairly conservative number because the way
we capture trade data right now is much more heavily weighted
to manufactured and exported goods. It is not as precise as it
relates to services.
We talked a lot about what this will do to level the
playing field in the automotive sector. But this is going to be
very good for all American manufacturers because we are going
to see a reduction in those tariffs immediately, the
elimination of most of them in the first 5 years, and 80
percent of our exports to Korea are in the manufactured goods
sector.
For those of you from farm states, this is a great win for
us. Our beef exports are up 187 percent. We are now exporting
almost $500 million worth of beef in Korea. The tariffs on
those are going to come down immediately. It is also going to
help grains and soybeans and others, so those sectors are going
to benefit as well.
Where we really see an opportunity for us to gain market
access is in Korea's service market. It is a $560 billion
market that we for the most part have had very little
penetration. For the first time, we are going to have access to
that.
So we think the $10 billion number is compelling. The
70,000 jobs, we actually believe that is a fairly conservative
number. The other important thing, it gives us a foothold,
again, in one of the most economically dynamic regions in
Southeast Asia and strengthens what is already a very strong
strategic partnership between the United States and South
Korea.
Chairman CAMP. Alright. Thank you.
Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Ambassador, for
your leadership, and thank you for being here today. As you may
remember, I am from Ohio, one of those Rust Belt states that
you talked about. I know you have an Ohio connection as well.
A quick question: The President has talked about doubling
exports. Can we do that without passing any additional trade
agreements?
Ambassador KIRK. It would be difficult. And again, one of
our passions for getting Korea and the others right, Mr.
Tiberi, is to do that. Now----
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Ambassador KIRK. I would tell you, to this point our
exports are running at about 17 percent per annum clip, which
is above the 15 percent needed. But certainly if we can get not
only Korea but Panama and Colombia and Trans-Pacific
Partnership done, it will make that goal much more----
Mr. TIBERI. And increasing exports means increasing jobs,
growing the economy. Correct?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes, sir.
Mr. TIBERI. You talked about cynicism, and you were
absolutely right on. In my state, in my district, there is a
ton of cynicism with respect to trade, and there is a
disconnect between trade and exporting. And I appreciate your
leadership. It has been absolutely fantastic.
However, there is a farmer in this room from my district.
His name is John Davis. And he is cynical as well with respect
to Washington, D.C., and here is why.
If you sat at his farm home in the fall of 2008 during the
election, you would have seen a Candidate Obama talk about
repealing NAFTA, how CAFTA was bad, how trade has cost jobs. If
you would have sat in his farmhouse during the last election in
2010, you would have seen more money than I have ever seen
spent in Central Ohio, as well as in the Cleveland market, in
the Cincinnati market, about how trade has cost hundreds of
thousands of jobs in our state. Trade is the big bogeyman with
respect to how Ohio's economy has suffered.
And so if you are John Davis sitting in this room and you
want to hear about cynicism, how do we stop that cynicism when
every 2 years in an election we have people running for office
making trade the bogeyman? Nobody, nobody, understands that you
are going to--in my state, at least, other than people who work
this every day who you talk to who maybe run companies or farm
like John Davis, that we could, for instance, with Panama, by
passing Panama, we can double agriculture exports from the
United States, which means, again, more healthy farmers.
But that is the minority. It is not the majority of Ohioans
because all they see coming from leaders, like President Obama
when he was campaigning in 2008, that trade costs jobs. That
puts a tremendous amount of pressure on you and on me and
everybody else up here when we try to tell them, no. Exporting
and trade actually is going to grow our economy.
And I think the President is disadvantaged when now he
says, we are going to grow the economy by exporting--and, by
the way, not talking about trade agreements--because he is one
of many who has said trade has cost us hundreds of thousands of
jobs.
As you know, Canada is Ohio's largest trading partner and
has created a ton of jobs in Ohio. And Canada is a great ally,
not just a great trading partner. So how do you, as the point
person, who has been dealt a very difficult hand and has
handled it very professionally, help bridge that disconnect
with the American people and the people in the Rust Belt that
no, trade is good, trade can be very good, trade can actually
grow our economy, exports mean trade, and it can actually
create more jobs in America and create a better America for all
of us and our kids?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, you heard Mr. Brady talk about my
work as a mayor, and I always tried to govern myself with one
principle, that the truth is always an option. And
unfortunately, I don't know that either one of your statements
is wrong.
And one thing we are doing is going to place like
Cleveland, and going to Detroit, not just going to Dallas and
Washington and others, and talking truthfully about what the
promise of trade is. But it also means then that we have to
have a less tin ear to those that say we need help.
So one of the things you do--and I agree; I think it was
Congressman McDermott--we do need to pass trade adjustment
assistance. And we need to enforce our rights as we did in the
tires case. And then we can get people to sit and listen. We
can make the case and help them understand trade can help
create jobs in Ohio.
Mr. TIBERI. Well, Ambassador, I hope that your leadership--
--
Ambassador KIRK. Obviously, Rob Portman made a good case of
it because he----
Mr. TIBERI. Yes. Well, I hope you use your leadership to
help us get Colombia and Panama across the line as well because
if we are indeed going to double our exports in the next
several years, it is critical that we pass Colombia and pass
Panama in the very near future.
Ambassador KIRK. Yes.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Davis is recognized.
Mr. DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Kirk, before asking my question, I would like to
comment briefly on the Japan Post insurance issue, which I know
you are aware of, which is a matter of serious concern to many
of us on the Committee.
Members of both parties are watching closely to see how the
Japan Post privatization is handled. This issue is very
important to U.S. insurance companies. I know you have worked
hard to encourage Japan to reform Japan Post in a manner
consistent with its WTO obligations, and I am concerned that
the privatization efforts to date may not fully be in
compliance with its commitments as a member of the WTO.
Mr. Ambassador, we support your efforts and those of your
predecessors and hope that you can achieve a successful
resolution to this issue soon. I will be submitting a question
for the record pertaining to this important issue.
But for my question today, I would like to come back a
little bit closer to home, to some of the agreements that have
already been touched on. I would like to hear your thoughts on
the geopolitical or geostrategic aspects of two of our pending
free trade agreements, Panama and Colombia.
They are key U.S. allies in Central and South America where
Venezuela's anti-American president, Hugo Chavez, seeks to
undermine U.S. interests and dominate the political landscape.
Panama and Colombia are also key links in the north-south
inter-American drug trade. By not implementing these
agreements, we are allowing some in Latin America to question
our commitment to the region.
I am not alone in this belief. In May 2008, five former
heads of the United States Southern Command wrote an open
letter to Congress strongly urging support for the Colombia
Free Trade Agreement. In light of the significant U.S.
strategic interests in the region, I am concerned that the
failure to move these agreements could precipitate a setback
for U.S. influence in the region.
Do you share these concerns? And if you do, would you mind
elaborating on them for a moment?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, let me say that we have examined our
relationship in Latin America from every standpoint. Now, I am
always--I try to be guided by the reality that the only reason
the Office of U.S. Trade Representative exists is because
Congress mandated that there be someone that looked at these
purely from sort of a commercial standpoint, not a strategic
one. That is why we are no longer housed in the State
Department.
Having said that, we fully understand the strategic
importance of our relationship with Colombia. We applaud the
work of both the Uribe administration and now the Santos
administration in working with us on the drug interdiction
areas. But that is why I think it is that much more important
that we are willing to try to find bipartisan compromise to
move forward on these agreements that stalled in May 2008.
In Panama, everywhere I have gone from the Port of
Baltimore to the Port of Orlando is getting ready and building
infrastructure here to take advantage of the widening of the
Panama Canal and the impact it can have on our port facilities
here to handle greater transshipment of goods back and forth.
So yes, we have examined all of those elements of the
benefits of that. And I think it just creates a great
imperative for us to come together on this other issue so we
can allow these agreements to move forward.
Mr. DAVIS. I guess I would like to go to a deeper level on
it. The concern that I have--and I appreciate, as Mr. Tiberi
noted, you have been dealt a difficult hand in dealing with
this. You understand firsthand the issues of the benefits of
trade.
But when we talk about raising the issues of the ILO
standards, we talk about various perspectives, out of concern
for the Colombians, let alone the Panamanians, we have had
their militaries come and plead with us, militaries across
Central America and the Colombians, to bring these agreements
about because of their internal security issues.
And labor leaders in Colombia have come and pleaded to have
us bring this forth. And those would have are strong organized
labor advocates in the Democratic caucus have chosen to ignore
the very voices that they say they are trying to help.
And I guess my concern is, considering that Colombia is
more in compliance, as I understand it, with these ILO
guidelines than we are, don't you think that this rhetoric is a
little bit--not yours--but a little bit dissonant? That we need
to actually agree that this needs to move forward? It needs to
move forward urgently both for economic and national security
concerns?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, we want to address all of the
outstanding concerns. I am not going to comment on your
interpretation of the Democratic members of this committee's
understanding of those ILO commitments.
And I would say--and I appreciate Mr. Tiberi's concerns.
But I enjoy the work that I have, and I think the President has
demonstrated great courage and leadership in articulating to
the American public how we can win, but we can win by having
trade agreements that fairly reflect our values, that open up
markets, that are enforceable. And if we can work in a manner
to get those done, then I think we will get to a place that we
are not having this conversation next year.
But the longer we want to sit and try to decide which party
is to blame for not moving it forward, that is how you end up
with these agreements being stalled for 4 years. And so I think
it is time to look. Let's find common ground. Let's stop
pointing fingers at one another and figure out a way to move
these forward.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Before I recognize Mr. Lewis for
5 minutes, after Mr. Lewis we will go to 3 minutes of
questioning. I know the Ambassador has to leave at 12:30, and I
want to give everybody an opportunity to ask a question of you.
So with that, I will recognize Mr. Lewis for 5 minutes.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Ambassador, I want to thank you for being here today, and thank
you for your service.
We have heard a great deal about delay. Wait. Is it better
to rush and get an agreement, or to wait and get it right? Now,
Mr. Ambassador, you know I am very concerned about the issue of
human rights, workers' rights, environmental issues. Some of
these concerns and issues are long-seated problems in Colombia.
You know, it is all right to talk the talk, but sometimes
we need people to walk the walk. And I am not sure that the
leaders, even the new leaders, are prepared to walk the walk.
There are too many killings, too many violations of human
rights, too many people disappearing.
And as you said, and I agree with you, our trade
agreements, our trade policies, should reflect our core values.
Could you just elaborate? What are you going to do to see that
the people in Colombia do the right thing? As someone said
before, the time is always right to do right, and if we don't
stand for something, we will fall for anything.
Ambassador KIRK. Congressman, thank you for your question.
Thank you for your service. You are a hero to so many of us who
value and respect human rights, and we appreciate your advocacy
and leadership on that.
I will say what I have said to others. We think that there
has to be a way for us to respect the sense of urgency that
America take advantage of these opportunities to conclude these
free trade agreements so we can say to that farmer, here is an
opportunity for you to grow your business. We can say to our
manufacturers.
But we have to keep faith with the American people that
want us to have a trade policy that reflects those values. And
so, again, my simple answer is we believe we have to be
responsive to both, and we can do so.
I know you have spent years studying and devoted to the
issue of human rights, labor rights in Colombia. I would tell
you we are greatly encouraged with not only the rhetoric but
the actions we have seen of the Santos administration, and that
is part of what is driving the President to encourage us to
intensify our negotiations.
I know for some there is still an unacceptable level of
violence. But we do believe, not only under the current
Administration but under previous Administrations, Colombia has
made great strides. We think we can build on that and work with
the new Administration, work with those of you on the committee
on both sides, and come up with the path forward that allows us
to address their sense of urgency but your concerns about
making sure we do so in a manner that takes care and respects
the rights of those workers.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Ambassador. Mr.
Chairman, I didn't take my 5 minutes. I think I took about
three.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Reichert is recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Ambassador. I have enjoyed working with you,
and you do enjoy your job, I have noticed that, although it is
a tough one.
The bottom line is that we want to sell American, and that
is really the message. And I think you are delivering that
message loud and clear. I am pleased to be a part of the Export
Council initiative with Mr. Tiberi and yourself and Secretary
Locke. And the goal, as I understand it, so far in the two
meetings we have had is to create two million jobs by doubling
exports.
As I have said in some previous trade hearings, we haven't
done that, doubled exports, since 1995, between the period of
1995 through 2007, and during that period of time, we passed
nine trade agreements.
So one of the first questions I was going to ask is whether
or not you thought that passing the Korean Free Trade
Agreement, or not passing, would impact the doubling exports
initiative. And your answer was, it would be difficult.
So I also want to say that I really appreciate your
recognizing right up front Washington State's issues as far as
Canada attracting new customers into their ports and not into
the Port of Seattle and Port of Tacoma when we first visited,
and the importance of Korea to Washington State, as Korea is
its fourth largest trading partner.
So what will be the impact of further delays in passing the
Korean agreement through Congress? What do you think they might
have on meeting that the Export Initiative's goals? And do you
believe, as I and many colleagues on both sides of the aisle
do, that we will lose hundreds of thousands of American jobs if
the E.U. implements its agreement with Korea before we pass
ours? And connected with that, we know that China has already
increased its exports--or imports to Colombia by over 200
percent. We are losing market share.
If that is true, we are going to lose thousands of jobs
with these two things happening. Doesn't the same hold true
with Colombia and Panama?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes. First of all, Congressman, thank you
for hosting us during the road show with the ASEAN ministers
when we were in Washington. Thanks for working with us on the
Export Council.
And in the interest of time, the answer to all your
questions is yes. I would add one thing, briefly. When we look
at Korea, we tend to look at the 70,000 jobs. It is important
to note 4 years ago we were the number one exporter in the
Korean market. Today we are number four and sinking fast.
So there are two ways to look at this. You can look at this
and say, we pass it, we have the opportunity to reap the
benefit of those 70,000 jobs. If we don't pass the Korea Free
Trade Agreement, we put at risk 270,000 jobs that are now tied
to all that we export to Korea.
And I would say to those of you concerned about Panama and
Colombia, I think it is a bit easy to look at Korea because it
is $10 billion. From our Administration--I can certainly speak
for me--every job is important. So whether Panama is a billion-
dollar market or Colombia is a $2 billion market, they
represent opportunities for some small business. And that is
why I think it is important we find a way to bridge our
differences to move forward on those as well.
Chairman CAMP. Alright. Thank you.
Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ambassador Kirk, I
am glad we finally have you in front of our committee, and so
welcome.
Look, I appreciate the work done on the South Korean Free
Trade Agreement. I know it is going to help workers. It is
going to help us grow jobs and business. But I can't pass up
this opportunity to say that rice, which is very important to
my state in Louisiana, was excluded.
We know no trade agreement is perfect. But I do believe
procrastination really hurts us from a standpoint of prestige,
credibility, and leverage. So it is time to move forward on
this agreement.
By contrast, if we look at Colombia, our commodities,
including rice, are included in this agreement, and we have
seen amazing statistics whereby U.S. exports of commodities
have plummeted just over the past year or two because we have
not moved forward and other countries are moving forward with
Colombia and free trade agreements.
So I hope that we will get to the point where we stop
hurting our farmers and rural communities and get moving on
these because it is going to help us export our commodities
going forward.
I want to raise an issue. You and the President have talked
extensively over the past 2 years about enforcement as a very
important part of your trade policy. I have a mid-sized
Louisiana company that cannot get payments on nearly $3.7
million in business with China, products that they sold to
China.
I believe having a robust bilateral investment treaty with
China is imperative. Other countries are doing this. If we are
going to regain a competitive footing and help especially small
and mid-sized firms, as the President has expressed interest in
doing, we need a robust dispute settlement mechanism to handle
this. And I think we are falling behind.
So what is the delay on the part of the Administration in
moving forward in getting a bilateral investment treaty
specifically with China?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, first of all, Congressman, thank you
for your comments about agriculture. And parenthetically, I
will tell you this year America's exports were up dramatically,
almost $106 billion, according to USDA. They are forecasting
that 2011 could be our highest year ever. We may reach as high
as $114 billion, and that is extremely important to all of
America's farmers and their workers and families. And we will
be looking to try to address some of your concerns about rice
within TPP and others.
With respect to enforcement, we are trying to do two things
with China. We are seeking a BIT with China. It would be
helpful. We have had four negotiating rounds thus far. We are
moving on parallel tracks because, one, we had already begun a
process to review our BIT model because we believed it needed
updating; it hadn't been revised in almost 10 years.
We are hopefully at the very end stages of that. We have
had extensive consultations with our committees of
jurisdiction, the business community, and there are only just a
couple of issues that remain to be resolved. But we are going
to try to get that work concluded as soon as possible as well,
and then we can go forward, not only with hopefully concluding
our BIT with China, but with India as well.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. The chair recognizes Mr. Neal.
Mr. NEAL. To you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ambassador, I want to weigh in, as Mr. Davis did, on
the issue of Japan Post. It is a very important issue to my
constituency, and we have gone back and forth on that with USTR
over a number of years. And I hope that you are going to
continue to vigorously pursue that issue in terms of reform.
Let me just, if I can, Mr. Ambassador, take us to an issue
that I think is important here. Our friends on the other side
suggested repeatedly that there have been these delays that we
have constructed into these FTAs. In many ways, the easiest
bilateral was Panama, and the problem was the complication that
was offered by the assembly speaker, who murdered, I believe,
an American soldier, who was alleged to have murdered an
American soldier.
The Bush Administration correctly pulled back on that
bilateral because of that human rights violation. So we can't
say that we are going to, as Mr. Lewis pointed out, dismiss
certain bad behavior with human rights if it is a Republican
president, and then insist that human rights ought not to be a
consideration if it is a Democratic president. And I think that
is the point that Mr. Lewis and I were trying to shop with you.
But could you give us an update on where we are with the
Panama bilateral, and what has happened with domestic politics
there that might ensure an easier path to completion?
Ambassador KIRK. I will try to. And thank you for your
comment. You are correct in noting that one of the reasons
Panama stalled was the complication of I think it was the head
of their assembly that had been convicted in a court in
Florida, in fact, of murdering a U.S. soldier. And the Bush
Administration wisely said, we aren't going to do business with
you.
After that person was removed from office, we began to
engage Panama on ways we could address the outstanding issues
we had presented to them. Then we had the intervening
complications of the OECD designated Panama as a tax haven.
And we were engaged with the previous Administration, and
we met with them in the Summit of the Americas. Mr. McDermott,
in fact, was there, and others. And that Administration told
us, frankly, if you are telling us that we are going to have to
put in place a tax information exchange agreement, we are not
sure that we want this deal.
But the bottom line is we were able to progress beyond
that. We have a new Administration in place. They do value this
relationship as we do. We have made great progress on a number
of the issues on labor. They have been working with Treasury to
address the tax issues.
I do understand they have initialed the tax information
exchange agreement. There is some legislation that needs to be
passed to address a corollary issue relating to bearer shares.
But frankly, we are making very good progress with Panama, and
we will be working with them on the coming months to see if we
can't address those outstanding issues.
Mr. NEAL. Well, thank you, Mr. Ambassador. The point that I
think that also needs to be raised, that this committee's
history, certainly in the 22 years that I have been a member,
has been largely bipartisan. I think that as we try to find a
path forward on these issues with these bilaterals that are
hanging out there, we really want to ensure that the language
that is offered here makes certain that going forward would be
a bipartisan undertaking. Thank you.
Mr. BRADY. [Presiding.] Thank you.
The chair recognizes Mr. Heller.
Mr. HELLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Ambassador, thank
you for being here. Appreciate your spending some time and
effort and energy in this committee with us.
From a state that is struggling, Mr. Ambassador [sic], with
almost 15 percent unemployment, we talk about these free trade
agreements and their impact and what they would mean to a state
like Nevada. Clearly they are incredibly important. In fact,
trade, as you probably well know, has certainly helped Nevada.
Since its inception in 1864 to the year 2000, we went
obviously from zero trade to $1.5 billion. But then from year
2000 to the year 2008, it went from a billion and a half to
almost 6.2 billion, an increase of 266 percent in just 9 years.

Now, the President has challenged all of us to double
exports in the next 5 years. I would argue that Nevada has
already done this. From 2004 to 2008, our exports jumped 110
percent. And we did this by taking valuing of fast-developing
markets, helping Nevada companies access these markets such as
China.
In 2000, China was Nevada's 24th largest export market. In
2008, it was our third largest. Similar examples with India,
from 28th in 2000 to 17th, or Brazil from 26th to 20th. So
trade has always been very, very important for a state like
Nevada, and clearly, as we move forward with this economy,
trade is going to play a big part in picking this state up.
Mr. Boustany talks about rice, and rice is important in
Louisiana. And mining is very important in Nevada. And I would
like to share a real story. We have some miners here in the
building, and some of their concerns are with pending free
trade agreements.
For example, in Panama, their concern is that they have
taken a lead based on encouragement from the government that
there will soon be a free trade agreement; but in their efforts
to mine and do the research and development which they are
doing, what they are finding is that the corruption in the
government in Panama right now is making it very, very
difficult for them to make a profit even though the ore, the
mineral they are able to find, has been very good.
And a lot of these international or national mining
companies, of course, come out of the State of Nevada. And
sharing their concern with me, I guess I will put it in your
lap. How would you address this?
I mean, they pay the licensing. They pay the fees. But then
they pay the fines. They have a corrupt government that they
have to make under-the-table payments, and it is making it
very, very difficult for them, obviously, and their
shareholders to produce or to make a profit.
How would you respond to that, and in light of perhaps a
Panama Free Trade Agreement coming through, be able to give
them some encouragement?
Ambassador KIRK. One, I would want to follow up and get
more specifics on that. Secondly, I wasn't much of a lawyer,
but the lawyer I was would tell you that what you framed to me
was a hypothetical because American companies don't pay bribes
because that would be in violation of the Foreign Corrupt
Practices Act. So first of all, we are not going to put
anybody----
Mr. HELLER. It is tough out there. It is tough out there.
Ambassador KIRK.--at risk of that. But I don't mean to make
light of it.
Mr. HELLER. I understand. I understand.
Ambassador KIRK. If we could maybe have a conversation
afterwards, I could learn a little more about that.
But I would say one of the values of all of these free
trade agreements--and, for example, why we want Russia in the
WTO, and China--is then we do have them in a legal rules-based
environment that we can address some of these issues.
But I will be happy to follow up with you. And I would
say----
Mr. HELLER. I would appreciate that.
Ambassador KIRK.--but we don't talk enough about travel as
a part of our exports. And as Congressman Reichert can tell
you, on our Export Promotion Council, that is one element that
we are looking at. And since I was in your great state for the
CEC Council, it is refreshing to see that the tourism and the
dollars that those foreign businesses bring----
Mr. HELLER. It is helpful.
Ambassador KIRK.--are helping to bring Nevada back.
Mr. BRADY. Mr. Chairman--thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much. And thanks for being here today.
Mr. HERGER. [Presiding.] Thank you. And I do appreciate
President Martinelli's effort both to resolve outstanding
issues so we can move forward on Panama as well as create a
business climate that is welcoming for foreign investment as
well.
The chair recognizes Mr. Roskam.
Mr. ROSKAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ambassador, thanks for
your time today.
Ambassador, earlier you said that the Administration was
going to move forward on the Korean Free Trade Agreement in a
matter of weeks. That sounds like a processed answer, and a lot
of thought was given to that.
Is that a matter of weeks that can mean months, or is that
a matter of weeks, the common understanding of weeks, that is,
less than a month?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, I went to public schools in Texas.
But for us, weeks means weeks.
Mr. ROSKAM. Good. So less than 30 days we can expect that?
Ambassador KIRK. We are--listen. We are trying to finalize
the text. As you know, we are operating under trade promotion
authority, and so there is a fairly structured process by which
we submit this to this committee and Finance, and you began
your, I think, mock hearings on those.
We very much are concerned, as you are, that we want to get
this agreement before the Congress and passed so that at least
we aren't putting our exporters in a competitive disadvantage.
Mr. ROSKAM. Great. But just so that I am clear, the common
understanding of weeks is less than a month. And that is what
really we are looking at. Is that right?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes, sir.
Mr. ROSKAM. Great. How about Colombia?
Ambassador KIRK. You may have missed my introductory
remarks. But the President, just as he did last year in
directing us to see if we couldn't conclude our negotiations on
Korea, has directed us to intensify our engagement with
Colombia so that we can resolve those outstanding issues this
year.
And we have had, I think, a fairly exhaustive discussion of
the sense of urgency and the sense of concern from members on
both sides. And we are going to find some way to find some
common ground that will allow us to address those and move
forward.
We will send a team to Colombia next week. The vice
president was here. Two weeks ago he met with myself, members
of the Administration, the Secretary of State. We are
encouraged with their new leadership. We hear your message. We
are going to move forward as quickly but thoughtfully as we
can.
Mr. ROSKAM. Turning just briefly to China, I want to
highlight an experience in a nutshell. And I will follow up
with you with a letter, Ambassador. A corporation in my
district, Fellows Manufacturing, is involved in essentially a
nightmare scenario with a joint venture that has gone south.
And they have not been able to get the legal remedies that they
deserve.
I think it is a very, very serious example of manipulations
on the part of some in China that are taking advantage of an
incredibly significant manufacturer in the Chicago area.
Because our time is truncated, I won't belabor the point. But I
did want to highlight it because I think it is an area where
the Administration and Congress can work forthrightly to
advocate and defend American manufacturers who in some cases,
and in this case, a quick reading of this story, it sounds like
the wild west.
So I know you don't have the benefit of the details, but I
will follow up and get these to you for your consideration.
I yield back.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you. I inadvertently recognized a member
who was not here at the gavel at the outset, so in fairness,
would like to recognize Mr. Rangel.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it is just a great
pleasure to see you here, and even a greater pleasure to hear
about the progress that is being made with our dear friends in
Korea. I first went there in 1950 under different
circumstances, but I cannot believe the tremendous advancement
that they have made economically and in terms of democratic
principles.
Quite frankly, it is much more difficult to alter
agreements that already have been made rather than be involved
in the first instance of discussion. You have done a fantastic
job and I am so pleased to hear that.
You know better than most people that we have reached a
point, due in part to high unemployment, that when you say
trade, people believe you are selling out the ``Made in the
USA,'' and you are transferring jobs across. And of course,
whether Republican or Democrat, business or labor, I don't
think we do a good job in identifying exactly where is the job
creation.
It just seems to me, as a former mayor, that if you are
selling anything, the bottom line is, what is in it for me,
Jack? And that is how you sell things. That is what politicians
do.
So if you had asked me as to what this does for America, I
would relate so closely to Detroit as well as Nevada and the
pain that we feel as Americans. When you see this type of pain,
you know if it is good for Detroit, it is good for us. And you
have really overcome a big obstacle.
But what about the rest of the jobs, whether in services or
agriculture? Why don't members, Republican and Democrats, come
and say, Rangel, we need that bill; it is going to help us to
have jobs? I don't hear that type of thing. I hear it from the
Chamber of Commerce. I hear it from the Republicans. I hear it
from business people, and certainly those that have a concern
about making America great because we have to trade in order to
survive.
But how do you reach out to see what jobs are going to be
created? Of course, if they are for New York, that would be
great. But if they are not, they should be good for the
country. I don't get that response on trade.
Ambassador KIRK. Well, Mr.--forgive me, Mr. Chairman--
Congressman Rangel, thank you for your kind words. Thank you
for your service to our country. And one, we would love nothing
more than to work with you, with the members, to provide you
that data.
Again, we are reasonably small. But I can tell you, in the
case, we can get data for every member, every district, at
least to the degree we have collected what every one of these
free trade agreements means in your communities.
And I can tell you, in the case of Korea, there is not a
member here that does not have at least tens of thousands of
workers that won't be benefitted from our passing this
agreement. Some may be in manufacturing. Some may be in the
services and insurance. Some may be in agriculture. Some may be
those small businesses. We tend to overlook the fact that many
of the beneficiaries of trade are those small businesses who
are suppliers to either Caterpillar or Chrysler or Ford, and
they may not even realize that they are benefitting from trade.
But we would welcome the opportunity to sit down with any
member and at least give you the best data that we have. And
then hopefully you can help educate us on what some of those
opportunities are.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador. ``Kamsa Hamnida'',
as they say.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you. The chair recognizes Mr. Gerlach.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Ambassador, thank
you for testifying today.
Whenever you talk about trade in Pennsylvania, the first
word that comes up is China. Everybody is so concerned about
the current trade policy, or lack of trade policy, that we have
relative to that growing economy. And we have heard from so
many different businesses and entrepreneurs in Pennsylvania
that the currency manipulation problem is one that is greatly
impacting adversely their ability to trade their products in
China and have a fair price for a Chinese product here in the
United States.
In the testimony you shared with the committee before you
started at 10:00 a.m., you have a paragraph here that says,
``Engagement with China, including through the Joint Commission
on Commerce and Trade, has been very productive, showing
results in addressing indigenous innovation policies, improving
intellectual property rights, including securing greater use of
legal software.''
That is wonderful progress and we applaud you for that. But
there was no mention of the currency manipulation problem that
continues to be such a problem.
So my question to you is, first of all, what was the
specific discussion, if you know, between President Hu and
President Obama when they met recently on this issue? And what
can you tell me the specific plan is of the Administration to
try to get this currency manipulation problem resolved once and
for all?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, I appreciate your concerns about
China. It is a complex but long-term and extraordinary
opportunity for America's businesses and exports, just as they
are trying to move 600 million people from an agrarian society
to one in which they can have a need for and afford the types
of products, services, goods produced in this country. So first
of all, we think it is worth the time and effort.
Secondly, my remarks were deliberately drafted to reflect
those areas that USTR can most impact. And I hope I don't sound
evasive, but as you know, our Secretary of the Treasury has the
responsibility to address the currency issue, and I know he has
spoken on that. And so I don't want to say anything that
attracts or detracts from the stance that Secretary Geithner
has enumerated on that.
I will tell you that in every occasion that President Obama
has engaged President Hu--and it is instructive to note we have
progressed to a point where it was a big deal 10, 15 years ago
that an American president entertained his Chinese counterpart
once in a term. President Obama and President Hu have now had
eight face-to-face meetings. When you include G20, G8, every
four, the President does address the issue of China allowing
its currency to flow to national norm. So we do that.
But our work at USTR is to make sure we are responsive to
those other concerns. You have heard other members talk about
their concerns about intellectual property rights, piracy,
indigenous innovation, and that is where we think we can add
the most value, is that while the currency issue is important,
what we hear from small businesses is their fear of putting a
product in China and, just frankly, having stolen it. We hear
businesses who are there that are concerned about their
indigenous innovation policies.
So we think the time and energy we spend on those areas can
be just as important to your businesses as addressing the
currency issue.
Mr. GERLACH. The House last session, late in the session,
did pass a bill----
Chairman CAMP. [Presiding.] I am afraid the gentleman's
time has expired.
Mr. GERLACH. Oh, okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Buchanan is recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador, I appreciate you being here today. And I share,
I think, the intensity we just talked for a couple of minutes
your views just as much on doing what is best for Americans and
America and American companies. We need to continue to fight
for them in terms of all the trade agreements.
I do want to say I applaud the effort that you guys have
moved forward on Korea. I think that is very important. But let
me mention to you as it relates to my district, and really the
State of Florida. We have 14 ports in Florida, but I have a
port in our area, Port Manatee. It is the closest port to the
Panama Canal.
It is something that we have been working on for a lot of
years. They are doubling the capacity in terms of Panama. I
have been down there, have had the Ambassador in our area. We
have met with the President. And we have had delegations from
the port to go down there because, again, they are doubling the
capacity. I think they are spending $5 billion in terms of
improvements in that area.
I am very concerned that these things go on for 4 years.
You mentioned you have been in business. I have been in
business. I have been in complicated deals before, maybe not as
complicated as this, but I am very concerned when these things
run on. There is the saying that you can't manage it if you
can't measure it.
And I think that is what we are talking about, is having
some reasonable time frames, because it is affecting us in
terms of our jobs. We have got 20,000 good-paying jobs,
directly and indirectly, with our port. We think we can double
that. But here we are. We have been waiting 6 months, 9 months,
some as long as 2 or 3 years.
It seems to me at some point you can't get the perfect
deal. You get as much as you can get done, my experience 80, 90
percent, and then we need to move on. But I think it is
imperative that Panama and Colombia, we get those off the table
because to me it is a lot about politics. And if we don't do
something now, we are going to run into more politics coming up
here shortly. So we need to get that done. So I just want to
get your comment.
And the second thing, I do share a lot of concern about
China and a lot of issues with China. But what happens, because
we can't move forward here, we don't get a chance to get to the
China discussion. So it is imperative we get this done in the
next six months, I think, for the sake of the country, Florida,
as well as my district.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you. The other point is, Panama
was started in 2004, and here we are in 2011. After 7 years the
law declares you legally dead, and we don't want Panama to die.
We want it to keep going.
So with that, I would recognize Mr. Doggett for 3 minutes.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is always good to see a fellow from Austin do so good
and do so much important work on the world stage. I appreciate
your service, Ambassador.
I voted, as a member of this committee, for most of the
trade agreements that have come here, and hope to vote for
more. If we were looking at it solely in terms of trade impact,
the three agreements we have been discussing would be very easy
to support.
These Bush/Cheney trade proposals are very much at the
margins. Even the Korea agreement, much larger than the other
two, was described by the International Trade Commission as
having a probable negligible impact on output and employment in
the United States, as you know, in its study.
But there is much more at stake, and particularly in
Panama, than just trade. Panama has made a name for itself not
only as a place of a canal, but as one of the leading tax
havens in the entire world. It has been an equal opportunity
offender. It didn't discriminate against us. It wouldn't
cooperate on taxes with anyone.
As recently as 4 months ago, the OECD outlined a long list
of deficiencies in Panama's legal framework. They have refused,
about as much as any country in the world, to cooperate
anywhere on taxes.
You have indicated you are getting close to being ready to
submit this agreement. Can you assure us that before you do so,
that Panama will have provided full compliance in making all
the necessary changes to correct these deficiencies and to
fully implement them? It appears that this trade agreement is
about the only thing we have to ensure they do what they should
have done many years ago.
Ambassador KIRK. Congressman, I can tell you that we have
worked with the Panamanians. We made it very clear last year
that it was, frankly, their call to make, that if they did not
choose to engage us on the issue of addressing the tax
questions, then we would accept that.
I would say that we have engaged them. Treasury has taken
the lead, so I want to be careful because you asked a fairly
precise question.
Mr. DOGGETT. Okay.
Ambassador KIRK. I can tell you we have had very good
engagement with the Panamanians under the new Administration--
--
Mr. DOGGETT. I appreciate that. Given the short time, I
will just say, just as there have been 7 years in which it
could be declared legally dead, there has been 7 years for
Panama to fully implement and make the changes necessary to
stop being a tax haven. It hasn't done it, and that remains a
big concern to me in looking at that agreement.
You and President Obama have spoken eloquently of the need
to make significant changes in our trade policy, and to
recognize that it is not just about moving widgets across
borders, it is a broader issue that encompasses the environment
and working standards.
I have some concerns. Mr. Lewis indicated that the
performance has not been quite up to the standards of the
speeches, specifically on the question of opening up the
process and involving more public representatives in the way
our trade policy is developed.
You had Lisa Garcia come and testify at our committee
almost 2 years ago. She could not identify any example where
having public representation on these trade advisory committees
had caused harm, as some have alleged in trying to block
increased public representation.
I wrote you shortly after that, and I gather you and your
staff, now having had almost 2 years, are unable to identify
any substantive experience where having the public involved in
this process through representations of environmental
representatives or health representatives has caused a problem.
Have you found any such problem in the history of USTR?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, I don't----
Chairman CAMP. The time is expired. So if you could just
briefly answer.
Ambassador KIRK. I think we have submitted it. And if we
didn't get it to you this morning, we did get your letter and
we have submitted an answer. President Obama is committed, not
just in trade policy, to opening up the advisory process in our
government to all Americans.
And we have done our best to strike that balance between
the statutory mandates we get from Congress in the composition
of our technical advisory committees, but in opening it up to
other voices as well. And I think----
Mr. DOGGETT. And you have found no problem, have you?
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thank you. You can submit an
answer in writing, Mr. Ambassador.
Mr. DOGGETT. Just a yes or no would be helpful.
Ambassador KIRK. Let me get back thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Mr. Smith is recognized.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ambassador,
for your service.
As we have heard, obviously the U.S. agriculture sector is
a vibrant economic engine that contributes significantly to our
export efforts. We also know that there are some non-tariff
trade barriers that do exist around the world, and that these
actually keep United States' farmers from meeting the demands,
the global demands, that we also know exist.
And so as we pursue science-based regulatory efforts, we
know that perhaps some of our trading partners are not. And we
know that we have got very innovative producers here. Can you
tell me what USTR is doing to make sure that our trading
partners are truly focusing on science-based standards as a
regulatory effort rather than more political results or even
efforts?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, we have a good story here, Mr.
Smith. And in the interest of time, if I could, we do two
things. One, for the reasons you articulated, one report that
you mandate we deliver to you is what is called a 301 report in
that we have to tell you how our other partners are complying,
say, for example, in intellectual property.
I made the decision when we came in the office that that
was good enough. We now issue a similar report on,
specifically, the sanitary and phytosanitary standards. We will
be submitting that to you soon. That is one thing.
But secondly, we have pursued in every forum compliance
with sound scientific standards, and it has helped us. We, for
example, settled a longstanding case with the European Union on
their excluding our beef. We are now shipping 20,000 metric
tons, almost $250 million, into that market.
After we had the H1N1 scare, almost 28 economies cut off
U.S. pork exports. We are back in, I think, all of those
economies but one. We have dealt with everything from poultry
in Russia to beef in China. But it is one of our highest
priorities, and we would welcome your thoughts on how we can
perhaps even do better.
Mr. SMITH. All right. Thank you, Ambassador. And Mr.
Chairman, I do have some other questions that I will submit for
the record. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you, Your Honor.
Mr. Schock is recognized.
Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ambassador, thank you for being here, and I look
forward to working with you on these issues, which are
important to our country and even more so to my district, the
issues of trade.
I guess, to be very frank with you, it is a little
frustrating to hear the talk about these groups that have labor
concerns--not that people don't have legitimate labor concerns,
but who the groups are and who the Administration truly is
working with and looking to for signoff on the issues of labor
concerns. Let me give you an example.
I have a very large UAW presence in my district. They
manufacture heavy equipment that would benefit, that right now
is put at a competitive disadvantage when doing business in
Latin America. I can assure you those labor workers would
support having a level playing field in our country to do
business in these countries.
When I traveled to Panama and Colombia a year and a half
ago with then-Majority Leader Hoyer, we met with labor unions
in Colombia who, interestingly, the trade groups, who I thought
would be opposed, were actually in support of these agreements.
But it was actually the public sector unions--the teachers, the
garbage collectors--who were opposed to trade, not because they
were concerned about human rights, but simply for political
reasons.
There had been significant progress made then, and
continues to be. President Uribe went through, line item by
line item, the work that he had done. The ILO just last year
removed Colombia from its labor watch list. Since then, 14
Colombian labor union leaders representing 79,000 of Colombia's
workers have signed off in support of the agreement.
The president of the United Workers Confederation in
Colombia stated that, ``Never in the history of Colombia have
we achieved that much progress,'' and views it as satisfactory
and supports the agreement.
So I guess I am looking for some specificity on who are
we--because we are not going to get complete agreement. And
many of the same labor issues that we had with Peru were
satisfied with the May 10 agreement, which is what is in the
current Panama and Colombia agreements. And Peru was passed
with strong bipartisan support. There were those who opposed
it, but it got strong bipartisan support.
So if we have those same labor and environmental concerns,
the same language, in Panama and Colombia, and the
Administration is saying, wait, who are we looking to
specifically to sign off?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, first of all, I don't know that we
are looking for any one group to sign off. And we have made it
plain: no one has a veto over the Obama Administration's trade
policy save the President. But we listen to all voices, just as
we did on Korea.
I have met with members of this body that have expressed
concern. We have labor advisory committees. We have statutorily
mandated technical and public advisory committees. I do as you
have recommended. When I have come to Illinois or have gone to
Washington, I sit down and meet with the workers themselves. I
don't just listen to their representatives in Washington.
We have published a notice in the Federal Register. We have
gotten all those comments. We take all of that information, and
then we try to come up with the best decision. Just as we did
in the case of Korea is what we want to do here.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Crowley is recognized.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Ambassador,
welcome once again. It is good to see you again, and thank you
for your hard work. I know sometimes it feels as though it is a
thankless job, but you have done some remarkable work as it
pertains to the Korean Free Trade Agreement, making the
agreement a better agreement for the U.S.
I want to thank Mr. Levin as well as Mr. Camp for their
work and engagement with you in your office in making that
agreement a better agreement. I know there is work to be done
on Colombia and Panama, particularly on the ground in Colombia
as it pertains to human rights and to the rule of law there.
And I know that your engagement over these next months will
have an impact in making that agreement a better agreement as
well. I look forward to that.
But one country that I want to look at, if I could, just
divert for a moment, is India. I have once again assumed the
chairmanship of the India caucus here in the House, as co-
chairman along with Ed Royce. And I know that Secretary of
Commerce Gary Locke is in India right now working on a trade
mission, seeking opportunities for U.S. companies to help
expand our opportunities for exports to India.
But one issue which I have been interested in for a very
long time is the investment caps in the Indian insurance
industry. Right now, American companies can only own up to 26
percent of the value of an insurance company within India, even
though we have been, I have been working to increase that
number to 49 percent.
What is the status as you know on that issue, and what more
can be done to ensure that our service companies can export
their services on a more level playing field?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, I appreciate your leadership on the
Indian subcommittee. And this, we spend so much time on China,
sometimes we neglect the opportunities, the growth markets and
needs in India and Africa as well.
As you know, President Obama led an export mission to India
as part of his Southeast Asia trip last year. And I will be
honest: We have been extraordinarily frustrated at the slow
pace of opening that market. We have a number of engagements
with India.
I lead a trade policy forum in which we have raised these
issues of them opening their economy for more. This would be a
case that when we can finish our BIT review, we are also
looking to perhaps get India to sign a bilateral investment
treaty which would remove those caps, not only in insurance,
but liberalize their markets across the board.
There is great opportunity for Americans in the retail, in
the agriculture, in the manufacturing sector. Some of this we
are trying to address if we can get, frankly, the right balance
in a Doha Round. The rest of it we are going to continue to see
if we can't find the right buttons to push in our bilateral
engagement.
Mr. CROWLEY. As you see, my time has run out, Mr.
Ambassador, I thank you and the Chairman for the opportunity. I
do have other additional questions that I will submit to the
Ambassador, and I look forward to your response, especially as
it pertains to the TPP. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Lee is recognized.
Mr. LEE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Ambassador, I won't dwell on this subject too long,
but I think it is worth repeating, and that is the issue of
jobs. We are sitting on over 9 percent unemployment again, and
why I think Congress gets such a bad name is we don't listen to
the American people.
I think you have--I have heard you pretty loud and clear,
and also even Ranking Member Levin when he was in Colombia,
that in Colombia we have made improvements. And your belief is
that all three of these trade agreements will create jobs here
in the United States.
Yet we have sat for 7 years. And I know you are trying to
move things along, but it worries me when we keep saying weeks,
and I went back and I--you look at some of these timelines. The
talk and the rhetoric that we have here, I think the American
people are tired of it. And this should be a nonpartisan issue.
This is about putting people back to work in this country.
To shift, then, to another point because I think all three
of these will put people back to work, and that is really what
our job is, is to help people in this country. But another area
of mine, and I came from manufacturing, and that is the issue
of IP and the issues surrounding China.
And we all want to increase our trade there. But China has
been using indigenous innovation policy for quite a while, and
it is their opportunity to circumvent international trade rules
and basically compel American companies to hand over their IPR.
And I know from your point just recently--we just had the
meeting of the JCCT. I was hoping that you could go into some
specific metrics that the Administration has put forward to
help remedy the situation.
Ambassador KIRK. Well, one of--and again, I want to make it
plain. We are going to have to be constantly vigilant with
China, Congressman. But one of our victories this time was
getting them to agree to de-link the IPR issue from indigenous
innovative.
This has been one of the highest concerns to our business
community in terms of China's efforts to try to have us
transfer technology in order to bid on that. But we were able
to successfully, between JCCT and then the followup engagement
with President Hu and President Obama, at least get them to
commit that they would de-link those two.
There was also a question--China had a very creative
application of having to comply with their standards and
experience in order to be able to bid on some of their
projects, even though we had American companies that had
experience all over the world. We were able to get them to
agree to use that experience as well.
But I don't want to, in any means, downplay the challenge
ahead of us. But this was one area where we did have some
success, and we will continue to monitor that.
Mr. LEE. I thank you. And I would again urge you to try to
push these trade agreements forward. It is very difficult to
look our constituents in the eye when there are no jobs for
them to be had, and we have a solution to help. Thank you.
Ambassador KIRK. Thank you.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Ms. Jenkins is recognized.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for
holding this important hearing. Thank you, Ambassador Kirk, for
being here today and for your service.
As you briefly touched on in your opening remarks, Russia
has been seeking to become a member of the World Trade
Organization for more than 16 years. Russia's joining the WTO
on the right terms would be good for both our countries,
strengthening the rule of law in Russia, and promoting closer
economic ties.
Last fall our two governments made very encouraging
progress in resolving a number of key outstanding bilateral
trade issues, and work continues on the multilateral terms of
Russia's accession to the WTO.
But with that said, Russia has much work to do on various
longstanding issues of concern, such as IPR enforcement,
barriers to U.S. agriculture exports, and other non-tariff
barriers. Such trade concerns, combined with broader foreign
policy and human rights concerns in Congress, is going to make
it difficult for Congress to consider PNTR legislation.
Is Russia's WTO accession a top Administration priority?
And if so, what exactly is the Administration, and more
specifically, what is the USTR doing or planning to do to
address such congressional concerns and lay the groundwork to
consider such major trade legislation?
Ambassador KIRK. Thank you, Congresswoman, for your
concerns. But you partly answered our question in the first
part of your recitation of what we have done. The President
expressly directed our office to work with our colleagues in
Russia to address a number of the outstanding bilateral
concerns we had.
We did work on that successfully over the summer. We met
the President's September deadline for that. That, for the most
part, we think addressed the overwhelming majority of the
bilateral issues. Russia's accession then moves to the broader
committee structure within Geneva, in which we will continue to
engage them on those other concerns.
Now, we are frustrated. You mentioned agriculture and their
adherence to sound science. And as you know--or maybe you don't
know--we have had an extraordinary challenge getting our
poultry and beef back into their market. But that also makes
the case why we want them in the WTO, so that we have them in a
form that we can address many of those concerns.
On the human rights component of that, as you know, the
State Department takes the lead in addressing those. But we
understand and appreciate all your concerns, and want to work
you and other Members of Congress to address those so that we
can move forward at the appropriate time.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador. And I will yield
back.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you.
Mr. Kind is recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. KIND. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
Mr. Ambassador, thank you for being here and for the work
you are doing in the Administration to try to advance a
proactive, forward-looking trade agenda which is crucial,
obviously, for economic growth and job creation back home. We
will look forward to working with you on the pending
bilaterals.
I am glad to see that the President has tasked you now to
see if we can get Panama and Colombia put to bed at some point
in the future. The bilaterals are important in their own right
as stand-alone measures. But the real game changer, as you
know, is really the multilateral round of discussions; the Doha
Round.
I apologize for having to step out. We had a meeting with
the Treasury Secretary a little bit earlier. But I just want to
impress upon you how important it is for us not to give up the
ghost yet when it comes to Geneva and the multilateral round.
That is what can have the most significant impact, not only for
global prosperity and growth, but for bringing the emerging and
developing countries into the global trading regime as well.
I know we have had some hurdles there, not least of which
are some of the agricultural provisions. And another item that
hopefully is going to be teed up in this next session of
Congress, is the next Farm Bill reauthorization and some of the
reforms that I and others feel, that we need to move forward in
a bipartisan fashion.
We have the Brazil cotton case still hanging over our
heads. We have elected now to deal with that by subsidizing
Brazilian cotton producers as opposed to reforming our own
domestic cotton program, which we should be doing, but also the
so-called amber box payments under the Title I commodity
programs and the work that needs to be there.
Given my history with the multilateral round, and having
talked to many of the trade ambassadors that are involved in
those ongoing conversations, so many times the roads do come
back to our farm policy, both here and in the E.U.
I know the Administration is anticipating engaging the
Congress when it comes to the next Farm Bill and the work and
some of the changes that we have to pursue in order to assist
an important trade agenda at the same time.
So I humbly advise, let's not take our eye off of the Doha
Roundeven though it has been tough the last few years trying to
get it back on track. I know there are a lot of interested
people to see what we can do to advance that, and that we don't
all just become all-consuming with these bilaterals right now.
You can understand why, given that they are in front of us and
pending. Hopefully, we will be able to advance on those later
this year, too.
Thank you again.
Chairman CAMP. Well, thank you.
Mr. Paulsen is recognized.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Ambassador, for your leadership on this issue. We really do
appreciate it.
Just real quickly, you mentioned one of the benefits we
have of the South Korea trade agreement is going to be our
ability to engage in more services, having a market there. The
same thing exists, obviously, with Colombia and Panama in
particular. I mean, 70 percent of their GDP comes from the
service sector, and it is really important, I think, to give
the U.S. access, a market foothold there. So we have got
tremendous opportunity there.
But I want to ask a question about the potential benefits
of what you might see with the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and
also what the timing of that might be. We have participants
right now in the TPP that include four of our existing trade
agreement partners, and then four new countries which do not
have trade agreements with us right now.
So with respect to our existing trade partners, in what
ways do you see the TPP would add economic value to our
existing trade agreements? And with respect to our potential
new agreement partners, what areas do you think those talks
might offer us the most promise for American jobs and exports
in the future?
Ambassador KIRK. Well, in the broader sense--and thank you
for your question--we think the TPP is an extraordinary
opportunity for the United States because it is our belief and
part of our rationale in reaching the decision to engage with
this original group of countries is our hope is obviously that
this will effectively become the free trade agreement, at least
of those 21-member APEC economies, and perhaps the architecture
for what could be the largest, most dynamic trading area in the
world in Southeast Asia.
With respect to our trading partners, obviously, we want to
be assertive. We are not looking to re-trade our existing
market share. But there are lots of areas that we can further
enhance trade by looking at regulatory coherence, addressing
some of the non-tariff barriers. Obviously, with these new
markets, with Malaysia, Vietnam, those are an extraordinary for
American businesses across the board.
We have a very ambitious goal. I don't know--I mean, it is
sort of our aspirational goal. But the thought was, start with
a small enough number of like-minded economies, work very
aggressively, put everything on the table, and let's just see
where we are by the time that our leaders meet at the APEC
leaders forum in the fall.
And at least right now we are on that pace. But I will
admit this next meeting in Chile is the first time we will
begin to table offers, so this is where the negotiations will
become a little more challenging.
Mr. PAULSEN. And maybe I can just ask, because I know the
President's own economic council and the U.S. business
community have both urged the goal of seeking a conclusion to
the TPP agreement by maybe even this November, when the United
States is going to host APEC, I think, in the President's home
state of Hawaii.
Do you agree that that goal of concluding the TPP agreement
would be an important, I mean, concrete deliverable in that
time frame, if possible?
Ambassador KIRK. If we could meet that goal, that would be
exceptional. But again, there are a lot of moving parts. I want
to make--right now, I mean, the spirit of engagement among all
of the economies is the right mood. But I am also tempering
this a little bit because I know now we are getting into the
guts of it.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Berg is recognized.
Mr. BERG. Ambassador Kirk, thank you for being here today.
Now, you and I both know how critical trade is for the
United States and for us to recover from our current situation.
And I know there is a lot of concern we have heard today, and
just concern by the American public about trade.
The National Export Initiative, the goal of doubling
exports, is a laudable goal and certainly one that I support.
But in order to make that happen, we need to get the American
people behind us. And you have done a tremendous effort in
going out and speaking on the advantages of trade across this
country, and I commend you for your efforts in doing that.
But it seems to me--and maybe you can discuss in more
detail how yourself and the Administration are going to get the
American people behind more trade, especially the three trade
agreements that we are looking at right now.
Ambassador KIRK. Thank you for your kind words about our
work. One, I think--and I have heard from all of you, and I
know we have differences, maybe on Panama and Colombia. What I
haven't heard, refreshingly, from any of you is a difference we
all understand right now.
What the American public care about right now, as Mr.
Rangel said, it is jobs. It is jobs. What is in it for me? And
one, we have got to do a better job of articulating to the
public how, when we provide opportunities for Americans to sell
what we make, grow, produce around the world. That can help
create jobs here.
And for whatever reason, we have had a political
environment that Americans are a little more skeptical of that,
but I think having an honest discussion with the American
public and an honest presentation of the reality of what trade
does and doesn't do.
But I do think it is important--and I trust you will not
take this as a political statement--keeping faith with the
commitment we have made to the American public. And I do think
renewing trade adjustment assistance is one way to do that, to
say to those communities that feel that they have gotten the
short end of this that you have heard us and you are going to
honor your commitments.
I think making sure that we honor our commitments to those
poorest countries in the world. The work that we do in
enforcement--when I take on China and stand up to them for
American steelworkers, we absolutely got criticized. But we
didn't spark a trade war. And in fact, every one of those tire
companies, for example, has increased capacity, has added
workers, and are making more tires.
So I think listening to the American public, being
responsive to those that have concerns and honestly addressing
those, making sure that we enforce our engagements, and then
make sure we draw a connection between opening up markets
around the world and creating jobs here at home.
And the more that we do that with one voice and we stop
attacking one another here in Congress, the better chance we
are going to have to convince the American public of the wisdom
of what we are doing.
Chairman CAMP. All right. Thank you. Thank you very much. I
want to thank Ambassador Kirk for his time this morning and for
his testimony, and also thank all of the members for their
thoughtful questions.
And let me note for Ambassador Kirk that members may submit
questions for the record. And if they do, I hope you will
provide a prompt and full response. Ambassador Kirk has--all
right. I guess we are not quite done.
We have a few more minutes, and we have a member who just
came, Mr. Pascrell. So he is recognized for 3 minutes. We have
had members that have been going back and forth to the Budget
Committee----
Ambassador KIRK. I understand.
Chairman CAMP. As members of the Ways and Means Committee
are on that committee also.
Ambassador KIRK. I frankly am flattered by the attendance
and the number of members that have stayed for being here. I
really appreciate it.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Mr. Pascrell is recognized for 3
minutes.
Mr. PASCRELL. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you, Ambassador. We discussed one of my major issues earlier
before I went to the committee.
Right off the bat, I want to stress how important it is
that the Congress pass an extension of our trade adjustment
assistance program. I think that is important to everything we
have worked on in the last 14 years. It is Critical. Would you
agree?
Ambassador KIRK. Yes, sir. You may have missed my closing
remarks, but----
Mr. PASCRELL. I am disappointed that we were going to bring
a bill to the floor yesterday extending the programs and, of
course, it didn't happen. It was pulled. I strongly believe we
can accomplish this in a fiscally responsible way without
cutting the vital worker training programs we are trying to
protect.
I want to thank you for being here. I believe we have been
taking some important steps. We still have work to do to ensure
that our trade policy reflects our values and the benefits of
trade. I told you this morning what my prism is to look through
on every trade deal. I will not back off from that. You know
where I stand. It is not going to be a fait accompli by any
stretch of the imagination, and I respect your candidness on
the matter.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations really represent
the Obama Administration's best opportunity to reshape our
trade policy. It also presents significant challenges. I have
two questions regarding the TPP.
One of the countries involved in negotiations, Vietnam, is
classified by our own government as a ``non-market economy.''
They don't have a democratic government, and many of their
major industries are controlled by the state.
As you negotiate the Trans-Pacific Partnership, what
efforts are you making with regards to state-owned enterprises
in countries like Vietnam? We have this problem in a lot of
countries, which are owned or controlled by foreign
governments. These are very serious problems. This is very
serious to our competitiveness and leveling the field. What
will you do if these countries will not be able to enter our
market, if they won't be able to enter our market and act in
their government's national interest instead of the company's
commercial interest?
Ambassador KIRK. Thank you for your candor both now and
this morning. I would say to you one of the reasons we are
excited about this TPP. It is an opportunity to bring a country
like Vietnam into this global system. One of the areas that we
are frankly looking to expand on in our investment chapter is
to take this opportunity to address the challenge of state-
owned economies.
And that is one of the issues that we are specifically
going to engage Vietnam on that. As well, it's for some other
countries, the challenges brought on by some of these
indigenous innovation policies.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
courtesy.
Chairman CAMP. Thank you. Thanks again, Ambassador Kirk.
You have spoken to many elements of the Administration's trade
policy agenda, and I am encouraged by your statements on the
South Korea agreement.
I am disappointed that the Administration has not been more
forward-leaning on plans for Colombia and Panama's trade
agreements as members of this committee, including myself, have
repeatedly said American employers, workers, farmers, ranchers,
are put at a disadvantage every day that we delay here in
Washington.
So I continue to hope that the Administration will lay out
a clear plan with specific areas of concern, a specific
timetable for considering all three of these agreements in
short order. And I strongly believe that we should consider all
of the agreements, all three of them, in the next 6 months, and
hope that we can work together to make that happen. Again,
thank you for your testimony today.
But for now, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.026

[Submissions for the Record follow:]
National Pork Producers Council

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.034

National Association of Manufacturers

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.046

National Association of Wheat Growers

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.053

U.S. Chamber of Commerce

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.065

Emergency Committee for American Trade

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.075

American Jewish Committee

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.076

National District Export Council Inc.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.079

California Table Grape Commission-1

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.080

California Table Grape Commission-2

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.081

National Oilseed Processors Association

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.088

National Potato Council

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.090

California Chamber of Commerce-1

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.095

California Chamber of Commerce-2

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.096

Retail Industry Leaders Association

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.105

United States Council for International Business

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.110

Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association-1

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.121

Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association-2

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.134

International Dairy Foods Association

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.140

Association of Global Automakers, Inc.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.141

Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.149

General Electric Company

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.154

American Federation of Labor & Congress
of Industrial Organizations

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.158

Public Citizen's Global Trade Watch

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.168

American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.178

U.S.-China Business Council

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.188

Intel Corporation

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.201

UPS

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5569.205


