- SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY

INCOME BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 27, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-HR9

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-280                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

GEOFF DAVIS, Georgia, Chairman

ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas, Ranking
RICK BERG, North Dakota              JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
TOM REED, New York                   JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of October 27, 2011, announcing the hearing.............     2

WITNESSES

Daniel Bertoni, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income
Security, U.S. Government Accountability Office................     8

______

Richard V. Burkhauser, Ph.D., Professor, Department of Policy
Analysis and Management, Cornell University....................    41
David Wittenburg, Ph.D., Senior Researcher, Mathematica Policy
Research.......................................................    52
Jonathan M. Stein, General Counsel, Community Legal Services of
Philadelphia, and Member, SSI Coalition for Children and
Families.......................................................    74
Elizabeth J. Roberts, M.D., Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist....    87

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

American Psychiatric Association, statement......................   132
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, statement...   135
Center for Fiscal Equity, statement..............................   139
Center for the Study of Empathic Therapy, Education, and Living,
statement......................................................   143
Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder, statement............................................   146
Client Rights Interventions Advisory Committee for FACT
Specialized Services, LLC, statement...........................   152
First Focus, statement...........................................   155
Gena Pontious, statement.........................................   158
Greater Boston Legal Services, statement.........................   159
National Health Care for the Homeless Council, statement.........   164
Pacer Center, statement..........................................   170
The Arc of the United States, statement..........................   171
The National Alliance on Mental Illness, statement...............   175
The National Alliance to Advance Adolescent Health, statement....   180

SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY

INCOME BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Human Resources,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:05 a.m., in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Geoff Davis
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Thursday, October 27, 2011
HR-9

Chairman Davis Announces a Hearing on

Supplemental Security Income

Benefits for Children

Congressman Geoff Davis (R-KY), Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Human Resources of the Committee on Ways and Means, announced today
that the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) benefits for children. The hearing will take place on
Thursday, October 27, 2011, in B-318 Rayburn House Office Building,
beginning at 9:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only.
Witnesses will include the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
and other experts on SSI benefits for children. However, any individual
or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a
written statement for consideration by the Committee and for inclusion
in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

The Supplemental Security Income program supports adults who are
aged or unable to work due to disability with monthly cash benefits of
up to $674 per person in 2011. The program also provides monthly
payments to disabled children. Currently, there are 1.2 million
children receiving SSI benefits at an annual cost of about $10 billion,
not including Medicaid expenses.

In November 2010, The Boston Globe ran a three-part series on
increases in children's payments under the Supplemental Security Income
program, identifying two areas of concern: a lack of program integrity
efforts by the Social Security Administration (SSA) and allegations
that psychotropic drugs may be improperly prescribed to children with
certain mental and behavioral impairments (especially Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder or ADHD) in order to improve their chances of
collecting SSI disability payments.

The series prompted Chairman Davis and a bipartisan, bicameral
group of Members of Congress to request that GAO review: trends in the
rate of children receiving SSI benefits due to ADHD, depression, and
other mental impairments; the role of medical evidence, such as the
presence of medication, in SSA disability determinations; and the
impact of SSA's not completing continuing disability reviews on current
recipients of SSI benefits. While final results and recommendations
from GAO are not expected until 2012, the hearing will include
testimony from GAO on their preliminary findings as well as from other
experts on SSI benefits for children, among related issues.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Geoff Davis (R-KY) stated,
``The SSI program provides financial support for families with a
disabled child. But as currently constructed, the program makes no
effort to ensure that benefits are used to help children overcome their
disabilities and lead productive lives. As a result, too many children
on SSI drop out of school, experience poor employment outcomes, and
continue receiving year after year of disability payments as adults.
This hearing will review how the SSI program is currently coming up
short and possible remedies.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on oversight of SSI benefits for children,
including trends, program growth, and recipient outcomes.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. Attach your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Thursday, November 10, 2011. Finally,
please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S.
Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman DAVIS. Good morning, thank you for joining us
today. At today's hearing we are going to review Supplemental
Security Income, or SSI, benefits for children. SSI provides
monthly Federal payments of up to $674 to 1.2 million low-
income disabled children across the United States. In all, SSI
provides about $9 billion in payments to children each year,
averaging about $8,000 per child. That $9 billion nearly
matches the amount taxpayers spend for welfare checks under the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program.
It is one of several reasons The Boston Globe published a
series last year that called the children's SSI program ``the
other welfare.'' As that series detailed and we will hear
today, SSI benefits for children are not only significant in
size and expense, but they are also growing rapidly, with
nearly a 50 percent rise of children receiving payments over
the last decade. This growth has been driven by mental and
behavioral impairments, which include attention deficit,
hyperactive disorder, autism, learning disabilities, and speech
and language delays. Boys are twice as likely to receive
monthly disability payments as girls, and over 60 percent of
children on SSI at age 18 continue collecting payments as
adults over a period that can span decades.
Especially troubling in The Boston Globe series were
allegations that some children are being placed on dangerous
psychotropic medications in order to increase their chances of
qualifying for SSI checks.
That is one reason why I, along with our colleague
Congressman Richie Neal from Massachusetts, who has joined us
today, and Senators Susan Collins, Tom Carper, and Scott Brown
asked the Government Accountability Office to review this
program. From GAO's preliminary findings we have already
learned that medication is merely one factor of many that are
used to make a determination.
GAO's review goes on to cover a broader array of issues
important to the oversight rule of the Subcommittee, including
trends for disabilities under which children qualify, the role
of medical evidence in determining eligibility, and SSA
reevaluations of children in the years after they start
collecting benefits.
We are privileged to be joined by Katie and Will Bentley of
Covington, Kentucky, part of the congressional district I am
honored to represent. Will is a child who receives SSI
benefits. We need to keep the interest of children like Will
and their families squarely in mind as we consider ways of how
to improve this program and how it serves them.
A review of the hearing's testimony revealed all of our
witnesses today propose changes in how SSI works with a common
goal of doing a better job helping children and families
overcome the disabling conditions that led them to apply for
SSI in the first place. For example, as several experts have
noted, SSI today offers monthly checks without any requirements
that benefits be spent on helping the child to overcome his or
her disability. Some question whether that may create a
financial disincentive to overcoming the disability, because
that would mean the checks come to an end.
Other recommendations focus on expecting teenagers on SSI
to remain in school in order to qualify for payments. A
disturbing 30 percent of older teens on SSI drop out of school,
which only adds to the barriers they face in going to work and
leading productive lives.
Still other recommendations go to the basic architecture of
the SSI program, a largely Federal program that since its
inception in the 1970s has spent $160 billion while being run
from the Social Security Administration headquarters in
Baltimore.
We look forward to all the testimony today and working with
our colleagues across the aisle to improve how this program
serves the children and families who depend on it as well as
ensuring that the program efficiently and effectively uses
taxpayer dollars.
One of the things that I would like to emphasize in this
hearing, and my friend and Ranking Member Lloyd Doggett and I
worked very hard during the course of this Congress so far in
addressing the programs that we have, is to look at processes.
In many cases the processes within the Federal Government are
broken. The information systems don't communicate with one
another, it is often difficult to identify data that is helpful
in helping the people that are being served by the safety net,
and to find errors inside of that. That is part of the
underlying motivation as we go forward in this hearing today.
We are here to gather facts, to get information and hopefully
to gain insight how to better improve that program, to improve
the process and to better serve both our taxpayers and
recipients of the benefits.
Without objection, each Member will have the opportunity to
submit a written statement and have it included in the record
at this point as well. And with that, I will now defer to my
friend Lloyd Doggett from Texas, the Ranking Member.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And the
objective that you mentioned in your opening statement of
helping families deal with these great challenges that they
encounter with a child or children with disabilities is a
shared goal that we have. And seeing that the Supplemental
Security Income program, or SSI, is administered in an
efficient and effective way is a goal that we share. It is one
of the reasons that Mr. Neal and others have joined to ask the
Government Accountability Office to take a look at the reports
that were raised by The Boston Globe.
On the other hand, when we have studied unemployment we
have had some Members almost suggest that the main problem with
unemployment is the unemployed and that they can be blamed for
the situation. And we ought not to follow a course along those
lines as it relates to children with disabilities.
SSI assists families who are dealing with a child with a
disability, physical, mental or both. And only about a tenth of
the children in the country with such disabilities receive SSI
and the benefits amount to about $600 a month. These are
benefits that help offset the cost of caring for severely
disabled children.
SSI is particularly important in my home State of Texas
where we have so many poor children generally and particularly
poor disabled children, about 130,000 in the State who are
receiving benefits. Two such children live near where I do in
central Texas in Bastrop County, Tyler and Noah Roberts. They
are 5-year-old twins. When you look at their photos you see two
very beautiful little boys, but they are little boys who have
severe autism. One is nonverbal and engages in behaviors like
flapping his arms, spinning and throwing tantrums. The other is
verbal but has severe anxiety, intestinal and sensory problems.
These are serious conditions that have greatly impeded their
mother's ability to maintain a regular work schedule, and she
depends on SSI to keep food on the table and a roof over their
heads.
I have seen situations just like this in the work that my
wife has done. Before I came to Congress she headed an early
intervention program working with infants and very young
children who had severe disabilities across the Texas hill
country. This is not an isolated case. It is an example of the
challenges that families face that we need to be assisting, not
blaming them for the problem that they have.
There has been some growth in the SSI program since 2001
largely in response to the growing number of children that live
in poverty in this country. Just because more families like the
Roberts are receiving SSI benefits to help raise their children
with autism and other significant problems doesn't mean they
should be targeted for cuts. During the last decade almost 5
million more children have fallen below the poverty line. One
could reasonably assume that the increase would have an impact
on a program designed to help low-income families with disabled
children.
While we hear suggestions that the program has changed, the
Congressional Research Service concludes that the rate of
children on SSI as a percentage of children living in poverty
is about the same now as it was in 2001.
Further, we have increased efforts to identify childhood
disabilities. The Center for Economic and Policy Research found
that the number of children receiving screening and diagnostic
services under Medicaid rose from a little over 5 million to
over 20 million children from 1998 to 2008. Nevertheless, there
has not been an increase in SSI approval rates for children
with mental impairments. According to the Social Security
Administration, the percentage has actually dropped from 2001
to 2010.
There are a number of steps that we can and should take to
improve the administration of SSI, and I hope we will explore
those in the hearing. First, I think Congress needs to make
good on its pledge to provide adequate resources to conduct
continuing disability reviews to ensure that SSI recipients
maintain their eligibility for service. And President Obama's
administration has nearly doubled the number of those reviews
compared to the last year of President Bush.
Second, if we are serious about improving outcomes for
children receiving SSI, I look forward to discussing other
supports we can offer these families as they work with their
children and they seek employment opportunities for unemployed
disabled children.
We are, as the Chairman indicated, joined by the Bentley
family, by Katie and her son Will, who receive SSI. They are
accompanying Jonathan Stein, who is testifying. Despite the
severe impairments that Will faces, Mrs. Bentley and her
husband were reluctant as many families are to even apply for
SSI. They wanted to support Will on their own. But after Mrs.
Bentley had to close her business to care for Will the
financial burden was heavy and she took the benefits that she
is entitled to take. Since Will has been receiving these
benefits his outcomes have improved remarkably. According to
Mrs. Bentley, the life altering value of SSI is worth so much
more than its monetary value. It is truly priceless in her
words.
Mr. Chairman, we can all agree on the need to improve and
strengthen SSI outcomes, and I look forward to working with you
on reform, but let's reject any direct cuts in assistance to
the disabled in the name of helping them. However great our
Nation's fiscal challenges may be, we ought not to balance the
budget on the backs of disabled children.
Thank you.
Chairman DAVIS. I thank you very much, Mr. Doggett. We are
also pleased to be joined by our colleague on the Ways and
Means Committee, Representative Richie Neal of Massachusetts,
who joins me and others in requesting the GAO review showing
concerns of families and about how they access SSI benefits for
children and ultimately how the program might be improved.
Mr. Neal, do you have any comments before we get to hear
from our witnesses?
Mr. NEAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
thoughts if I could, just a brief statement and I find myself
in agreement with what you said and with what Mr. Doggett said.
I think that is the path forward, to have deliberative effort
here.
I want to thank you first for allowing me to give some
brief opening comments even though I am not a Member of the
Subcommittee. And I am very pleased the Subcommittee through
you and Mr. Doggett has called the hearing to examine the state
of SSI in America. SSI for children is a program that has been
brought to my attention as well as New Englanders by an
illuminating and powerful three-piece and three-part series by
Patricia Wen of The Boston Globe, but also anecdotally by
educators, parents and health care professionals, in
Springfield, Holyoke and other cities and towns in
Massachusetts with high populations of SSI recipients.
The Globe map that I would encourage all of us to take a
look at that demonstrated a clear concentration of SSI
recipients in the older cities in Massachusetts speaks to the
issues that you have raised and the issues that Mr. Doggett has
raised. But I also believe that the role of the Federal
Government is to aid the most vulnerable amongst us. The SSI
program was created to do just that, originally to provide
financial support for children with severe physical
disabilities and to evolve as our health care system has
evolved to support children who suffer from behavioral and
mental health issues as well.
I have met with the Social Security Administration and the
Administrator, Michael Astrue, about my concerns with SSI. I
requested the Administration meeting with President Obama as
well as SSI administrators and I would suggest to this
Committee that we include an Institute of Medicine study to
examine the concentration of SSI recipients in the old cities
of Massachusetts. And why? Simply to get to the bottom of the
issue as to the role that the program plays in helping those
who need it and to avoid the potential for stigmatizing
children when it becomes the first option that is suggested
from health professionals.
I have asked the GAO along with the Members of the
Subcommittee to conduct an objective and balanced analysis of
the SSI program and to specifically look into provocative
topics like suspected overprescribing of medications and the
lack of a periodic review of the health care progress for
children. I think everybody would agree with that, that is not
a system that we review sufficiently the progress that children
might be making. I am interested in what the report concludes.
You should know I have drawn no conclusions and would be
anxious to hear from the Institute of Medicine.
The Social Security administrator has indicated that that
study would cost about $10 million. I think that is a
reasonable expenditure so that we might determine how we go
forward. Supplemental Security Income for Children is an
important program for the very vulnerable and neediest of the
population, but oversight of the program is necessary as well
to ensure its mission in assisting those vulnerable children
remain intact while abuse might be examined and identified and
where possible eliminated.
I also want to emphasize that I have not again drawn any
conclusions, but I want to tell you the series that The Boston
Globe outlined is a powerful reminder of the responsibilities
that we have to these children.
I thank you and Mr. Doggett for allowing me to participate
this morning.
Chairman DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Neal. Before we move on to
our testimony I would like to remind each of our witnesses that
they need to limit their oral statements to no longer than 5
minutes. Without objection, all of the written testimony will
be made part of the permanent record.
On our panel this morning we will be hearing from Dan
Bertoni, Director of Education, Workforce and Income Security,
the U.S. Government Accountability Office; Richard Burkhauser,
Professor, Department of Policy Analysis and Management at
Cornell University. Dr. Burkhauser will also be testifying
before another Subcommittee this morning and so will need to
leave before the end of the hearing, but we certainly
appreciate his taking the time to join us and including your
testimony in the record. He is also joined by David Wittenburg,
Senior Researcher from Mathematica Policy Research; Jonathan
Stein, General Counsel to Community Legal Services in
Philadelphia and also representing the SSI Coalition for
Children and Families; and Elizabeth Roberts, Child and
Adolescent Psychiatrist joining us from Murrieta, California.
Mr. Bertoni, please proceed with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL BERTONI, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION, WORKFORCE,
AND INCOME SECURITY, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. BERTONI. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Doggett, Mr.
Neal, Members of the Subcommittee, good morning. I am pleased
to discuss our preliminary observations on children with mental
impairments and supplemental security----
Chairman DAVIS. Could you make sure that the light is on
there?
Mr. BERTONI. It is on.
Chairman DAVIS. Okay, maybe the mic needs to be a little
closer, thank you.
Mr. BERTONI. In 2010, SSA paid over $9 billion in SSI
benefits to more than 1.2 million children. In prior work we
reported that the number of children on SSI had increased
substantially due in part to program changes that expanded
eligibility for those with mental impairments. And despite
modifications intended it address this growth, the number of
children on SSI with such impairments has continued to rise.
My testimony draws on our ongoing work, presents our
observations on trends in the rate of children receiving SSI,
the role medical and non-medical information plays in the
disability decision process and steps SSA has taken to review
the continued eligibility of children.
In summary, we found that the number of children who
applied for SSI benefits due to mental impairments increased 60
percent over the last decade, and such cases now comprise a
growing majority of all child beneficiaries. Moreover, between
fiscal years 2000 and 2010 the number of children found
eligible for benefits increased for almost every mental
impairment category with the most prevalent being ADHD, speech
and language delays, and autism. However, over the last decade
the average allowance rate for all children with mental
impairments has held steady at about 46 percent.
Several factors may have contributed to trends in the
roles, including agency and advocate outreach, increased
diagnoses of certain mental impairments, and the number of
children living in poverty. However, it is unclear how any
single factor or combination of factors have driven such
trends.
During our field work DDS examiners noted that they rely on
a combination of medical and non-medical information such as
treatment records, prescribed medications, school records and
teacher assessments in determining a child's eligibility. In
short, the decision is based on the totality of information
rather than any one piece in isolation.
Examiners obtain evidence such as psychological tests and
physician's notes to assess children with alleged mental
impairments and when such evidence is inconclusive they may
purchase an independent consultative exam of the child.
With regard to the role of prescription medication, DDS
examiners in various locations told us it is generally given no
more weight than any other information, and in some cases if
medication improves functioning, it can be a factor in denying
a claim. However, certain field offices acknowledge that some
parents may believe that medicating their children will improve
their likelihood of receiving benefits. In going forward we
plan to conduct an indepth case file review to assess the
relative weight medication and other evidence plays in SSI
decisions.
In regard to non-medical information, we found that some
DDSs face challenges in obtaining school records and teacher
assessments, which can be a critical source of information for
assessing a child's functioning over time, partly due to the
school's and teacher's reluctance to complete such assessments.
And finally, although SSA is required to periodically conduct
continuing disability reviews, or CDRs, of children on the
rolls, such reviews decreased substantially over the last
decade, from more than 200,000 to about 126,000. And those for
children with mental impairments decreased from 84,000 to only
13,000 last year.
We identified over 400,000 child SSI cases with mental
impairments that were overdue for a CDR, with thousands of
cases exceeding their scheduled dates by several years. Of the
CDRs SSA did conduct last year the average benefit cessation
rate was 24 percent, with personality disorders and speech and
language delays having higher rates of rescission at 34 and 33
percent respectively.
SSA has acknowledged the importance of conducting CDRs but
has primarily attributed its failure to do all required reviews
to resource constraints and competing workloads. Thus the
program continues to be exposed to substantial overpayments.
The recently enacted Budget Control Act of 2011 authorizes
additional funding for SSA to do more CDRs and SSI
redeterminations, and the agency is currently assessing how it
will use such funding should it be appropriated.
Plus, it is not yet known whether SSA will use this funding
to do additional childhood CDRs or target its efforts toward
those mental impairments with the highest potential cessation
rates as a means of best leveraging its limited resources.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I am happy to
answer any questions that you or other Members of the
Subcommittee may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bertoni follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.030

Chairman DAVIS. Thank you, Mr. Bertoni.
Dr. Burkhauser, please proceed with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD V. BURKHAUSER, PH.D., PROFESSOR,
DEPARTMENT OF POLICY ANALYSIS AND MANAGEMENT, CORNELL
UNIVERSITY

Mr. BURKHAUSER. Thank you for the opportunity to submit a
summary of my research on the SSI disabled children's program
contained in my new book with Mary Daly.
In 1974, the SSI disabled children's program provided
benefits to a small subpopulation of poor families with age-
eligible children. Only about 10 per thousand poor children
received such benefits. Program caseloads grew modestly to 20
per thousand by 1989. Between then and 1996 the number more
than tripled to 65 per thousand, fell modestly for a year, and
then increased to 80 per thousand in 2007.
Based on our reading of the evidence, this dramatic growth
is not a result of a growing health epidemic of poor children,
but rather the consequence of several policy decisions that
have turned a modest program for disabled children into a more
general welfare program that in large part serves the same poor
single mothers in the TANF population.
Seventy-one percent of SSI families are headed by single
mothers or other non-two-parent families. Increasingly, their
children have medical conditions that are difficult to
objectively measure and they are coming onto the SSI program
via increasingly subjective evaluations by SSA gatekeepers.
So why has the SSI caseload risen? Is it a health epidemic?
While it is difficult to obtain information on the underlying
health of poor children, we find no evidence of worsening
health in this population. While the number of poor children
has increased, the number of children in that population
receiving SSI benefits has increased even faster; hence, the
400 percent growth in their share among poor children
previously mentioned.
Is it program policy factors? I believe it is and I focus
on three policy effects. The first is TANF and SSI
interactions. The typical SSI applicant family is headed by a
poor single mother who is eligible for TANF. Because SSI
benefits are larger than TANF benefits and have no work
requirements, it is in the interest of these single mothers to
apply and economists have shown that the greater the difference
the more likely they are to do so. States also have an
incentive to move their TANF families to the SSI program, thus
cost shifting their payments to the Federal Government. This
becomes a more realistic option, the lower the standard for
establishing SSI eligibility and the more subjective SSI's
eligibility decisions are.
So here is where the second change comes in. Eligibility
standards were both lowered and made more subjective in the
wake of the Zebley case, and this explains much of the increase
in SSI caseloads between 1989 and 1996. As part of welfare
reform, Congress modified definitions of disability for
children, creating a new stricter standard. This reduced
caseloads per child, but only for 1 year.
Here is where the third change comes in; that is, a change
in the way SSI gatekeepers interpret these rules. The outcome
of applying more subjective criteria to determine eligibility
can be seen in the percentage of SSI awards for two conditions:
Mental retardation and other mental conditions. These two
conditions represent extremes between medically measurable and
more subjectively determined outcomes.
In 1983, approximately 37 percent of new beneficiaries
qualified based on mental retardation, and only 5 percent based
on other mental conditions. Today over 55 percent of new
beneficiaries claim other mental conditions.
In sum, the research findings provide plausible evidence
SSI program growth has primarily been driven by policy changes
rather than the declining health of poor children. But what
policy caused, new policies can change, but only if they are
fundamental changes.
The SSI program closely resembles more general welfare
programs and thus can be changed using many of the same
principles applied in moving from AFDC to TANF. This would mean
moving SSI from the Federal Government to the States. This
devolution would, like TANF, hold States accountable to Federal
guidelines regarding outcomes of children with disabilities.
Like TANF, SSI could be funded by block grants and States could
be asked to comply with broader goals.
Devolution to the States would also solve three major
problems with the current program. First, on equity grounds,
placing responsibility for all welfare families with the States
would reduce the difference in treatment of poor families based
on the often subjective decision of whether their children meet
the SSI standards.
Second, devolving the SSI program to the States would limit
State incentives to shift the cost of managing welfare
caseloads to the Federal Government through the SSI.
And third, devolution to the States, who have far more
experience than SSA in transitioning poor single mothers in the
workforce, would allow these single mothers to work now and
eventually allow their disabled children the opportunity to
work after the children age off the SSI rolls.
Thank you for the opportunity for speaking today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Burkhauser follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.039

Chairman DAVIS. Thank you very much, Dr. Burkhauser. Dr.
Wittenburg, if you could give your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DAVID WITTENBURG, PH.D.,
SENIOR RESEARCHER, MATHEMATICA POLICY RESEARCH

Mr. WITTENBURG. Thank you, Chairman Davis, Ranking Member
Doggett, and Members of the Subcommittee, for the opportunity
to testify on how we can improve efforts to provide supports to
child SSI recipients.
I have written several reports about the outcome of these
youth. And I will make three points about this program related
to issues raised in recent media reports, including The Boston
Globe series.
The first point is about the importance of the child SSI
program as an anti-poverty tool. A key indicator of the
program's effect on poverty is that on average the child's SSI
benefit check currently accounts for approximately half of the
income of the family.
A second related point is about the strong individual and
State incentives that encourage families to apply for SSI over
existing State welfare programs like TANF. This point, that
goes to Dr. Burkhauser's point just made, that families might
be enticed to apply for SSI on behalf of their child because
the Federal SSI benefit on average is $200 larger than State
TANF benefits. Because TANF is funded by a block grant, States
can also financially gain because every dollar saved by a
transfer of a TANF recipient to SSI remains within the State.
For these reasons a low-income parent who has a child with even
a moderate disability has a financial incentive to apply for
SSI, and could even be encouraged to do so by a State worker.
The caseload trends illustrate this gradual federalization.
Since 1989 child SSI caseloads have increased by 350 percent
while the corresponding State welfare caseloads have dropped by
more than 50 percent. There is evidence of direct transitions
across the programs. A key question is whether this movement
increasingly toward using child SSI supports for low-income
families is appropriate.
This question leads to my third point, which is the most
important point in my testimony, and is illustrated on the
slide above. A major concern is the program's effects on the
outcomes of young adults. And this slide shows between the ages
19 to 23 former child SSI recipients reported first of all
substantial dropout rates. Two in five did not have a high
school diploma and were not actively attending school. Low
employment rates, almost four in five are not currently
working. Most disconcerting, high arrest rates, one in five had
been arrested. And unfortunately these arrest trends are
consistent with other reports that indicate 30 to 50 percent of
incarcerated youth with disabilities could qualify for other
services.
Finally, reliance on SSI benefits is a long-term option.
Just over three in five are receiving SSI after age 18. Taken
together, these poor outcomes suggest a need to rethink the
current policies. Any approach though should balance the
outcomes needed above with also providing income supports that
keep low-income families out of poverty.
One approach to reforming policy and to reverse the outcome
shown on this slide is to pilot the addition of education and/
or work requirements for continuing SSI eligibility. This
option maintains the current structure of the child program but
alters the potential adverse incentives children face regarding
school and work. The infusion of education requirements would
also make the child SSI program more consistent with the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, which provides
free and appropriate education services to youth with
disabilities.
A second more ambitious approach is to look at the broader
safety net and consolidate service delivery to more
specifically meet the diverse needs of youth with disabilities
and their family. This option is especially important given the
fact that the line between TANF and SSI has become blurred.
Improving program design requires rethinking of existing
programs and designing new approaches that should be tested to
build a consensus on what works. Such rethinking could include
local, State, Federal or even private providers who provide a
more integrated set of reports.
While we do know some information to approach the problem,
the exact model for reform is not known at this time because it
has not been tested. So we should not rush to a solution.
Experimentation, however, can lead to innovation of promising
practices, service delivery and effective policy. For this
reason I suggest the use of congressional authority to invest
in major demonstrations which will highlight models that could
improve health and social outcomes and potentially save
significant tax dollars. Failure to do so only delays our
ability to develop policies to improve the lives of youth with
disabilities. Youth are worth the investment, and the outcomes
I outline today indicate that we should be more aggressive in
efforts to help them reach their full potential.
Thank you and I would be pleased to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittenburg follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.059

Chairman DAVIS. Thank you, Dr. Wittenburg.
Mr. Stein, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN M. STEIN, GENERAL COUNSEL, COMMUNITY
LEGAL SERVICES OF PHILADELPHIA, AND MEMBER, SSI COALITION FOR
CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

Mr. STEIN. Good morning. I am Jonathan Stein, General
Counsel at Community Legal Services in Philadelphia, where I
have represented children with disabilities and their families
for most of my 43 years of practice. CLS is a member of the SSI
Coalition for Children and Families, 80 organizations that
share the belief that SSI is a critical lifeline for children
with severe disabilities, our Nation's most vulnerable children
and youth.
I first would like to introduce you all to Will Bentley,
and his picture is up there on the wall. Will is an 8-year-old
boy who lives in Covington, Kentucky with parents and sister.
Nearly from birth Will's parents knew something was wrong. Will
was very slow in learning to speak and had trouble eating and
drinking because he wasn't able to keep liquid in his mouth.
His parents enrolled him in First Steps, Kentucky's Early
Intervention program, where he learned to sign with his hands
so that he could communicate with his family.
At age 3 Will began to have frequent violent seizures. His
diagnoses grew to include developmental delays, speech delays,
Sensory Integration Disorder, Anxiety Disorder, frequent bouts
of depression, among others. Taking Will to all his needed
medical and therapy appointments became a full-time job for his
mother, Kate.
Katie Bentley was forced to shut down her small business to
stay home and care for Will and the family suffered a huge loss
of income. In Katie's own words, ``My husband and I really
wanted to support Will on our own, but we quickly learned that
the dream we had of our own family would never become a
reality. I surrendered my career and we adapted our lives so
that Will's needs could be met. Before he was granted SSI in
2010 we barely could even afford the gas to drive him to his
therapy appointments with his specialist. Now SSI allows us to
focus on Will's needs.''
And as she further says, ``At one time Will was unable to
do anything for himself, he couldn't even feed himself. Now he
has learned to write his name, and a few days ago Will learned
to zip his own jacket, and is even learning to read. The wealth
of support that comes from SSI and Medicaid is a dream come
true for us,'' says Katie Bentley.
Helping children with severe disabilities like Will lead
their fullest lives possible requires access to treatment and
support services as well as financial support to replace lost
income when a parent must stay home to care for the child. SSI
is a key ingredient to helping them get the care and support
they need.
Sensational and ill-informed media accounts as in The
Boston Globe and elsewhere have relied almost entirely on
anecdotal observations and half truths. So let's instead
consider some facts.
Fact, only the most severely impaired children qualify for
SSI. Fewer than 10 percent of all children in the Nation with
disabilities receive SSI. And this is because of the
extraordinarily strict SSI disability standard, an objective
standard, unlike Mr. Burkhauser's characterization of it as
subjective. Just 39 percent of children who apply are awarded
SSI, a figure that has remained essentially unchanged for well
over the past decade.
Fact, SSI was established by Congress to aid children and
adults with physical as well as mental impairments. As a nation
we have made great strides toward achieving parity between
mental and physical disabilities. Any debate over whether
mental impairment, such as ADHD or autism, are as
``legitimate'' as physical disabilities represents a
significant and shameful step backward.
Fact, ADHD is a neurobehavioral disorder with clear medical
diagnostic criteria recognized by the National Institutes of
Health and a myriad of other respected organizations. Only the
most severe cases of ADHD qualify for SSI. Just 26 percent of
children with ADHD who apply for SSI are approved. Thus three
out of every four children with ADHD are denied. In fact, the
allowance for ADHD has been declining in recent years.
Fact, a prescription for medications would never on its own
make a child eligible for SSI. In fact being on medications can
actually make a child less likely to be found eligible for SSI
if they lessen the severity of the child's impairments.
Moreover, SSA data show that children with ADHD who are taking
medications are no more likely to be approved for SSI than
those not taking medications. And the fact is there is nothing
in the GAO report that cites a study to be contrary to that.
We look forward to hearing, though, GAO's findings when it
has completed its study and expect they will match SSA's own
findings.
Fact, growth in the children's SSI program in recent years
is due primarily to increasing poverty. As the number of poor
children in this country has reached tragic new heights, over
16 million U.S. children now live in poverty versus 11 million
a decade ago. More low-income children obviously are
financially eligible for SSI. Yet the share of children in
poverty who receive SSI has remained unchanged for the past 10
years, 7.5 percent.
I am nearing my end, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman DAVIS. We are well past that.
Mr. STEIN. Might you just give me one more minute.
Chairman DAVIS. No. If you could sum up briefly with one
sentence.
Mr. STEIN. Okay. I will be saying the following: I would
urge the Subcommittee not to take hasty action, and to wait for
the GAO study and then seek a study from the Institute of
Medicine or the Association of University Centers on
Disability. And I would say, as I have said earlier, this is a
critical lifeline for families like the Bentleys. And if any
Members of the Subcommittee have any questions of Mrs. Bentley,
who is sitting behind me to the right, she is also available to
respond to questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stein follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.070

Chairman DAVIS. I appreciate that, Mr. Stein. I wish we had
unlimited time for all of our witnesses. It is simply a
constraint with the overall schedule of the Congress today. I
am personally looking forward to meeting with the Bentleys
again after the hearing concludes.
We are going to move on now to Dr. Roberts. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH J. ROBERTS, M.D.,
CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PSYCHIATRIST

Dr. ROBERTS. Thank you, Chairman Davis, Mr. Doggett, for
inviting me to speak today.
As a child psychiatrist, I have treated hundreds of
children who are receiving the Supplemental Security Income.
And what I have observed in the cases that I have been treating
is an alarming abuse of the SSI system, but more importantly I
have observed what a devastating effect the abuse of the SSI
system can have on child and family. Because diagnosing a child
with a psychiatric condition is based almost exclusively on the
verbal report of the child's parent, it is easy for a doctor to
arrive at the wrong conclusion. There are no blood tests, CAT
scans, MRIs, SPECT scans, and what have you, that can
accurately diagnose a mental disorder.
The misdiagnosis of children with psychiatric conditions
and the consequential overmedicating of these kids has become a
problem of epidemic proportions in the United States. And when
you add the financial incentive of getting your child diagnosed
and treated with a mental illness, the pursuit of SSI benefits
for children has become an irresistible attraction of poor
families. If this abuse of SSI were only a waste of taxpayer
dollars, that would be bad enough, but the fraudulent use of
SSI is hurting children both emotionally and physically. The
best way that I can think to elucidate this problem is to give
you examples of children I have actually treated.
In 2002, I met an 18-year-old girl who had been assigned to
me at the Riverside County Mental Health Clinic for a
psychiatric evaluation. For the purpose of this testimony I
will refer to her as Sarah. Sarah explained to me that she was
required by the SSA to be reevaluated if she wanted to continue
to receive her benefit check. She told me that since she was 14
she had been abusing every street drug imaginable,
methamphetamine, cocaine, LSD, marijuana, alcohol, and others.
It was at 14 that she started abusing drugs and this is
when her mother took her for an evaluation at the county mental
health clinic. When she was high on speed she was hyperactive
and agitated. When she was drunk, she was depressed. She only
experienced her mood symptoms while she was using or
withdrawing from drugs.
Prior to the time that Sarah started using drugs, she had
no serious mood problems, aside from being belligerent and
demanding with her mother. Regardless, her physiatrist
diagnosed her with bipolar disorder. And with this diagnosis
her mother was able to secure SSI benefits. And though she was
prescribed psychiatric medications for her mood disorder she
told me she never took the medications consistently and usually
refused them altogether.
Furthermore, Sarah explained that she continued to abuse
street drugs for the next 4 years. She described her own
behaviors as defiant and rebellious and wild throughout those
drug-soaked teen years from 14 to 18 years old. Sarah presented
her history with pride and impunity.
At 18 Sarah moved out of her mother's house, starting to
cash and keep her SSI benefits of over $800 a month. I guess
kids get more in California than they get elsewhere. Though she
abused drugs excessively she was an otherwise beautiful,
physically healthy, able-bodied, trim, attractive, smart,
Caucasian blonde girl.
Sarah reported it to me in this first session that she
established the practice of cashing her SSI check each month,
checking into a cheap motel, buying up all the meth with the
SSI funds that she could afford. And then she and her boyfriend
would use drugs continuously until the money ran out. And when
the motel evicted them for nonpayment, they would sleep on the
streets and panhandle for money until the next SSI check
arrived.
With the start of each month Sarah and her boyfriend would
cash the SSI check and repeat the same routine. When I
confronted her with the fact that using the SSI funds to do
drugs was destroying her own life, she stated that she didn't
care and that she was having fun. She told me that in spite of
the fact that she was perfectly capable of working, her bipolar
diagnosis entitled her to the SSI money and that she had every
intention of continuing to use that money to finance her drug
use.
When I pointed out to Sarah that people worked hard, paid
their taxes to support programs such as SSI for the benefit of
the truly needy, like Will Bentley, she responded by telling me
people who work and pay taxes are chumps. Furthermore, I
explained to her the abuse of the SSI system was fraud. She
went on to provide me with the following advice: If working
people had half a brain they would figure out her scam and take
advantage of the system as she had.
I offered Sarah psychotherapy, vocational training, drug
rehabilitation. She declined all of our services at the county
clinic, and including I offered her medication prescriptions.
She said she hadn't been taking them anyway and she refused all
our services. She asked that I please just simply complete her
renewal application for the SSI benefits. I completed the
application, providing the SSA evaluators with all the
information I had gathered in this first meeting, and her
benefits were denied.
Chairman DAVIS. Dr. Roberts, I just encourage you to wrap
up.
Ms. ROBERTS. We are out of time. I am sorry, I didn't
notice.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Roberts follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.073

Chairman DAVIS. Thank you. And we have the rest of your
statement in the record as well for further review. I
appreciate everybody's testimony. We are going to go ahead and
move now to questions.
In the testimony that we have heard today, it appears there
are both short- and long-run recommendations on how to help
disabled children better prepare for adulthood and recognizing
a wide range of needs within the population of children
receiving SSI benefits.
Mr. Bertoni, your testimony indicates that, while mental
impairments are the diagnosis for two-thirds of the children
receiving SSI, the continuing disability reviews, or CDRs
needed to confirm children in this group remain eligible, have
dropped by 84 percent in the past decade. On page 21, you
display a chart that shows how the reviews are years overdue
for nearly all child recipients with mental impairments.
Looking at the short-run, Mr. Bertoni, of the trends
involving children on SSI due to mental impairments, what does
the evidence suggest SSA should be doing to better manage this
program?
Mr. BERTONI. I think at the front end SSA should be
concerned and looking at the rise in some of these impairments.
Especially in speech and language it appears to have increased
precipitously. Many of those--that impairment can be viewed as
transient in nature, likely to improve. But at the back end
much of their focus has been on age 18 redeterminations and
low-birth-weight babies, about 87 percent of all CDRs. So we
have 13 percent of all other CDRs that are looking at all other
mental impairments.
I think it would behoove the agency to sort of tease out
some of these impairments that, number one, are growing in
terms of raw numbers, and our own CDRs have shown to have
fairly large high cessation rates, speech and language 33
percent cessation rate right now.
Chairman DAVIS. So you are saying in effect, if I could
just offer a possible example, and tell me if I am right or
wrong, that a person who might have been a young person 3 or 4
years old was diagnosed with this, it is possible without the
CDR say coming at a reasonable time, within a couple of years,
would remain on SSI all the way until age 18 without reviews.
Mr. BERTONI. Certainly right now the case goes up to
174,000 cases and if they are only doing 13 percent of all
mental impairments, I think it is fair to say that very few
speech and language delay cases are being reviewed. It is
probably fair to say that many of those children are probably
on the rolls well beyond a CDR that could possibly have ceased
them.
Chairman DAVIS. Thank you. Dr. Wittenburg, the outcomes you
describe in your research for older youth on SSI are terrible,
quite frankly. No one would want that for their children: high
rates of school dropout and low rates of work, training, or
other positive activities. Two questions, really. First, what
should we do about that? And second, is the Social Security
Administration equipped to take the steps needed to improve the
outcomes or is this the type of effort that State agencies need
to be involved in as we saw with welfare reform?
Mr. WITTENBURG. That gets to the heart of my testimony. I
think that is an excellent question, Chairman Davis. I think
the short answer for what can SSA do about it is look into
school and possibly work requirements for child SSI recipients
as well as young adult SSI recipients to reorienate them around
the concept of work is potentially an important step, but the
bigger picture that I wanted to focus on is the appropriateness
of the child SSI benefit and meeting all the diverse needs of
the families.
I think as you heard across all the testimonies today, you
have a diverse spectrum of youth here. So when we talk about
devolving to the State level, I think that is an interesting
concept because that is where the services are provided to
these youth, that is where schools and voc rehab is provided,
and that is where Medicaid is provided. So there is an
interesting potential to bundle services, but I would stop
short of saying we should go ahead and block grant that to
States because at least in some of the experiences under TANF
States have not spent their money for other resources. So if
you block grant SSI and TANF, a key question is will some
States have enough resources to serve both programs given that
they are having difficulties serving just TANF in some States?
That is why I suggest a more integrated approach that could
occur at the State or other levels that might even include
private providers. And that is why experimentation is really
important.
Mr. STEIN. Mr. Chairman, may I add to that answer if I
could in response to your question?
Chairman DAVIS. Sure. We just have a few seconds though.
Mr. STEIN. Yes, sure. Concerning the whole idea of bad
outcomes to which Mr. Wittenburg refers, isn't it really not a
surprise that there is a high unemployment rate for disabled
children; whether they are on SSI or not, they are not going to
be employed in great numbers or may be dropping out of school.
What Mr. Wittenburg is not doing is comparing those disabled
kids on SSI with other disabled children. Don't they all share
similar problems or outcomes that we are not that pleased with
but we have to understand come because of severe disabilities?
Yes, they will drop out of school, and yes, they will have
somewhat lower employment rates than others because of the very
severity of their disabilities.
Chairman DAVIS. I appreciate your perspective. The reason
we are holding this hearing today is to ask some questions that
often don't get asked. We are trying to work in a number of
areas related to processes and really understanding how to help
these young people the best way possible so they can go back to
work. And I think the one mistake we don't want to make is to
assume, well, because this has been the issue in the past, we
therefore should continue to insist that we won't address the
root causes of that. Rather, I think the point of asking is to
assure that we look at creative ways to address that and make
sure that very worthy young people like Will and his family
receive support. And for those who may never be able to make
that transition we understand that. But on the other hand, I
have seen some great success personally in the professional
world with young people, incredible disabilities that had been
able to move into meaningful work. I think it comes back to
community involvement, working the front lines and asking
questions like we are asking today. Whether we all agree with
each other or not, there is great benefit.
Mr. STEIN. And we do, Mr. Chairman, have specific
recommendations in our written testimony which I won't repeat
here.
Chairman DAVIS. Reclaiming my time. You will have plenty of
opportunity, I am sure, to share as the other Members of the
panel ask questions. And with that I will defer now to Ranking
Member Doggett for 5 minutes.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask to be
made part of our record an excellent article in today's USA
Today, Cutting SSI Would Only Hurt Children, written by Dr.
Susan Parish of Brandeis University and Dr. James Perrin, a
Professor of Pediatrics at Harvard Medical School.
Chairman DAVIS. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.075

Mr. DOGGETT. Just reading a couple of lines from that
report, I think we have had testimony in my opening statement
to this effect, but ``SSI serves only low-income children with
the most severe mental and physical impairments. Its medical
and financial eligibility requirements are so strict that only
1.6 percent of the children in the United States and fewer than
10 percent of kids with disabilities receive SSI. In fact, the
overwhelming majority of children who apply for SSI are denied.
Congress should look for ways to support our Nation's most
vulnerable children and families instead of painting a target
on their backs in the name of deficit reduction.''
That certainly summarizes my own feeling about this. I am
against scams. I think everybody on this Committee is against
scams. I am against them whether they are committed by giant
pharmaceutical companies at the cost of tens of millions of
dollars to public service programs or they are committed by one
young woman who goes off to have drugs with her boyfriend. And
it seems to me that the focus ought to be on getting at the
scams rather than on denying benefits to many deserving
families.
We have one way of getting at scams under the system and
that is the disability reviews. Unfortunately, under the Bush
administration the resources for those disability reviews were
significantly reduced and finally under the current
Administration we have begun to increase the review process.
That is where the focus ought to be, rather than across-the-
board cuts.
I find the testimony of Dr. Burkhauser has left the
suggestion that because the States have done such a great job
reducing benefits in Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,
in cutting the level of those benefits and affording them to
fewer and fewer families, let's let them do the same thing for
families with children with severe physical or mental
disabilities. It is a little like the argument that some people
have made that because the States do so little with Medicaid in
our nursing homes, let's let them administer Medicare too and
save some money at the expense of seniors and individuals with
disabilities. I think that is very backward thinking. I know
what will happen in Elgin, Texas to this beautiful set of twins
who suffer from autism. They will get the same kind of second
rate support from the State of Texas that the State of Texas
provides through the Medicaid program for those who rely on it
who can barely get by and can't get all the prescriptions that
their doctors provide to them.
Mr. Stein, what would be the effect as you see it in States
across the country for these families if we just turn all this,
we use I believe the term devolution, let's give it all back to
the States instead of maintaining any Federal program with
reference the SSI.
Mr. STEIN. I think there would be terrible consequences,
Mr. Doggett. There would be a lack of equity. There would be a
lack of minimum standards. There would be the very subjectivity
that perhaps Mr. Burkhauser is concerned about.
When you have a national system like the Social Security
one for kids and adults, you have national standards, you have
quality controls in place. In fact, the quality control
accuracy rate for decisionmaking in child disability cases is
something like 97 percent.
Now, there is a kind of myth out there that this is the new
welfare; this is almost a defamation of the SSI kids program.
And it is the wrong assumption that suddenly when you reduce
the TANF rolls, all those kids go on to SSI. I think you have
heard a little theme about that by a couple of people at this
table. But despite those allegations that SSI is or has become
a general welfare program, the truth is that being poor is not
enough to qualify for SSI. To get SSI you also have to have a
very severe disability, and the Congress in 1996 in the welfare
legislation then upped the severity standard greatly.
Mr. DOGGETT. Let me just ask you one other question that
has been referred to in testimony I think by Dr. Roberts and by
others here. Looking at the testimony that is on file with the
Committee today from Dr. James Scully on behalf of the American
Psychiatric Association, that testimony indicates in response
to this issue of well, aren't the people out there just passing
out drugs to these kids so they can qualify for this program.
He says that the medication treatment for disorders like ADHD
actually reduces the likelihood of eligibility for SSI. Is that
correct?
Mr. STEIN. That is exactly true.
Chairman DAVIS. Mr. Stein, I am sorry to interrupt.
Mr. DOGGETT. Continue with another Member.
Chairman DAVIS. Time has expired and part of the reason for
needing to expedite is we are going to have a vote coming in
the next 15 to 30 minutes. I want to make sure that every
panelist has the opportunity. If you could give that response
to the Committee in writing we would be very grateful for that.
Mr. STEIN. Yes. I was in mid sentence, Mr. Chairman. May I
just complete that sentence?
Thank you for that.
Chairman DAVIS. I tell you what we are going to do. Since
the last sentence was a minute and a half long I think we will
let it come back in writing. I share equal passion for helping
young people and have volunteered and worked in this space for
nearly 30 years. So I think that we can have some common ground
in this.
With that I would like to recognize the gentleman from
Minnesota, Mr. Paulsen.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will be pretty quick.
I want to thank you for holding this hearing. And I want to get
back to this issue of the timely reviews. Mr. Stein had noted I
think back in January regarding children on SSI that existing
law already requires disability reviews every 3 years where
improvement is likely. But the data really does suggests that
those reviews have not actually been happening recently in
years.
For example, the Social Security Administration Inspector
General recently reported that although required by statute,
SSA failed to complete 79 percent of scheduled child reviews
resulting in an estimated 1.4 billion in overpayments. So there
is obviously concern about this issue on a bipartisan basis. In
fact, in the Budget Control Act which we just adopted in August
we provided more resources for these reviews, as well as other
program integrity activities to the tune of $623 million for
2012.
Mr. Bertoni, you also note in your statement and made some
comments that SSA does not appear to be conducting childhood
CDRs in a very timely manner. In your opinion, how vital is it
for SSA to conduct childhood CDRs? And in what ways could SSA
better target those efforts?
Mr. BERTONI. Certainly. The CDRs they are conducting, as I
said earlier, are for age 18 redeterminations as well as the
low-birth-weight babies, but there is a vast range of other
mental impairments that they are not getting to. We do know
that many of them are increasing and represent a significant
portion of the rolls: Speech delay, 21 percent; ADHD, 26
percent; autism, 11 percent. In excess of 50 percent of the
rolls are within those three impairments.
They are getting very few CDRs, and again, some of those
cases potentially could have medically improved, the science
says that that is a possibility. A number of those are probably
listed as medical improvement expected, so I think you are
foregoing an opportunity, I think, not just to save taxpayer
dollars but to put children who are medically impaired on a
different track to a track toward productivity and integration,
toward something other than lifelong Social Security benefits.
Mr. PAULSEN. So knowing there is that opportunity there, do
you believe that SSA has a plan for how to use the moneys in
the Budget Control Act that we just passed a couple of months
ago to target these reviews more efficiently and effectively?
Mr. BERTONI. I do know they are concerned about certain
trends in the caseload, certain impairments, and they are
eyeing it very closely. I do not believe there is a specific
plan to get to the existing backlog or what they would do going
forward.
Mr. PAULSEN. Mr. Chairman, I just think we are going to
have to monitor this because we are all looking at, you know,
stretched resources, and there is broad agreement here that
these reviews, timely reviews, are critical, so I will yield
back my time to move on.
Chairman DAVIS. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize Mr. McDermott from Washington State for 5
minutes.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It seems to me this
hearing has two issues in it, and we can't deal with both of
them. One is the effect of poverty on poor kids and what we
have done, and Dr. Burkhauser and Dr. Wittenburg both talked
about that, we ought to have a hearing about that and what we
ought to do about it, but the more important issue here, it
seems to me, is what Dr. Roberts says.
Dr. Roberts says that child psychiatrists are fraudulently
putting children on SSI. She says in her testimony, because
diagnosing a child with psychiatric condition is based almost
exclusively on the verbal report by a child's parents, it is
easy for the doctor to arrive at the wrong conclusion.
Now, that would imply that you don't examine the kid. I am
a child psychiatrist; you are a child psychiatrist. You saw
that child, and you made the diagnosis on the basis of reports
but also what you saw in front of you. For you to imply that
any kid out of the 1.2 million kids that are on SSI in this
country were put there by somebody who didn't see the child is
an absolute accusation of fraud.
And I know you went on Oprah, and you have been on CNN, so
I know you have the ear of the media. That is why I am taking
you on, because you are in the media here. And the fact is that
I would like to hear, did you ever report a doctor for doing
such a thing? Because it is against the ethics of the American
Psychiatric Association to make a diagnosis without seeing the
patient. You know that. I can't make it--I can't say what I
think of Mr. Davis' psychiatric condition because I haven't
examined him. Everybody understands that.
Chairman DAVIS. If I could interrupt, I would only agree to
that if I could have reciprocity with the gentleman from
Washington State.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, I make my point. You don't--the
business about making a decision about Miss Schiavo by Dr.
Frist. Making a decision about somebody in Florida on a
breathing machine when you haven't seen the patient is
malpractice, and it is unethical.
So now you are accusing doctors of doing that. Give me an
example of someone you know by name that saw a patient or
didn't see a patient and signed a paper and said they are
eligible for SSI.
Chairman DAVIS. I just, in respect of HIPAA, I would ask
that you not name any individuals that you are citing if you
have those records.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Well, you can give me a false name like
Sarah, all right?
Dr. ROBERTS. Thank you, Mr. McDermott, for the opportunity.
I don't know how you came to the conclusion that I said that
because the diagnosis is made primarily on the report by the
parent that the child is never seen. Evaluations of children,
as it is done in practice--it is very nice that there is so
much testimony here that getting a child on to SSI is so
difficult and the requirements are so strict and stringent.
They are not. In practice--now, I don't know how many people
here actually treat children still today in poverty and see and
help them apply for SSI every week, because I do. Every week.
Filling out SSA forms. And the children----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. How long do you spend with these kids, 2
minutes or 3 or an hour?
Dr. ROBERTS. See, that is the difference. I spend 2 hours
or more, and my colleagues spend 20 or 5, and that is the
problem.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Twenty minutes or 5?
Dr. ROBERTS. Five minutes, right.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. How do you know that?
Dr. ROBERTS. How do I know that? Because the doctors tell
me that, and the patients who have seen these doctors report
that to me. The doctors----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Have you reported them for an ethics
violation for seeing the patient for 5 minutes and then going--
--
Dr. ROBERTS. It is a common practice, Mr. McDermott, a
common practice.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Common practice?
Dr. ROBERTS. And, yes, I report it to the supervisors at
the county, and they tell me forget about it.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Wow.
Dr. ROBERTS. For example, in the case of Sarah, when I
denied her, her mother came back a year later and said, my
house burned down; we need the money.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You have given me one example. You--and, I
am sorry--let me tell you----
Dr. ROBERTS. Oh, I can give you hundreds of examples.
Hundreds.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You are trying to draw a general policy.
Dr. ROBERTS. No, I am not.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Yes, you are.
Dr. ROBERTS. I am not. I am trying to say there is a lot of
fraud and abuse in the system, and it needs to be fixed. I am
not referring to Will; I am talking about kids like Sarah.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And what have you done to repair it? Where
have you used the organizations that one would use to repair
that fraud and abuse? What have you done?
Dr. ROBERTS. I report the--I write books. I write articles.
And I report it to supervisors. What else can I do? I testified
before a Subcommittee; that is the best I can do.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Are you a member of the AMA? Are you a
member of the American Psychiatric Association?
Dr. ROBERTS. No, I let my membership lapse because they are
making statements like they did that completely ignores what
happens in the trenches for those of us who are actually
treating these children. They make these blanket statements as
if everyone is getting a very strict review. They are not.
After Sarah was denied----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You are making the blanket statements----
Dr. ROBERTS [continuing]. Her mother came back in to me.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Excuse me----
Dr. ROBERTS. No, I am not making a blanket statement.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. It is my time.
Dr. ROBERTS. Oh, sorry.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. You are making statements----
Chairman DAVIS. Actually, it is now my time. Thank you.
Mr. BERG. Our time.
Chairman DAVIS. I appreciate the spirited dialogue on this
issue with my friend from Washington, with whom I have worked
on many legislative initiatives, and yours, Dr. Roberts, as
well. We do have a copy of your book, among others.
Now I would like to defer to the gentleman from North
Dakota, Mr. Berg.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I truly do want to thank all the panelists that are
here.
Thank the Chairman for pulling this together.
You know, back in September, we had really a hearing on the
SSI program for adults. And I am just happy here that we are
looking at the same issue with children, and one of the things
that strikes me is before we get in the weeds, we have to kind
of look at the outcomes. And really, what in the big picture
long term are we doing, what are we creating, how are we
impacting these people's lives? And so that is kind of the
thrust of where I would like to go with the questioning, and
you know, we talked about the incentives in September for
adults on vocational rehabilitation and how to help them
reenter the work force, and I think that should be a goal is
how do we have people feel a part of our society, have them be
engaged in work that they enjoy, work that they feel a value
to? And so a lot of what I have heard here today seems we have
barriers and disincentives to that direction.
And so, Dr. Wittenburg, you know, from your research, you
know, there are very low rates of enrollment in vocational
rehabilitation services on these youth that are transitioning,
and you mentioned several demonstration projects. I guess one
of the brief questions is the Youth Transition Demonstration.
What is the theory behind that?
Mr. WITTENBURG. That is a very good question, Mr. Berg, and
the Youth Transition Demonstration is one of the demonstrations
that I am very optimistic about because I feel like it is
asking the right questions, which is, how can we promote the
long-term outcomes of these youth? It looks at the exact poor
outcomes that I put in that slide, and it says, what do we know
about best practices in terms of delivering employment supports
to youth with disabilities? What do we know about incentives
that may affect youths' choices regarding the labor market? And
it combines a series of intervention approaches, and I think
one of the key points of it, Mr. Berg, is that it is designed
to be a customized approach to meet the individual needs of the
youth. It is not a standard system.
So the Youth Transition Demonstration is operating in
several sites across the country, and sites have developed
their own models around these general parameters, and it is a
flexible sort of model. It is too early to tell what the
impacts of YTD are, but demonstrations like YTD are really
important because they are changing the way that we are
approaching youth with disabilities, and the way we should be
approaching, quite frankly, all the youth because the outcomes
of these populations are not acceptable currently.
Mr. BERG. Well, then the next question is a follow up,
really relates to the high school graduation.
Mr. WITTENBURG. Yeah.
Mr. BERG. And, I mean, I am just stunned by, again, the
statistics where, you know, two out of five don't have a
diploma; four out of five are not working; one out of five is
arrested.
Mr. WITTENBURG. Yeah.
Mr. BERG. Again, it seems like there are some things that
are failing here. So, you know, back to you, and even within
the program, where we have people receiving survivor benefits,
children, they must remain in school, so I guess my question to
you is, you know, does this current policy undermine what we
are trying to do and should this be a requirement in the system
for the education?
Mr. WITTENBURG. I think that is an excellent question, Mr.
Berg, and I do believe that we should be putting requirements
in the system that help youth achieve all the outcomes that
they need to achieve.
Now, all these requirements are not going to be appropriate
for all youth. For example, it may not be appropriate to apply
these requirements to say, youth who are homebound, but I think
that we can move beyond a one-benefit-fits-all-needs model, and
if we can customize supports to better meet the needs of these
youth--and I want to be clear, I am not advocating cutting the
child SSI program in any way. It provides a vital source of
low-income support. I am suggesting that we rethink the way the
benefits are provided so youth, getting back to your question,
so that when we come to a youth, they don't say to themselves,
look, I am afraid to work because it might jeopardize my
benefit status.
Mr. BERG. Right, right.
Mr. WITTENBURG. So----
Mr. BERG. Well, and that is kind of in the bigger picture
here; I think the one-size-fits-all strategy from the top down
is a problem. I think the States are the innovators, so if
States can come up with solutions. And, you know, you talked
really about again I think the Federal program restricts
innovation at the State level in trying to be more effective
and better outcomes for children. And so I guess kind of my
question is this integration you talked about with the States,
if they have more flexibility, what--I mean, I understand the
benefits. What are the issues we should be aware of if we are
going to transition more of those decisions down to the State
level?
Mr. WITTENBURG. Well, the first issue you should be aware
of is we don't know what works, and so part of the history of
the SSI program is that it became a Federal program because
States were having a problem serving people with disabilities.
Chairman DAVIS. Dr. Wittenburg, if I could suggest, if you
could complete that answer for the record, that would be
helpful. I hate to be the traffic cop this morning, but knowing
that we have this impending vote, I want to make sure that all
our Members have the opportunity to question.
Mr. WITTENBURG. I am sorry, Mr. Berg.
Mr. BERG. I yield back.
Mr. WITTENBURG. Okay.
Chairman DAVIS. The chair now recognizes Mr. Lewis from
Georgia.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding
this hearing.
Thank members of the panel for being here.
Mr. Chairman, I would like for Mrs. Bentley to come before
the witness table.
Mrs. BENTLEY. Thank you.
Mr. LEWIS. Mrs. Bentley, thank you and Will for being here.
Can you tell the Subcommittee something about your son Will's
disability and about how SSI benefits have helped you better
care for him? Or do you think SSI benefits have made a positive
difference for Will? What improvement has he made since
receiving SSI? What would happen to Will and your family if you
did not have assistance from the SSI program?
Mrs. BENTLEY. Thank you.
Will has a seizure disorder that when he has seizures, and
most of the time, they are at night--he does have some during
the daytime, but he has them when he sleeps, and he loses
skills that he has learned during the day. So if it is in his
short-term memory, Will may not get it back for some time. And
he was unable to feed himself, unable to communicate. He
communicated with his hands. We learned how to tell stories,
and then he learned how to talk after we started controlling
the seizures somewhat, but they are in the part of his brain
that controls speech, so that was huge for him.
For Will to be able to dress himself and be able to read
that he can today, he is learning so much, and feeding himself
and being able to talk to us and to tell us things. His speech
still has delays, but Will can say so much, and he can
communicate in so many ways.
Without--with the SSI program and being able to have those
benefits, it brought so many things to Will, resources that I
couldn't even imagine doing without. I don't think that Will
would be where he is at today if I had not had that
opportunity. These programs just really are priceless to
families, to have the support, the doctors, to be able to buy
his medicines and not worry, to be able to take him to therapy
and get a good home program that I could use so that when Will
is in the community or he is at home, we are able to find ways
to help him be a part of that. I am not sure if I have answered
all your questions.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, thank you, you have done very well.
Mrs. Bentley, thank you so much.
How would you respond to some of the comments from the
witnesses here today, particularly those who claim that the
childhood SSI program is not working, that it is devastatingly
corrupt, it is a menace to children, and a tragic misuse of
public funds? How does that make you feel when you have to read
these type of allegations, when you are trying to do the best
for your son Will?
Mrs. BENTLEY. It makes me want to ask you guys to come home
with me, spend some time with me, some time with Will, and to
see how great his life is. The opportunities we are giving him
are priceless.
I have huge hopes and dreams for my son, and I am working
with him to help do that.
If SSI was not available to our family, I could not do
that; I couldn't give him an opportunity.
Some day my son is going to be a productive part of the
community. He is not going to be someone who is there just
getting a check, and right now that gives us an opportunity for
me to be there and really be enriched in his life, not just on
the sidelines. I am here with him making sure that he has a
future, and I put my career back where it needs to be right
now. I can always pick that up later. If I don't make the
changes in Will's life today, if I don't invest my time in him,
I am never going to change the outcome for him. He is going to
be the same way his entire life.
But now I know that Will has a chance because I am not
going to quit. I am going to be there for him and every other
child that is tucked in my heart today as I come here before
you.
Mr. LEWIS. Mrs. Bentley, I appreciate you saying what you
said. It is my philosophy, it is very simple, that you cannot
give up or give in or give out, and thank you for your standing
up for Will and speaking up for this program.
Mr. Chairman, you know, in spite of all of the difficulties
that we have as a country, I don't think this is the time to
cut this program and try to balance the budget on the backs of
the most disabled children, young people in our society. We can
do better.
Thank you very much, Mrs. Bentley.
Mrs. BENTLEY. Thank you.
Chairman DAVIS. I thank the gentleman.
And, you know, as we move forward, I think one of the
highlights that speaks to me and points all the more to why
Congressman Neal and I requested the GAO report in the first
place is the Sarahs of the world are the ones who take away the
opportunities for the Wills of the world, and nobody, I think,
has implied or remotely suggested cutting the budget on the
backs of the needy. I think what we are trying to do is
understand broken processes so that we can repair them and
improve the quality of our systems overall, and that
unemotional focus in a very emotional situation, I believe, is
critical and nonpartisan in nature. Just as we were able to
have such a successful reform in the child welfare
reauthorization, I would hope as we move forward with these
programs, we can accomplish the same thing.
With that, I recognize Mr. Reed for 5 minutes.
Mr. REED. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and I strongly
associate myself with your words because I think, Mrs. Bentley,
I am a new Member of Congress, and everybody up here
recognizes. My son's name is Will. I have two nephews that have
autism, one low functioning, one high functioning, and the
system needs to be secured. And I hope you take some comfort in
knowing that we all up here recognize the system needs to be
here for you and for Will. But what we need to focus on is
making sure that the abuses and the program is sustainable and
the abuses are weeded out so that it will be here in the future
for Will and the future Wills.
And so I come out here from a new perspective of trying to
look forward, and when I hear my colleagues who have been here
for quite sometime talk about how the Federal Government has
done it so well and we shouldn't give it to the States or we
shouldn't experiment with things at the State level, I just go
to the scoreboard. I mean, I look at Social Security, bankrupt
2036; Medicare, bankrupt 2019; Medicaid, every county in my
district, I represent eight counties in New York State, 100
percent of the property tax levy goes to Medicaid. It is
driving my seniors out of the homes that their parents built
because they can't pay the property tax bill. So I came here to
make a difference. I came here not to talk about how President
Bush cut the program but President Obama is restoring the
program. That partisan stuff, I am tired of it.
So we are here to ask the questions of, how do we
strengthen this program, how do we--and I will start backward.
You know, Mr. Stein, I would hope your goal is to have
recommendations to us today to remove disabilities so that
children can go on and become productive so that they don't
have the need for SSI going forward. Give me one recommendation
from you, sir, that would enhance that goal of removing the
disability, and then I want to go to Mr. Bertoni about how we
reform and go after the fraud, and then I want to go to Dr.
Roberts to go to the qualifying events to make sure they are
objective and not subjective.
Mr. STEIN. Thank you, Mr. Reed.
We have a number at the end of our written testimony. One
is improving vocational rehabilitation services for those youth
who are under 18 and those who transition after 18 on to SSI.
The voc-rehab services are very minimal these days to
nonexistent. They could be much more proactive. Vocational
Rehabilitation is a State agency, so this is State action.
Mr. REED. So you recommend State action?
Mr. STEIN. We recommend that there be improved and pumped-
up and targeted services by State voc-rehab agencies that work
with Social Security and with other Federal and State agencies
to really assist kids who are older kids and teenagers and
those transitioning after 18. Indeed, you know, you don't have
an automatic ride onto SSI after 18. One-third of SSI kids are
terminated at age 18.
Mr. REED. Thank you.
Mr. STEIN. That is a population that also needs voc-rehab
services as well.
Mr. REED. That is a very reasonable recommendation. I
appreciate you giving us that thoughtful comment.
Mr. Bertoni, from your perspective, what is one of the top
areas we could target to go after the fraud and abuse in the
system?
Mr. BERTONI. Aside from the income and asset, there is a
lot that can be done on the income and assets with the parents,
but that is not the subject of this hearing.
From a medical standpoint, I think really targeting those
cases that are most likely to improve, doing the appropriate
reviews and identifying those children who can move, as you
said, to that different track, that more productive track, is
key. If you don't, there is the likelihood if it is not fraud,
it could be abuse, whereby folks will linger on the rolls for
many years well past their eligibility period, and that is a
cost to the taxpayer. So if we don't want to touch the front
end, which folks can argue whether it is subjective or not
subjective, we really need to look at existing folks, the
existing folks on the rolls and making sure that they are truly
eligible for benefits, and the way you do that is by doing the
reviews that you are required to do.
Mr. REED. The reviews. Now on the front end, Dr. Roberts,
any recommendations as to how to make this more of an objective
standard?
Dr. ROBERTS. It would be very hard because, like I said,
when children are being assessed, it is really their parents'
report. I am not speaking of children like Will. I am not
talking about the children I have helped on to the SSI rolls
who definitely needed the help, their family needed the help,
but the system has to be reformed in terms of the way the money
is used by those who receive it. Regular reviews are a good
start, but if the patient is still being seen very quickly----
Mr. REED. I see my time has expired. Maybe we can talk
offline or maybe written recommendations as to creating a more
objective standard from the gatekeeper perspective.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With that, I yield back.
Chairman DAVIS. I thank the gentleman.
And Mr. Neal, my partner in the original request, will have
the last word.
Mr. NEAL. Just a couple of thoughts. First how difficult it
is to have these conversations, how really hard it is because
they become so charged when we really are trying to discern
evidence that might support Mrs. Bentley and her family, and
that is what the goal ought to be here. That is the priority.
Now, Social Security is not going bankrupt in 2036. I have
not heard one actuarial suggestion that that is the case.
Dr. Wittenburg I believe is correct, the reason that the
Federal Government took over the initiative was because the
States were ineffectual in their approach, and the suggestion
that I offered earlier, and I hope that the Subcommittee and
the Full Committee might entertain, is the idea of having the
Institute of Medicine take a look at the program. I do think
that Mr. Bertoni has raised a reasonable point when he says
there is a difference between fraud and abuse. There is a chasm
there, and abuse clearly could be perhaps an overworked
physician suggesting, well, medication becomes the first
option. And there are educators in Springfield and Holyoke,
Massachusetts, that I have enormous regard for--I have known
them my whole life, professionally and personally--and they
have suggested to me that this is a worthwhile examination
based upon the challenges they face every day in the classroom.
And there is evidence that the rolls have grown, and if it is
for children like Will, they should grow. If it is an abusive
State, then we have an obligation just to examine it, and I
don't think we ought to be afraid of the outcomes that the
Institute of Medicine might produce, and I would hope we could
all rally around the suggestion and the responsibility we have
to ensure that people that need the benefit get it and the
people that don't need the benefit are removed from it. That is
a simple equation.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate very much you
allowing me to participate today.
Mr. STEIN. Mr. Neal, may I just add something to your
response, which is I think we fully agree with that, and I
think the heart of what you are saying is the need not to rush
in haste. I think that we need to wait for the GAO study, which
is in its ``preliminary observation'' stage today. We need an
Institute of Medicine study, and I think the danger, as Dr.
Wittenburg says in his statement, is to rush, like Congress did
15 years ago. He states in two places in his testimony today
that there were media reports at that time in the mid-1990s,
which were later proved to be totally untrue about abuse, about
parents coaching, and all of this, and that fueled changes in
the law in this Congress in 1996, changes that he says, at
pages 3 and 4 of his testimony, were unwise and made things
worse. And he is urging, and I think we all in this room should
be in agreement, that this is not a program that we should rush
into changing. We should take time--we should look at the
studies. We should take our time because the lives and health
of too many children are at stake for hasty action.
Mr. WITTENBURG. And if I could just say for the record, I
would say that welfare reforms made in 1996 were not evidence-
based changes. They were made in haste. So I don't want to put
a judgment on whether they were good or bad changes, but
certainly, when you look at the outcomes that we are seeing
today, I think it does cause us to look at what is going on in
the SSI program.
Chairman DAVIS. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. NEAL. I did already.
Chairman DAVIS. I thank the gentleman.
And I thank all of our witnesses who came to join us today
for this discussion. If Members have additional questions, they
will be submitting them directly to you all in writing. What I
would ask is that the witnesses submit a copy of their response
to the Committee for the record so that it can be shared with
all Members and staff. We appreciate your time that you have
invested in preparation, especially the Bentleys for coming
from my home area in Covington, Kentucky.
And with that, this hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:31 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.098

[Submissions for the Record follow:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 72280A.151


