- THIRD IN A HEARING SERIES ON SECURING THE FUTURE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY INSURANCE PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THIRD IN A HEARING SERIES ON SECURING THE
FUTURE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY DISABILITY
INSURANCE PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 20, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-SS14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

78-671 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2013

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer Safavian, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

SAM JOHNSON, Texas, Chairman

KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   XAVIER BECERRA, California
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
RICK BERG, North Dakota              FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page
Advisory of March 20, 2012 announcing the hearing................     2

WITNESSES

PANEL 1:
The Honorable Michael J. Astrue Commissioner, Social Security
Administration...............................................     6
PANEL 2:
Trudy Lyon-Hart Director, Office of Disability Determination
Services, Vermont Agency of Human Services, on behalf of the
National Council of Disability Determination Directors.......    41
Lisa D. Ekman Senior Policy Advisor, Health & Disability
Advocates on behalf of the Consortium for Citizens with
Disabilities Social Security Task Force......................    53
Dan Bertoni Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office................    67
Leighton Chan, M.D. Chief, Rehabilitation Medicine Department,
National Institutes of Health................................    87
Nicole Maestas, Ph.D. Senior Economist, RAND Corporation.......   100

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

AFGE, Statement..................................................   134
University at Buffalo Law School, Statement......................   143
NHCHC, Statement.................................................   151
Ruth Kolb, Statement.............................................   157

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Michael J. Astrue..................................   118
Trudy Lyon-Hart..................................................   122
Dan Bertoni......................................................   125
Leighton Chan, M.D...............................................   129
Nicole Maestas, Ph.D.............................................   131

THIRD IN A HEARING SERIES ON SECURING THE FUTURE OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY
DISABILITY INSURANCE PROGRAM

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 20, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Social Security,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:31 a.m. in
Room B-318 Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Sam
Johnson [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairman Johnson Announces the Third in a

Hearing Series on Securing the Future of the

Social Security Disability Insurance Program

Tuesday, March 20, 2012

U.S. Congressman Sam Johnson (R-TX), Chairman of the House
Committee on Ways and Means Subcommittee on Social Security, today
announced a hearing on how disability is decided. The hearing will take
place on Tuesday, March 20, 2012, in B-318 Rayburn House Office
Building, beginning at 10:30 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Subcommittee and
for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

The disability insurance program pays benefits to those who have
worked in the past but are determined unable to work because of a
disability that is expected to last more than a year or result in
death. The responsibility to make the initial finding on disability was
assigned to the State Vocational Rehabilitation Agencies or other
appropriate State agencies in the Social Security Act Amendments of
1954. All 50 states, plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico,
maintain fully federally-funded agencies, collectively referred to as
Disability Determination Services (DDSs), which decide initial and
continuing eligibility of disability claims. The DDS examiner does not
see claimants face-to-face and must rely on relevant medical evidence
that is provided by the claimant and/or medical sources in deciding
whether the individual is disabled, as defined by Federal regulation
and Social Security Administration (SSA) policies.
In FY 2011, the DDSs received over 3.3 million initial disability
claims, the highest in the SSA's history. Examiners completed nearly
3.4 million initial claims, reducing the backlog of pending
applications to 759,000, nearly 300,000 fewer claims than were pending
at the end of FY 2010. The average processing time for initial
disability claims was 109 days in FY 2011 and is projected to rise
slightly in FY 2012. Over the most recent five-year period for which
data is available, the percentage of all applications for disability
benefits that were allowed ranged from 36-38 percent.
The Social Security Act considers people eligible for benefits when
they are unable ``to engage in any substantial gainful activity (SGA)
by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment
which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted or can be
expected to last for a continuous period of not less than twelve
months.'' The disability has to be so severe as to prevent them from
doing any ``substantial gainful work which exists in the national
economy,'' whether a specific job is available or not. The disability
must result from a physical or psychological condition that is
``demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical and laboratory
diagnostic techniques.'' In 2012, the level of earnings that
constitutes performing SGA is $1,010 per month for non-blind
individuals and $1,690 for blind individuals.
Most claims are evaluated under a five-step sequential evaluation
process. The first two steps screen out individuals who are currently
working above the SGA threshold and applicants whose impairments are
not severe. The third step compares the individual's condition to the
``medical listings''--a regulatory list of conditions that are
considered severe enough to prevent a person from doing any gainful
activity. If the individual's condition does not meet or equal the
severity of a condition in the medical listings, the examiner proceeds
to step four, which is assessing the individual's residual functional
capacity (what an individual can do despite his or her impairment--
including past relevant work). If the individual is found able to
perform past relevant work, the claim is denied. If not, the examiner
must determine at step five whether the individual can undertake other
work. State examiners rely on medical evidence obtained from the
claimant's health care providers, and can also consult with medical
experts and may purchase one or more consultative examinations.
The SSA also has several fast-track procedures for evaluating
claims from individuals with a terminal illness, or who have certain
especially severe conditions that are highly likely to be allowed
(called Compassionate Allowances and Quick Disability Determinations).
In announcing the hearing, Social Security Subcommittee Chairman
Sam Johnson (R-TX) said, ``Americans with disabilities deserve to get
the right decision as early as possible, but that's just not how it
currently works. States struggle on the front lines to make sense of
the program's complex rules to decide who gets benefits. At the same
time advances in treatment, rehabilitation, and the workplace have
created new opportunities for those with disabilities to return to
work. Securing the future of the disability insurance program should
address these challenges and opportunities while keeping the process
fair for both claimants and taxpayers.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on how disability insurance eligibility
decisions are made, including the definition of disability and the
Federal-State relationship.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit, and
click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission for
the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions, submit
all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word or
WordPerfect document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by the close of business on Tuesday, April 3, 2012.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word or WordPerfect format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages,
including attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman JOHNSON. Good morning.
The hearing will come to order. Good morning and welcome to
the third hearing in our series on ``Securing the Future of
Social Security Disability Insurance.''
Today, we will focus on how disability is decided. For more
than 50 years, the Social Security Disability Insurance Program
has provided a vital safety net for workers who have worked
long and recently enough and who meet the definition of
``disability.''
When Congress created the Disability Insurance Program in
1956, it defined ``disability'' as the ``inability of an
individual to work due to a physical or mental impairment.''
``Qualified impairments'' are those that are expected to
last for no less than one year or those expected to result in
death.
Over the years, the Social Security Administration has
created complex criteria, emphasizing ``complex,'' and a time
consuming process that is frustrating to claimants, costly to
the taxpayer, and frequently raises questions about the
consistency, accuracy and fairness of this program.
Our witnesses today will tell us how claimants apply for
disability, how the state disability determination agencies,
which are fully funded by Social Security, decide eligibility.
As we will hear today, deciding whether someone is eligible
for benefits is far from easy.
The examiners supported by medical consultants must analyze
medical and other evidence and take a series of complicated
steps to make their decisions.
In the 1980s, Congress also created requirements relating
to the opinion of treating doctors, and how pain and other
symptoms affect the ability of an individual to work.
A morass of policies developed to help ensure consistency
and respond to the courts have also added to the complexity of
the program.
It is no surprise then that there are wide variations in
outcomes, raising questions about whether this program is being
administered consistently across the country, and whether
claimants are being treated fairly.
Further, Social Security has had an up hill climb for years
to provide the kind of policy oversight, quality review, and
ongoing training that massive disability workloads require.
It has also struggled to stay current with needed updates
to the list of medical conditions considered severe enough to
qualify for benefits.
While this program has served as a vital safety net to
millions of Americans, the reality is much has changed since
1956.
Thanks to advances in medical care, many people with
disabilities experience greater independence, and as a result,
can live more productive lives.
Legal and social changes have promoted participation by
people with disabilities into mainstream society, and the
nature of work has changed significantly, as we have moved from
an economy largely defined by manual labor to a service and
knowledge based economy.
Yet, the ``all or nothing'' standard of half a century ago
is often criticized as ``work disincentive,'' furthering
dependence by those who might otherwise be able to achieve
varying levels of self support.
As we consider securing the future of this program, we owe
it to the American public to ensure that the program
effectively serves the interests of applicants, beneficiaries,
and taxpayers.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Becerra, for his
opening statement.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for calling
this, the third hearing in our series examining the Social
Security Disability Insurance System.
I want to just begin by mentioning that Social Security
disability is an earned benefit. It is not something that you
just get. You have to have paid into the system, which means
you have to have worked and paid into the system, and you must
have suffered a work ending disability to be able to qualify.
Even so, the requirements for receiving benefits are very
tough. You mentioned that. Only the very sickest and most
disabled Americans qualify.
The majority of Americans with disabilities do not meet
Social Security's strict eligibility standard. To qualify,
applicants must submit detailed medical and other evidence
demonstrating that they are either dying or too sick or
disabled to work at all, and that their condition will last
more than a year.
Moreover, in deciding whether someone cannot work, SSA
considers not just an individuals' previous job or occupation,
but whether he or she can assume any job in the nation's
economy that that individual could do despite the person's
medical condition.
Individuals who do not meet these criteria are not eligible
for disability assistance from Social Security.
Evaluating whether an individual is so sick or disabled
that he or she cannot work is a difficult task, involving
complex evaluations of medical evidence and other factors.
DI benefits are not generous. A typical worker receives
about $13,000 a year. Because they are either too sick or too
disabled to work at all, those benefits translate into a life
line for many of those Americans and their families.
We owe it to these Americans to pay their benefits when
they need them. Let's remember one in seven beneficiaries of
these disability benefits dies within a year of being awarded
benefits.
We owe it to all Americans and workers who pay into the
Social Security system to safeguard their contributions and pay
only benefits to those who meet the strict standard.
Social Security's operating budget is lower today than it
was in 2010, because of decisions made in this Congress in what
to appropriate and how much to appropriate to the different
agencies.
That, to me, is alarming, at a time when Social Security is
increasing its workload because of the economy, because of the
number of individuals aging into the system. We are finding
that the Department's budget or the Administration's budget is
actually shrinking in its ability to meet the needs.
That, I believe, is distressing.
As I have said before, I think we owe it to the hundreds of
millions of Americans who pay into the system or who receive
benefits to hold hearings specifically on these critical
decisions on budgets for the Social Security Administration.
Americans' contributions into the Trust Fund are what pay
for Social Security's operating expenses. Budget cuts have real
consequences now and in the future for Social Security and its
recipients.
Initial disability claims, the topic of this hearing, are a
good example. With an aging population and the worst recession
since the Great Depression, the Social Security Administration
receives over three million applications for disability
benefits a year, an average of nearly 13,000 claims a day.
Right now, it takes SSA an average of 111 days to make a
decision on a disability application.
Due to budget cuts, SSA has been operating under a hiring
freeze, which means there are fewer workers to process claims,
assist the public, and safeguard the Trust Fund than there were
in 2011.
The state DDS offices which evaluate applications have lost
more than ten percent of their staff compared to last year.
This is the equivalent of about 2,000 skilled workers, many of
whom had years of experience.
As a result, the amount of time it takes to make the
decision on an application is rising, as is the backlog of
people waiting for a decision, which is currently about 750,000
disabled individuals.
Mr. Chairman, this is an important hearing. I believe that
we must continue to take a close look at how the system
operates. We have to make sure the benefits are there for those
who need them, and I am glad that we are holding this in a
series of hearings on the Social Security Administration, and
in this case, on the disability program.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Becerra.
As is customary, any member is welcome to submit a
statement for the hearing record.
Chairman JOHNSON. Before we move onto our testimony today,
I want to remind our witnesses, all of them, to please limit
your oral statements to five minutes.
However, without objection, all the written testimony will
be made part of the hearing record.
We have two panels today. Seated at the table is our first
panel witness, the Commissioner of Social Security, Michael
Astrue.
Welcome, Commissioner. You may proceed.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. ASTRUE, COMMISSIONER, SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION

Mr. ASTRUE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra, and Members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to talk about
our disability programs.
These programs have become more complex and more people
depend on them. Over the past five years, we have improved
service despite limited resources and the huge influx of new
disability claims.
In addition to our core work, we have seen a drastic rise
in our non-program work. Increasingly, our waiting rooms are
filled not with people looking for help with retirement or
disability, but with people needing verifications so they can
qualify for Federal, state or local programs, or for
employment.
Together, we need to figure out how to keep improving
services as the population expands and baby boomers age.
To succeed, we need experienced employees, up to date
technology, and streamlined policies. We must make more and
smarter investments in technology in order to best use our
declining resources.
Toward this goal, we are providing people with convenient
online options. We are close to testing an uniform case
processing system for DDSs.
We are using electronic tools to help us better decide and
document cases to improve quality. We are using technology to
identify more and more cases for fast tracking, and we are
moving from pilots to permanent process with health IT, which
has the potential to make dramatic improvements, both in
quality and efficiency.
These IT investments demonstrate that we understand that we
can no longer do business as usual.
Nevertheless, technology alone cannot make disability
determinations. The complexity of the disability programs
requires skilled employees to make those decisions.
Unfortunately, after two straight years of less funding
than we had in Fiscal Year 2010, we will have lost 7,000
experienced employees who we cannot afford to replace.
Rather than spend time on initiatives we cannot fund, we
have focused on program simplifications. Some of these ideas we
have implemented on our own. On others, we need your help. With
your support, we can make other smart changes.
The President's Fiscal Year 2013 budget includes a
legislative proposal, the Work Incentives Simplification Pilot,
or WISP, which has great potential to encourage persons with
disabilities to return to work.
For several years prior to 2009, we received about 2.6
million initial disability claims each year. Since 2009, that
level has increased dramatically to last year's nearly 3.3
million disability claims.
To deal with this sharp increase, we added capacity to our
DDSs and flexible national resources to help us quickly
reallocate additional support to the most stressed states.
The dedication of our DDS staff and support from our
Federal resources has helped us keep pending disability claims
considerably lower than our original projected levels.
Furthermore, our average processing time of 104 days, and
that includes both the field office and the state DDS time, is
near a record low since we began using that combined measure.
Social Security remains a sound investment. We have
drastically reduced the time claimants wait for a hearing
decision.
In Fiscal Year 2011, we cut the average wait for a hearing
below one year for the first time since 2003. Wait times are
also down in field offices and our 800-number.
Through the hard work of our employees and technological
advancements, we have kept our administrative costs very low.
Moreover, we have increased employee productivity by about
four percent in each of the last five years. Few if any
organizations, public or private, have similar accomplishments.
We are proud of these accomplishments, and appreciate your
confidence in us.
The scope, sensitivity, and complexity of our programs
requires well-trained people on the front lines and in key
support roles. We simply cannot continue to lose so many
employees and keep up.
That challenge requires a complicated and ongoing
conversation with Congress, which is why we are so pleased to
participate in today's hearing.
Before I conclude, I want to give you also an update on the
Social Security Death Master File, which I testified about last
month.
After working closely with OMB and interested Federal
agencies, I am pleased to announce that we have provided the
Subcommittee with our proposed legislative specifications
designed to limit access to the Death Master File in order to
reduce identity theft.
The Subcommittee's leadership on this important issue has
guided our work and we are grateful for it.
Thank you. I will be happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of The Honorable Michael J. Astrue
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. I appreciate your testimony.
As is customary for each round of questions, I will limit my
time to five minutes and ask my colleagues to also limit their
questioning time to five minutes.
Commissioner, determining whether someone meets or equals
the medical listings is a critical step in deciding disability.
Advances in medical science and treatment are constant.
I was disappointed to learn from GAO's testimony that some
of the listings have been extended repeatedly for the last 19
to 33 years, without updates.
In fact, two of the listings including those for mental
impairment, which count for 21 percent of all claims, have not
been comprehensively revised for more than 27 years.
How in the world could updating these listings take that
long? Nineteen to 33 years?
Mr. ASTRUE. Well, it should not, Mr. Chairman. Very early
in my tenure, I made it a priority to change that long-standing
practice in the Agency.
On my management initiative, not because Congress said so,
not because OMB said so, not because GAO said so, I set the
standard for the Agency of trying to be on a five-year cycle
going forward, in terms of updating our medical regulations.
I worked in biotech for almost 15 years. I know how
important it is to have updated medical information.
I think quite frankly GAO's comments were a bit unfair. We
did this on our own initiative. We have updated, if I remember
correctly, eight of the 14. We are making very good progress on
the others.
We will not in all likelihood quite hit five years,
depending on when you decide those five years start. It might
be five and a half years.
Considering there was catch up, as you yourself pointed
out, the regulations had not been updated in 33 years, it will
be easier and faster in the future when you only have to update
for three to five years of medical advancement, instead of
going over 33 years, which is what we have been doing.
We have been trying to do this the right way. We have been
trying to do this with a high degree of consensus, with
participation from NIH, with patient advocacy groups. We have
had relatively little complaints about this process.
I think we have done this extremely well from a quality
point of view. We are doing it extraordinarily quickly by
historical standards. I do not really think GAO has anything to
complain about at all.
Chairman JOHNSON. Do you have one or two people that look
at that all the time?
Mr. ASTRUE. We have a person who does nothing but manage
the regulatory process, named Paul Kryglik. He is overseen by
our Deputy for Retirement and Disability Policy, David Rust. We
have a lot of people working on this.
Could I do it faster if I had more people? Yes. We are
doing the best we can with what we have.
Chairman JOHNSON. In their testimony, GAO says ``Social
Security has made several changes that hold promise for needed
updates.''
Yet, GAO also raises questions about whether the new
process will work. What changes are you making and are you sure
they will work?
Mr. ASTRUE. Well, if I understand, they have embraced the
five year goal. That came from me. That comes from my
management oversight of my people.
I think in general they are doing a terrific job. I am not
quite sure. There was a certain vagueness to the GAO criticism
there, so I do not really quite frankly understand what it is
they are complaining about.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, they have to complain.
[Laughter.]
Mr. ASTRUE. It is Washington. Silly me. I forgot.
Chairman JOHNSON. To assess the functional demands of
specific jobs, Social Security has long relied on the
Dictionary of Occupational Titles maintained by the Department
of Labor.
Labor decided to replace this with a new system to track
occupations, the Occupational Information Network, known as
``O*NET.''
According to GAO's testimony, Social Security decided O*NET
was not detailed enough and would not be able to withstand
legal challenges. As a result, Social Security, according to
what we know, is now developing its own informational system
for a cost of $108 million by 2016.
Worse, the estimate does not include the cost of
implementing or maintaining a system, which according to Mr.
Bertoni's testimony, could be significant, based on other
agencies' experiences.
Tell me why Social Security cannot use Labor's system
instead of asking taxpayers to pay again to develop a separate
system?
Mr. ASTRUE. Well, quite frankly, the statute does not allow
us to do it. O*NET does not have the specificity that the
statute requires in order to make the individualized
determinations that we need.
The Dictionary of Occupational Titles, which was developed
in 1938, was always at best an imperfect fit. It was not
designed for us. It just happened to be convenient and there
was some overlap.
O*NET is by comparison to the DOT very superficial and
designed for--it is further away from our purposes than the DOT
is.
We have brought in outside experts to advise us on this.
Except for a few consultants who thought they could make money
off this, no one has looked me in the eye and said
Commissioner, you can just substitute O*NET for DOT.
That is simplistic and a simply wrong approach to something
that is very complicated and important.
I think this Agency and a lot of Washington has had their
heads in the sand about our vocational guidelines for a long
time.
The last update on this was 1991, and that was a
superficial update. This has been a tool that needed work for a
long time, no one was doing it.
I am not going to benefit from this. We have diverted a lot
of resources into this, despite all the pressures to deliver in
other areas, because it is critically important for the long
term future of the disability program, just as important as it
is to be up to date on medical, it is important to be up to
date for vocational, and there is no other way to do it than
grind it out and do the hard work to do it right.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, ask Labor to give you some money
for it then.
Mr. ASTRUE. Mr. Chairman, I have had this conversation with
some committee staff, not on this committee. There is a
perception that is wrong, that there is this huge pool of
untapped resources over at Labor.
Labor decided basically to get out of this business a long
time ago, even O*NET is done largely by contractors.
We have tried to work with Labor as best we can. We have
invited them into the process. There is this misconception that
there is this huge untapped pool of expertise at Labor that we
are not trying to take advantage of. That is simply not true.
Chairman JOHNSON. I am just worried about the cost. Mr.
Becerra, would you care to question?
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner, thank you for being here. Thank you, by the
way, for the work on the DMF, on that file. All those records
of deceased individuals that have been used by people to invade
people's privacy and steal their identity, the work you are
doing, I think, will benefit many, many people, and we thank
you for that.
The faster we can get to that, the better. If we can help
you as you go around to the other departments and agencies to
try to make sure everyone works under the same standards, so we
do not have people's death records being revealed and used by
others for the wrong reasons, the better off, I think, all of
us will be.
Mr. ASTRUE. It took a little while, but I think the
agencies are aligned now. We support this proposal. What we
need now is the Congress to move.
I would turn it around on you a little bit. We want to help
you. I think there is bipartisan support, which is a little
rare in this city right now, for doing something in this area.
I think it would be a great thing if we could find a way to
all work together to try to make sure this bill still passes
this year.
Mr. BECERRA. It may surprise you, Commissioner, but I think
the Chairman would agree with that statement and I would, too,
that there can be bipartisan support on that particular issue.
I hope we are able to work with you to make something happen
soon to protect people's identity.
You mentioned earlier that your caseload has increased on
the disability side. What were the numbers?
Mr. ASTRUE. It is up to about 3.3 million.
Mr. BECERRA. As opposed to what?
Mr. ASTRUE. To 2.6, 2.65 before the recession hit.
Mr. BECERRA. In the last two or three years, you have
increased by almost a third, 25 percent?
Mr. ASTRUE. We are taking in roughly 600,000 to 650,000
more cases than what the actuaries were projecting we would
have in this time period before the recession hit.
Mr. BECERRA. You were already going to increase because of
the size of the baby boom population that was going to start
working its way into the Social Security system, whether
through disability or retirement, but on top of that, with the
recession, double whammy.
Now, more people than you expected are coming into the
system.
Mr. ASTRUE. Triple whammy. We have a lot more retirement
applications because desperate older Americans are applying for
retirement in higher numbers than we projected.
Because we are doing so much verification for other
Federal, state and local programs, which people are using more
because of the recession, those workloads have gone up as well.
Mr. BECERRA. I am looking at your written statement on page
two where you talked about the budget. You said toward the
bottom there of page two, ``Our Fiscal Year 2013 budget request
is lean.''
You go on to say ``While we will achieve goals associated
with these priorities, we simply cannot do all of the work we
are required to do. We expect to lose over 3,000 employees in
Fiscal Year 2012, the current year, and over 2,000 more in
Fiscal Year 2013, on top of more than 4,000 employees we
already lost in Fiscal Year 2011, a total loss of more than
9,000 Social Security and state disability determination
services employees in just three years.''
While your caseload is rising, you are losing valuable and
experienced personnel, and your budgets are shrinking.
Your current budget from Congress is about $1 billion lower
than what you requested, and it is lower than what it was in
2010.
By the way, working men and women are contributing to the
Social Security system every day through their paycheck
contributions, so it is not that there is not the money there
for Social Security to do its work because everyone who sees
that paycheck deduction, that FICA tax deduction, knows they
are paying for Social Security.
If Congress is short changing your budget, are you able to
keep up with these caseloads?
Mr. ASTRUE. The answer is we have done a remarkable job up
to this point in keeping up, and it is because of
simplification, great work by the employees, a lot of things.
We cannot keep this up indefinitely. I want to make sure
that all of you understand that we are probably four to six
months away from moving significantly backwards in most of our
major service metrics.
Even if we keep up the four percent increase in
productivity, which is an extraordinary achievement, and I am
not sure we can do that, but even if we do, it is not going to
be enough to compensate for all the people that we are losing
so quickly.
Mr. BECERRA. Longer waits to get your determination on your
disability, longer waits to be able to apply for retirement
benefits, longer waits to receive your surviving spouse
benefits.
Probably more mistakes, because we know the longer a case
sits, the more likely errors will be made in the
determinations, so it seems like some folks in D.C. are being
penny wise but very pound foolish when it comes to services
that most Americans have paid for.
I hope you will continue to sound the alarm and get us the
information that will help us make the right decisions so that
we do not short change our seniors and all those Americans who
paid into the system for Social Security, whether disability,
retirement, or surviving benefits.
I thank you, Commissioner, for being here.
Mr. ASTRUE. Thank you, Mr. Becerra.
Chairman JOHNSON. Commissioner, I want to just set the
record straight. This year, Social Security received an
increase in its budget despite a 1.5 percent decrease in an
overall discretionary cap.
In fact, while Social Security is subject to the same long
term domestic spending caps enacted in the Budget Control Act,
that same bill gave Social Security an additional $11 billion,
from 2012 to 2021, over the budget caps, to increase continuing
eligibility reviews in its DI and SSI programs.
This year's appropriation bills were supported equally by
both parties, including the President, the Democrat led Senate,
Ranking Member Levin and Ranking Member Becerra.
Even the President's Fiscal Year 2013 budget requested $753
million below your request of $12.5 billion.
The fact is our nation faces a sea of red ink that will
break the back of our great nation unless we act now to get our
fiscal house in order.
The Federal Government has to live within its means, just
like families do. That means doing more with less.
Mr. ASTRUE. Mr. Chairman, I understand the fiscal needs,
and certainly we live with whatever judgments Congress makes.
Let me be clear, because I am not sure it was clear from
your statement, our appropriation is smaller two years in a
row. We had less in 2011 than we did in 2010 and we have less
in 2012 than we did in 2011.
Chairman JOHNSON. You reduced your force, too, have you
not?
Mr. ASTRUE. Substantially.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, since we are out of order, if I
could just comment as well.
Chairman JOHNSON. Go ahead.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you. I think we also have to remember
that Congress forced the Social Security Administration to use
its reserves to try to continue to perform at a higher level.
Those reserves were meant to help deal with any number of
important activities that the Social Security Administration
must perform. Those reserves are now gone, so while----
Mr. ASTRUE. Most of those were rescinded. We used some, but
the majority of them were rescinded.
Mr. BECERRA. Congress stripped them away from you. Not only
are you receiving less money in your budget, but money was
taken away from you that you would have otherwise have used for
good purposes.
Mr. Chairman, let's be clear. We can try to paint this
however we wish, and we should do hearings on this particular
issue on the budget, because Americans have paid for the
administration of the Social Security programs.
This is not one of those areas where because we are in
fiscal red ink that the Social Security Administration should
suffer the consequences, because to this point today, Americans
through their taxes have contributed more to Social Security
than they have spent.
Therefore, we should not find that this agency, which does
tremendous work for tens of millions of people, should all of a
sudden have to make cuts to its services because it is getting
short changed by a Congress for deficit spending unrelated to
Social Security.
I think it is important, Mr. Chairman, that we continue to
do these hearings, but as the Commissioner just said, there are
consequences.
Chairman JOHNSON. I believe it is your Administration that
cut back two percent.
Mr. BECERRA. We can have those conversations later. Let's
just agree on a bipartisan basis that we will not make cuts to
Social Security that have no place when Americans have
contributed to the system to pay for the services and the
administration.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Becerra. Mr. Berg, you are
recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Moving on to a different area, Commissioner Astrue, I
understand the statutory definition of ``disability,'' Social
Security has a regulatory framework and listing of impairments
considered severe enough to prevent an individual from working.
I have a few questions relating to the medical listings of
impairments. First, would you say that these listings rely on
objective medical findings and are less subjective to the
judgment of the DDS examiner?
Mr. ASTRUE. Yes. I think that is generally the notion. If
we think something is clear enough we can do a listing for it,
in other words, create a presumption. Invariably, there are at
least substantially objective criteria that go into that. I
would not want to say there is no subjective element, but it is
substantially objective.
Mr. BERG. A higher standard from your point?
Mr. ASTRUE. Yes, I think that is generally right.
Mr. BERG. I know you have invested personally a lot of time
and effort into the development of compassionate allowances.
Mr. ASTRUE. Yes.
Mr. BERG. How do compassionate allowances differ from
conditions in listings set forth by the regulations?
Mr. ASTRUE. It is basically an expansion of the concept.
What we do is we have gone--the listings historically would
only apply to fairly common diseases and conditions, and what
we found is we were making a lot of mistakes in the aggregate,
in sort of rare diseases and conditions.
The notion was on a one time effort, we went through to try
to identify those diseases and conditions that pretty much by
definition make you disabled.
Now because we are electronic, we have the ability to pull
those out at the front end and just allow them, which is what
we do. I think it is about ten days now.
They are basically an extension of the philosophy of the
listings. I think the differences are we have moved to much
smaller diseases and conditions than what we would historically
recognize.
We have pulled them out electronically in the system, and
we have set up procedures in the DDS so they are triaged at the
front end, so it is a very short amount of time for a decision.
Mr. BERG. You have a more streamlined processing procedure?
Mr. ASTRUE. Right.
Mr. BERG. Last, I have heard from constituents in North
Dakota. They are asking about the disability listing for
Huntington's Disease.
How do you decide to add a new listing?
Mr. ASTRUE. Well, what we try to do is we look not only at
the medical literature in detail, but we try to speak to the
patient groups. Increasingly, we have a very broad and very
productive partnership with NIH.
With Huntington's, I guess I will jump on one of our
announcements, so on April 11, we are going to be announcing
that we are adding juvenile Huntington's to the compassionate
allowance list. That is a first step.
I have met with a Huntington's group. I think the dilemma
there is trying to figure out where to draw the lines. I think
we think we can do it, but actually, it is one of those rare
cases where it is harder because of technology.
Now with genetic tests, where a lot of people are getting
diagnosed at a very young age, you cannot give benefits
consistent with the statute, just with the genetic test that
says you have Huntington's.
Historically, it took so long to diagnose Woody Guthrie. By
the time they knew Woody Guthrie had Huntington's, he was long
gone, and obviously disabled.
Now with the new technology, we have to figure out exactly
what symptoms of people with Huntington's make them unable to
work. We have not finished that process, but we are fairly
optimistic that we are going to be able to do that.
We have been in contact with both NIH and with the patient
groups. That is in the neurological listings. My guess is we
will have an NPRM out on that probably early next year, would
be the likely schedule.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman JOHNSON. Mr. Marchant, you are recognized.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner, last week in our district work period, I
spent most of my time visiting with senior groups. In the
conversation, usually in the question and answer section
afterwards, in every instance, I had a senior that raised their
hand that said they knew someone or some family that they were
confident was receiving disability benefits that they felt like
that person was defrauding the Social Security System.
In response to that question, I would use your statistic,
that there are 600,000 to 700,000 new claimants more than, was
it ten years ago?
Mr. ASTRUE. Three years ago.
Mr. MARCHANT. Three years ago. That response brought on the
question is the Social Security Trust Fund solvency threatened
by the 600,000 to 700,000 more claimants.
The general attitude is there is a fear among people who
have worked their entire life and that this program, the
disability program itself is threatening the entire integrity
of the Trust Funds.
Can you address that for me?
Mr. ASTRUE. Sure. There is a mythology in a lot of
quarters, and the media feeds this from time to time, that the
system is ripe with fraud. That is simply not true.
Is there fraud? Well, sure. With a system this big and with
standards this complicated, is there some small level of fraud?
Yes. I think the level of fraud is much smaller than in most
government programs. I think it is some fraction of one
percent.
We do everything that we can to try to root those out, but
I think what you have to be aware of is that increasingly,
particularly as our society's and Congress' definition of
``disability'' has expanded, there are people who are
legitimately disabled who do not look that way to their
neighbors, and their neighbors make unfair conclusions. You see
this with people with a variety of mental conditions. You see
this fairly typically, for instance, with people with early
Alzheimer's.
We even had a case with one of our own medical examiners
who saw someone with early Alzheimer's and just ridiculed the
person. I apologized in a public hearing for the way one of our
own people reacted.
I think people are sometimes very quick to assume fraud
when in fact what they are seeing is a non-apparent disability.
Mr. MARCHANT. What about the issue of these claims
threatening the solvency of the Trust Fund?
Mr. ASTRUE. My view is the level of fraud is so low that it
is a rounding error in terms of the solvency of the system.
Mr. MARCHANT. Setting fraud aside, what about the increased
number of cases, with the 1.8% total payroll deduction. Are
there statistics out there that say the 1.8% raises this much
money, and this much money is coming out of the system?
Mr. ASTRUE. That is a good question. Something that should
give you confidence in the integrity of the system, with the
recession related claims, which economists and others would say
typically would not meet our standards, if the system has
integrity, then the allowance rates should drop.
Our allowance rates have dropped during the recession, both
at the DDSs and even more dramatically at the hearings and
appeals level, because we are seeing more claims that are not
meritorious.
The increase in claims is not a result of any significant
change that we have made or that you have made.
Eighty to 90 percent of the change probably, and we will
supply more information to you about the record, is entirely
predictable, has been predictable for decades.
It is what the Office of the Actuary has been telling the
Congress would happen because people basically, with my
profile, aging baby boomers, are in their disability prone
years.
The amount of disability allowances we are seeing are
relatively close to what the Agency, CBO and other experts have
been predicting for a long time.
[The insert follows,The Honorable Michael J. Astrue
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Marchant. Mr. Smith.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Commissioner
Astrue, for coming here today and certainly for your service.
Mr. ASTRUE. Thank you.
Mr. SMITH. I appreciate the Social Security
Administration's efforts obviously to expedite cases through
the quick disability determination process. Obviously, I
believe it is important we find ways to move the easily decided
cases through the system more quickly.
Can you speak to the safeguards that you might have in
place to ensure that the system still cannot be gamed perhaps
amidst the fast track that we know probably needs to exist?
Mr. ASTRUE. That is a very fine question. None of this
happens on automatic pilot. As fast as this is, there is still
a full medical review. Not necessarily a full vocational
review, if it is not necessary, for instance, for a
compassionate allowance.
For QDD cases, there is still a medical/vocational
analysis. It is just put up at the top of the queue.
We confirm all these medical analyses. We do not take the
representation of the claimant as definitive.
I think it is a system with a lot of integrity.
The other aspect to integrity that I think is important, it
is not statutory, not regulatory, but something that I think
you should know about and be concerned about for the future, is
again, at a management level, we have set the threshold for the
QDT cases, 95 percent probability or more of allowance.
There has been occasional internal and external pressure to
lower that. What I would tell you is if you lower that, you
start damaging the integrity of the system.
It might look good in the short run, but I think you start
damaging something that works really well, and I think the
discipline of making sure that only the most likely cases are
compassionate allowances or QDTs is an important one, but by
doing it the right way, we are up to almost six percent, I
think, of the cases decided in that way. I think by the end of
next year, we will probably be at seven percent.
It will start flattening. There is a natural end to it. I
think if you water down the system, you start damaging
something that is really important for disabled people.
I hope in the future you will protect the integrity of the
system and ask the Agency in the future to maintain that 95
percent threshold.
Mr. SMITH. Thank you. Shifting gears a little bit, in terms
of the hearings' backlog, you committed to eliminate the
backlog and reduce the average time it takes, and there has
been some progress made obviously.
The productivity by ALJs has increased, the backlogs have
been reduced, and waiting times for the hearing decision are
down from over 500 days in 2008 to 345 days in 2011. Some
progress.
Conditions sometimes change perhaps, but in the 2013 budget
request, I know hearings pending and hearing wait times will
continue to decline, looking at that request, and yet the
workloads pending and wait times will increase.
Social Security has always worked to make the right
decisions as soon in the process as possible. Can you speak to
that and how the budget request reflects the numbers?
Mr. ASTRUE. Sure. You know, at some point as much as we
have tried to lay out a plan for what we can do, it is
contingent on a couple of things.
It is contingent on adequate funding from the Congress. It
is contingent on an adequate supply of judges supplied by the
Office of Personnel Management. Those are the two key
variables.
At some point, as the budget gets tighter, we are going to
have to make hard choices about whether we back off from the
goal that we set for ourselves, and I think that is on the
table for next year. I hope not.
My view is we have done, I think, a much better job than I
think most Members of Congress expected five years ago when we
started this process.
If you had said to me at the time, Commissioner, can you do
this, oh, and by the way, you are going to have the worst
recession since the Great Depression, and you are going to have
budget cuts for two straight years, are you still going to be
able to do this, my answer would have been no, Congressman, I
cannot do it.
We are here. We have made great progress.
The question of whether we can get from approximately 345
days to 270 days in the next year and a half will turn a lot on
the funding situation.
When I was General Counsel of HHS, I had in my closet a
cartoon wall. My favorite was a lawyer looking at a client. He
looked at the client and said, ``Well, how much justice can you
afford?''
That is basically where you are. If you want justice, if
you want 270 days, then you can get that, but you have to
support the budget to get there.
Mr. SMITH. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Tiberi is recognized.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Commissioner,
for your service. Thank you for being here.
I want to make just a couple of points and then ask a
question. One of the best things that Social Security has ever
done is provide those of us who pay into Social Security, and
yes, congressmen pay into Social Security, even though there is
a long-standing myth that we do not, when I get my statement,
and I got my statement last summer, the notice that says I am
going to get this much money based upon quarters that I have
put in, and what I have paid in, but then a little asterisk
that says ``If nothing is done by the time you are scheduled to
turn 67,'' it does not say 67, but by the time you are ready to
retire at full retirement age, ``you will only get 77 percent
of your benefit.''
I think that is great. I think that illustrates that there
is a problem with the future of funding Social Security, not
just for me, but for my four daughters, if we do nothing.
I think that is a great service, and I would hope you would
highlight that better, and obviously we are here talking about
the disability fund, which according to the Congressional
Budget Office, is in worse shape than the retirement fund.
In my office, I had a case worker who has been doing Social
Security long before I got elected to Congress, who was working
for my predecessor.
He says anecdotally that he can count on three out of every
four constituents who come in to our office to seek help will
ultimately get denied initially, and then will go to an appeal.
A majority of those anecdotally in our office who go through
the appeal process will ultimately get awarded.
In relation to that context that I just gave you, when you
have numbers that have been provided to us that it takes about
$1,050 to process a DDS claim on average initially up front, so
it is a little over $1,000, that claim is processed in a little
over 100 days, through our office at least, most of those are
denied initially.
Then they go to an appeal. That appeal through a judge
costs about three times as much, three times as long.
In view of those numbers, and those are national numbers,
in addition to what we see in our office in terms of the time
frame, is there an inconsistency in this process?
Do we need to look at what the DDSs are doing versus the
appellate process to make that system maybe more efficient? Are
they not trained the same?
Is there some sort of breakdown between the initial process
and the appeal process? Can we streamline this process to make
it more cost effective, more timely?
Mr. ASTRUE. I am tempted to answer yes to most of those
questions, but let me say this.
Different iterations of that question we have been dealing
with for a long time. I do think we have made some significant
progress.
Compared to five years ago, quality in the DDSs is up
substantially. We have additional quality initiatives or
quality related initiatives in the pipeline.
The most important one is that we are moving from a
fragmented, antiquated 54 siloed IT system to a state-of-the-
art unified system that builds in the best practices that we
know work.
The most important one is something called eCAT, which uses
basic artificial intelligence techniques to prompt examiners
with everything they need to know when something comes up
relevant, if multiple sclerosis comes up or rheumatoid
arthritis comes up, whatever, it tells them everything they
need to know.
In fact, it requires for quality reasons documentation of
certain things if our rules require it, in essence, to prevent
examiners from taking shortcuts.
The quality is getting better in the DDSs, and I think they
have done a great job.
It is also helping the fast track that Mr. Berg and others
have mentioned, it has been a big help in terms of quality.
When I came in and there was some resistance to doing the
compassionate allowances, we did a retrospective study, and we
found that on the things that were on my list, our error rate,
which at that point was about six percent in the DDSs, it is
probably about 20 to 40 percent, and most of them were closer
to 40 percent.
Picking out those rare things and giving precise guidance,
those things help.
By definition, you are going to see the close cases. Ohio
may be a little worse than some other states. Ohio is one of
the states that did a lot of furloughs. That damaged morale,
increased turnover, aggravated backlogs, meant more acrobatics
in terms of staffing and higher costs to get things done.
It may be a little worse in Ohio at the DDS because of
that. I think it is moving in the right direction now.
One of the things you should be real happy about, one of
the real success stories, is five years ago, Columbus was
probably one of the sixth worse hearing offices in terms of
backlog in the country, made enormous progress, about 500 days
off the wait time.
You should particularly go and thank the new Chief Judge
over there, Judge Allen. This is one of those cases where one
person with backbone and management talent has made an enormous
difference.
Mr. TIBERI. Great point. I appreciate that. You are right
about that.
The only thing that is depressing for me is when my case
worker has to tell people up front that you know what, you are
probably going to get denied when you initially apply because
that is what usually happens. That is kind of unfortunate.
Mr. ASTRUE. Statistically, it is about one in three. I know
it feels differently, I think because you do not get a
representative sample----
Mr. TIBERI. That is probably true.
Mr. ASTRUE. In hearing offices. It is about one in three at
the DDSs, and right now, the allowance rate is about 50/50, it
is about 51 percent are allowed on appeal.
Again, some of that is rational. People who are severely
ill, that is not a static situation, particularly if the time
lines stretch out, their situation changes.
The obligation of our people on the way is not to decide
whether the previous decision was right, but to look at it
fresh and new.
It is not necessarily inconsistent. Sometimes it is.
Mr. TIBERI. Thank you.
Mr. ASTRUE. It is not necessarily inconsistent when an ALJ
comes to a different decision from an examiner.
Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr.
Becerra, you are recognized for 30 seconds.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. By the way,
Commissioner, thank you very much for your visit to Los Angeles
and the offices that we have there in Los Angeles, and the work
you are doing with them.
Just a quick point, maybe we can follow up because we need
to move on. I know you have instituted a new policy that will
withhold the names of the administrative law judge to Americans
who are filing their claims or to their representatives, as
they try to move through the appeal process. I know there is
some concern as to whether or not some folks are trying to
judge shop who will conduct the hearing for that appeal.
I think it may have been overly broad in its approach in
targeting both in-person and video hearings. It sounds to me
like the concern with judge shopping may be more related to
video hearings than the in-person hearings.
I am hoping that maybe we can talk further. I do not think
that what we want to do is end up with more errors in the
decision making, and a more arduous process for folks who do
not have a lot of money.
I know what we want to do is make sure the appeals process
works in the most efficient and adequate way forward, and
perhaps we can talk about that.
Mr. ASTRUE. Always happy. You have my number, call any
time.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Commissioner, thank you for being here.
You are doing a great job.
Mr. ASTRUE. Thank you. I appreciate all the support from
members of this committee. It does make a huge difference for
us in a lot of big and small ways. Thank you for what you do as
well.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. We will now proceed to our
second panel. You will be excused. Thank you, sir.
Our witnesses that are taking their seats at the table are
Trudy Lyon-Hart, Director, Office of Disability Determination
Services, Vermont Agency of Human Services, on behalf of the
National Council of Disability Determination Directors.
Lisa Ekman, Senior Policy Advisor, Health & Disability
Advocates, on behalf of the Consortium for Citizens with
Disabilities Social Security Task Force.
Dan Bertoni, Director, Education, Workforce and Income
Security Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office.
Dr. Leighton Chan, Chief, Rehabilitation Medicine
Department at the National Institutes of Health.
Dr. Nicole Maestas, Senior Economist, RAND Corporation, all
the way from Santa Monica, California.
Ms. Lyon-Hart, welcome. Please go ahead. You are
recognized.

STATEMENT OF TRUDY LYON-HART, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF DISABILITY
DETERMINATION SERVICES, VERMONT AGENCY OF HUMAN SERVICES, ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF DISABILITY DETERMINATION
DIRECTORS

Ms. LYON-HART. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra,
and Members of the Subcommittee, I am Trudy Lyon-Hart,
President-Elect of the National Council of Disability
Determination Directors, NCDDD, and Director of the Vermont
Disability Determination Services.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on behalf of the
administrators of the Disability Determination Services, the
DDSs, of the states and the District of Columbia.
Collectively, we direct the work of over 14,000 employees,
processing nearly 4.8 million disability cases a year,
including initial claims, reconsiderations, and continuing
disability reviews, CDRs.
DDSs make determinations with high accuracy, ensuring that
over a million deserving disability applicants get benefits
quickly each year.
In any given year, over 70 percent of the allowance
determinations in the disability program are made at the DDS
level, with no need for an administrative law judge hearing.
DDS accuracy, speed and volume are notable considering the
program's complexity. Adjudicators must obtain health care
records and detailed descriptions of daily activities and work
history, arrange for consultative exams if needed, analyze
reams of electronic evidence, in the process evaluating
symptoms, weighing different medical opinions, assessing
medical severity, and determining individuals' remaining work
capacity.
Social Security and the DDSs have historically worked
together to provide the American public with prompt, accurate
and cost effective service.
However, our ability to continue to do so is now
increasingly threatened. Funding in the Fiscal Year 2012 budget
will not cover all the cases the DDSs will receive.
The deeper cuts scheduled to occur in 2013, as part of the
Budget Control Act, will dramatically worsen the situation.
In early Fiscal Year 2011, SSA imposed a hiring freeze
extending even to replacement hiring. Since then, the DDSs have
lost over 2,000 employees. Three-quarters were examiner losses,
a lost capacity of over 900,000 case determinations a year.
Already many thousands of cases are delayed in growing DDS
backlogs.
Recently, with release of the Fiscal Year 2012 budget, SSA
authorized 200 DDS hire's nationally. These hire's, while
appreciated, are a drop in the bucket.
With the DDS situation so fragile, further increase in our
medical CDR workload is a concern. We would need both
additional funding and advance hiring.
Our pipeline of disability examiner trainees has been empty
for a year and a half, and examiners are not quickly
replaceable. It takes a minimum of several years of training
and mentoring before they have the knowledge and skills to
handle all cases, especially CDRs.
For as long as they can, the DDSs will continue to keep
cases moving and meet workload targets. DDS staff are highly
skilled and extremely elastic.
In the short term, we have shifted some support resources
to case processing, but this is not sustainable.
With insufficient funding for the incoming cases, continued
attrition, and only minimal replacement hiring, the DDSs will
reach a tipping point with backlogs and case delays.
Policy changes would make the process more efficient. NCDDD
continues to recommend consistent application of policy across
the nation and across all appeal levels.
Our written testimony includes recommendations in such
areas as policy simplification, enhancement of technology
tools, expansion of the medical listings, expansion of single
decision maker authority, and reinstatement of the
reconsideration in the ten prototype states.
Last year alone, the DDSs allowed over 92,000 claimants at
the reconsideration step, an invaluable service.
SSA and the DDSs have a long history of accomplishment
working together to provide high quality service and careful
program stewardship.
This relationship has never been more important.
Collaborative strategy is crucial if we are to find ways to
continue the service on which the American public relies.
Policy changes and technology tools can further improve
program efficiency and consistency, but the foundation must be
adequate in funding and highly trained staff.
On behalf of NCDDD, thank you again for the opportunity to
provide this testimony, and I would be happy to answer any
questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lyon-Hart follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Ekman, welcome. Please proceed.

STATEMENT OF LISA D. EKMAN, SENIOR POLICY ADVISOR, HEALTH &
DISABILITY ADVOCATES, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, ON BEHALF OF THE
CONSORTIUM FOR CITIZENS WITH DISABILITIES SOCIAL SECURITY TASK
FORCE

Ms. EKMAN. Thank you. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this
opportunity to testify at this very important hearing.
My name is Lisa Ekman. I am a Senior Policy Advisor for
Health & Disability Advocates. I testify today on behalf of the
Consortium for Citizens With Disabilities Social Security Task
Force.
The Social Security Disability Insurance or SSDI Program,
provides vital economic security and access to health care for
individuals whose impairments are so severe that they preclude
work.
The importance of SSDI to people with disabilities cannot
be overstated. I would like to begin by sharing the stories of
two SSDI beneficiaries with you, and tell you a little about
the difference of SSDI being in their lives.
First, there is the story of Angelice P. Angelice was
diagnosed with Type I Diabetes as a teenager. She went to
college and she worked for many years.
Two years ago, when she was 36, she had to be hospitalized
for diabetes related complications. Angelice spent a long time
in the hospital, due in part to the fact that she continued to
work when she should have stopped because it was aggravating
her diabetes.
As a last resort, Angelice applied for benefits while she
was in the hospital. Due to the severity of Angelice's
diabetes, she was approved for SSDI benefits.
Angelice came very close to becoming homeless when she
could not work due to her diabetes. Fortunately, she was able
to keep her apartment but only because a charity helped support
her and pay her rent.
She received a quick decision regarding her eligibility and
because of SSDI, she was able to keep her home.
Angelice receives just around the average SSDI benefit of
just over $1,000 per month. Her rent is $550. Her SSDI allows
her to live in her home, but she squeaks by. Without SSDI, she
would be homeless.
It is with sadness that I tell you that last night,
Angelice passed away due to diabetes complications, but in the
two years that she received SSDI, it made a tremendous
difference in her life.
There is also the story of Henry H. Henry is in his 60s and
has severe cardiac problems. He was working in the insurance
industry for a long time, but was not able to keep his job due
to his heart condition.
Henry spent all of his savings and cashed out his 401(k)
before he applied for SSDI benefits.
When he filed his application as a last resort, he was
homeless and living in his car. He lived there for about a
year.
Once his SSDI benefits were approved, Henry was able to
secure housing again and has not been homeless since.
Given the importance of SSDI to people with disabilities,
like Angelice and Henry, I want to highlight three key points.
First, providing the Social Security Administration or SSA
with an adequate administrative budget is essential to accurate
and timely initial processing of SSDI claims.
Second, the current definition of ``disability'' and
structure of the SSDI program are appropriate and should not be
changed.
Third, SSA does a good job of administering the program,
but improvements could be made.
First, as has been discussed quite a bit during the
Commissioner's testimony, SSA requires an adequate
administrative budget to effectively administer the SSDI
program and complete initial disability determinations in an
accurate and timely manner.
We were pleased to see the progress SSA was able to make
during Fiscal Years 2008 and 2010 in reducing the time for
people with disabilities to receive their disability
determinations.
Unfortunately, as discussed, SSA has received no increase,
although debate whether there was a decrease, no increase in
their funding since 2010, and we are likely to see an increase
in the processing time for initial disability applications
because the funding, as discussed, is completely inadequate to
keep up with SSA's workload.
Second, because the intent of the SSDI program is wage
replacement and to provide income support for individuals who
do not have the capacity to engage in substantial gainful work,
the current definition of ``disability'' is appropriate.
The definition is strict, providing benefits only to
individuals with the most significant impairments.
However, keep in mind that just because an individual has
an impairment, it does not mean they will be eligible for
benefits. Neither Angelice nor Henry would have been eligible
for benefits if their impairments were less severe and did not
prevent them from working.
Third and finally, both SSA and the state disability
determination services do a good job of administering the SSDI
program, especially given the resources they have available.
However, we encourage SSA to make some modest changes to
ensure that medical evidence is fully developed early in the
process so that unnecessary delay and unnecessary and costly
appeals can be avoided.
Such modest changes include providing more assistance to
claimants earlier in the process, providing better guidance to
doctors and other professionals regarding what evidence SSA is
looking for, and by providing additional and improved training
to disability evaluators.
Our written testimony contains additional recommendations.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ekman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am.
Dan Bertoni, welcome back.
Mr. BERTONI. Thank you.
Chairman JOHNSON. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF DAN BERTONI, DIRECTOR, EDUCATION, WORKFORCE AND
INCOME SECURITY ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. BERTONI. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Becerra, Members
of the Subcommittee, good morning.
I am pleased to discuss our preliminary findings on the
Social Security Administration's efforts to modernize its
disability criteria.
Last year, SSA paid nearly $170 billion to about 12 million
beneficiaries and independents, and given the size and cost of
its programs, the Agency needs current criteria to assess
whether an applicant's medical condition affects his or her
ability to work.
In 2003, we designated SSA's disability programs high risk,
in part, because its criteria for determining medical
eligibility did not reflect advances in medicine and
technology, and its occupational information did not reflect
changes in the labor market.
My statement today addresses SSA's most recent efforts to
update its medical listings and develop its own occupational
information system, to better reflect the existence of jobs in
the national economy.
In summary, the Agency has made several changes to improve
the timeliness and effectiveness of its medical listings
updates, such as adopting a two tier system that first includes
a comprehensive review of all disorders in a body system and
making appropriate revisions; then, on an ongoing basis,
conducting subsequent targeted reviews of that body system,
focusing only on a limited number of conditions.
To date, the Agency has completed comprehensive reviews for
eight of 14 body systems, and has moved to the targeted phase.
In 2010, they also established a five year cycle time for
updating its listings to ensure more systematic consideration
of advances in the treatment and evaluation of conditions.
The Agency also contracted with the Institute of Medicine,
and has acted on several of their recommendations, such as
creating a standing committee to review and provide advice on
the listings.
However, SSA still faces challenges keeping its listings up
to date, and has yet to complete comprehensive revisions for
six body systems, which in many cases, have been ongoing for
decades.
Moreover, despite multiple extensions, four body systems
will expire in 2012, and it is uncertain whether SSA will
complete the required reviews.
The Agency has also experienced delays with its targeted
reviews, and slippage in its plans to conduct post-
implementation evaluations of previously revised listings.
SSA has noted that challenges in this area are mainly due
to limitations in the number and expertise of staff needed to
update the listings, and complexity of the regulatory process.
As you know, the Agency has begun an ambitious project to
develop its own occupational inventory database by 2016, which
will replace an outdated system it currently uses.
In 2008, SSA took steps to guide the development of this
occupational information system or OIS, to capture both the
physical and mental demands of work to better support its
disability decisions.
Accordingly, SSA established an advisory panel of external
experts tasked with making recommendations on developing a
system, and held initial meetings with outside experts and
other agencies that collect occupational information to gain
insight into sampling methods and other challenges.
Last year, the Agency issued a research and development
plan detailing activities necessary to complete this phase by
2016, at a cost of $108 million.
To date, they have made progress on several fronts,
including using its own administrative data to identify the
most frequently cited occupations and functional and vocational
characteristics of its applicants.
However, due to staffing constraints, several planned
initiatives have slipped, and officials know that further time
line adjustments are likely.
To offset this challenge, SSA has used consultants with
specialized expertise and is working with OPM to obtain
additional staff skilled in industrial organizational
psychology on a part time basis.
Finally, in the course of our work, we have identified some
gaps in SSA's approach, such as insufficient documentation
supporting SSA's research and development cost estimate, and
the absence of any information on total cost of the project
over time.
We will continue to pursue these and other issues as our
work progresses, including how SSA is managing the OIS against
best practices, and ensuring that the project schedule reliably
estimates key activities and length of time they will take.
Finally, we plan to review any risk analyses conducted by
the Agency, as well as mitigation plans to address identified
risks, including how this complex project will proceed should
funding be reduced.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I am happy to
answer any questions you or other Members of the Subcommittee
may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bertoni follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Chan, you are recognized, sir.

STATEMENT OF LEIGHTON CHAN, CHIEF, REHABILITATION MEDICINE
DEPARTMENT, NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH

Dr. CHAN. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am honored to have the
opportunity to appear before you today to testify about NIH's
collaboration with the SSA.
The SSA approached NIH in late 2007 for advice on new
assessment methods that might inform their disability
evaluation process. The NIH Clinical Center's Rehab Medicine
Department agreed to help, and based our work on widely adopted
contemporary disability concepts.
Our collaboration has been facilitated by an interagency
agreement that was initiated in February 2008. I want to note
this area we are talking about today is just one of many
factors that SSA takes into account in their statutory role to
ensure that the Agency's disability evaluation standards
reflect appropriate medical and vocational information.
Currently, the SSA disability determination process is
linked to a claimant's diagnosis or their impairment. However,
a diagnosis or impairment may no longer be so closely connected
to an individual's ability to work, as it has been in past
years.
The concept of disability has evolved over the last few
decades, and this evolution has now culminated in an
international agreement.
In 2001, the World Health Organization adopted a landmark
standard called the ``International Classification of
Functioning Disability and Health,'' or the ICF.
The ICF has been endorsed by all 191 WHO members, including
the United States.
The ICF considers disability to be the result of not only a
person's diagnosis but also two other very important factors,
the impact that diagnosis has on their ability to function and
the environmental demands placed on them in their workplace.
It is this ICF theoretical construct that really informs
our collaboration with SSA.
Our work with the SSA has several components. One of the
most important projects is the direct attempt to create a
rapid, reliable, and objective functional assessment tool that
SSA could use one day in real time.
To do this, we have engaged colleagues at Boston University
to help us develop a series of computerized functional
assessments that utilize something called ``Item Response
Theory and Computer Adaptive Testing'' or IRT/CAT.
The scientific evidence validating IRT/CAT instruments has
been available for decades. If you have recently taken the SAT
or GRE or LSAT, you have taken an IRT/CAT test.
The theory is really quite simple. If you want to assess an
individual's capabilities regarding a single characteristic,
let's say their ability to lift 300 pounds, and you need to
know that in one pound increments, well, you could ask 300
separate questions. That would give you a very precise
estimate, but it would take some time.
Item response theory utilizes information gathered in prior
questions to determine what questions should come next.
For instance, you might ask that same individual can you
lift 50 pounds. If the answer to that question is yes, the next
question might be can you lift 100 pounds. If the answer to
that is no, the next question might be can you lift 75 pounds,
and so on.
By asking five or six questions rather than 300, you can
determine how much that person thinks they can lift.
IRT/CAT tests have a significant advantage to the SSA, in
addition to administering them to claimants, the SSA might also
apply these same tests to clinicians to obtain their functional
assessment of the claimant. This information could add an
important perspective to a person's disability claim.
Our team is currently in the process of creating two
initial IRT/CAT instruments. They will assess a claimant's
interpersonal interaction skills and their mobility.
These two topics were selected because of the high
relevance they have to SSA's current applicant pool.
For these topics, assessment questions have been developed
and the calibration tests are being completed. We will
calibrate the tests not only to SSA claimants but also to the
population as a whole, after which we will put together the
IRT/CAT instruments themselves.
An RFP or Request for Proposal is currently posted for the
development of four additional IRT/CAT instruments that will
cover all the remaining topics in the ICF related to work
disability. These topics will likely include self care,
communication, learning and applying knowledge, and general
tasks and demands.
We hope to have much of the initial work for all six IRT/
CAT instruments completed by 2016.
Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. Once
again, thank you for the opportunity to testify today and
provide an overview of our work with the SSA. I will be happy
to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Chan follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Maestas, welcome. Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF NICOLE MAESTAS, SENIOR ECONOMIST, RAND CORPORATION

Dr. MAESTAS. Thank you, Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member
Becerra, for this opportunity to testify.
I will address my comments to the question of consistency
in the initial disability determination process drawing on
recent RAND research.
DDS case examiners are called on to evaluate and weigh many
aspects of complex cases against extensive medical and
vocational criteria in a dynamic medical environment.
They have heavy caseloads, and although they may consult
with physicians, they are not themselves trained physicians.
Moreover, as the SSDI caseload has grown, the composition of
applications has shifted toward impairments with greater
diagnostic uncertainty.
Chief among these are musculoskeletal and mental
impairments, which now comprise 59 percent of all applications.
Given these factors, some variation in decision outcomes
across DDS examiners is expected. Nonetheless, it is worth
trying to minimize the extent of variation as much as possible.
In our analysis of initial disability determinations
recorded in SSA's disability operational data store in 2005 and
2006, we find a notable degree of variation in initial outcomes
across DDS examiners within the same office.
This variation cannot be explained by differences in the
mix of cases they evaluate. We find that after adjustments for
case mix, one-third of examiners have allowance rates more than
six percentage points above or below the average allowance rate
in their DDS, and as many as five percent of examiners have
allowance rates more than 12 percentage points above or below
the average.
As a result, for many applicants, whether they are allowed
or denied benefits depends upon the examiner to which their
case is assigned.
While most examiners have initial allowance rates near the
average for their DDS office, some do not. This means that most
applicants would receive the same initial determination if
their application had been assigned to a different examiner in
the DDS office, but even so, due to the examiners who are not
near the average, we estimate that as many as 60 percent of
applicants could have received a different initial
determination from at least one other examiner in the DDS
office, had they been assigned to that examiner instead.
The magnitude of this measure is driven by the examiners
who have the lowest and highest allowance rates in a DDS
office.
For example, if we remove from our calculations the top and
bottom one percent of DDS examiners, those with the highest and
lowest allowance rates, then the percent of applicants whose
initial decision depends on the examiner they are assigned to
would fall by half, from 60 percent to 28 percent.
As you would expect, the appeals process significantly
dampens the effect of examiner variation. In our administrative
data, nearly two-thirds of all initial denials are appealed and
75 percent of these are eventually overturned.
Once we account for appeals, we estimate that only 23
percent of applications could have received a different
ultimate outcome, that is accounting for appeals, had they been
assigned to a different examiner, and if we again remove the
highest and lowest examiners in an office, this number falls to
11 percent.
These figures illustrate two points. First, although most
examiners have allowance rates that are near the average for
their DDS office, many have allowance rates that are notably
below or above their office average even after adjusting for
differences in case mix.
Because an applicant could potentially be assigned to one
of these examiners, applicants face significant uncertainty as
to whether their application will be initially allowed or
denied.
Improving consistency across examiners would significantly
reduce this uncertainty about initial outcomes.
Second, it bears emphasizing that these statistics are not
estimates of the fraction of applicants who should have been
denied. Rather, they identify the size and characteristics of
the group that would be most affected by changes in the
policies and procedures used in initial disability
determinations.
This group disproportionately includes younger claimants,
claimants with very low earnings histories, and claimants with
mental impairments.
At present, the variation in examiner allowance rates and
the high probability of having an initial denial overturned on
appeal means it is usually worthwhile for denied applicants and
their attorneys to pursue appeals.
The appeals process, as you know, is costly. From the time
the initial DDS application is filed to the time a final
determination is made, an applicant may not earn more than
$1,000 a month in paid employment since this would exceed the
SGA threshold and result in denial of benefits.
In our administrative sample of SSDI applicants who
received decisions, initial decisions, in 2005, the average
time from SSDI application to final determination exceeded one
year.
While those who did not appeal waited an average of only
four months, those who did appeal waited an average of two
years before receiving a final determination. That is after
exhausting all appeals.
Time spent out of the labor force while seeking benefits
may have detrimental effects on employability. Indeed, we find
that longer application processing times reduce the employment
of SSDI applicants in the years after their initial decision.
Our calculations suggest that the SSDI determination
process itself reduces the post-application employment of
denied applicants by an average of 3.6 percentage points in
years two and three after the initial determination, and
similarly, reduces the average employment of allowed applicants
by five percentage points.
In sum, by reducing the variation in initial
determinations, we would improve the targeting of the SSDI
program. That is we would increase the chances that people who
truly qualify receive benefits and reduce the chances that
those who do not truly qualify receive benefits.
To the extent the decision thresholds could be better
aligned between the initial and appellate phases, the share of
those initially denied applicants who decide to appeal would
likely decline, and the detrimental effects on future
employment potential would be reduced.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Maestas follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, ma'am. Did you listen to Dr.
Chan? Did you agree?
Dr. MAESTAS. I did. I was actually quite excited by what I
was hearing.
Chairman JOHNSON. Dr. Chan, you testified about the
collaboration between Social Security and the National
Institute of Health and Boston University to develop your
computer tests.
Are you saying by taking a test, Social Security can
credibly assess a claimant's ability to function in a matter of
minutes?
Dr. CHAN. I think the techniques and the procedures behind
IRT/CAT instruments are well validated. They have been utilized
in educational arenas for quite some time. We have been using
them in health care for quite some time.
They are remarkably powerful and insightful tools that can
be done very, very quickly, particularly in the area of
functional assessment.
Chairman JOHNSON. Can people fake them?
Dr. CHAN. Well, you know, our job really was to look at
functional assessment, to determine a technique for functional
assessment. Clearly, there is no functional assessment tool
that would be completely immune to gaming.
On the other hand, there are, I think, several aspects to
IRT/CAT that are really beneficial in this area.
The first would be that the IRT/CAT instruments themselves
are comprised of dozens if not hundreds of questions that would
be very difficult to memorize, and indeed, very difficult to
figure out the order those questions might come in.
Second, we could also give the same assessment tools to the
claimant's clinicians, and that would provide very interesting
information, and I think useful for SSA in validating certain
things.
In addition, we would be applying these tests to millions
of individuals, so we would probably have some really wonderful
baseline data looking at what a normal response pattern would
be, so individuals who have aberrant response patterns
potentially could be identified.
Chairman JOHNSON. It just takes one person to do the test?
Dr. CHAN. Yes. Mostly, it would be claimants who would be
doing the tests, but for those individuals----
Chairman JOHNSON. I understand that. The person
administering the test.
Dr. CHAN. Oh, on the testing side. In general, these are
computer administered tests.
Chairman JOHNSON. One person can do them?
Dr. CHAN. Yes, a person could do it by himself, if that is
what you are asking.
Chairman JOHNSON. Do they have to be trained?
Dr. CHAN. We sort of tailor these tests so they are at a
relatively low and easy level. Obviously, we need to do that so
that a broad range of individuals----
Chairman JOHNSON. That is the kind of test we need up here.
[Laughter.]
Chairman JOHNSON. Do you agree with that, Doctor?
Dr. MAESTAS. I think this sounds quite promising.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Becerra, you are
recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I cannot get quite as
excited on the numbers, but it sounds like the two of you put a
great deal of numbers in, and I am glad it raises your blood
pressure a bit to see we might have some opportunities.
I do think as you say, quite promising, Dr. Maestas, that
we might have other ways to try to validate the process.
What I take from what every one of you have said is this
ain't easy to do. In many cases, you are making judgments
because you are looking at folks who are maybe right on the
edge, could they work, and not just in their current
occupation, but in some capacity whatsoever, and it is
sometimes not an easy call to make.
What we are trying to do is make the system as efficient
and standardized as possible, so that way when folks have to
make the decision, they are not guessing. They should be
collecting the information as early as possible to try to help
these determiners, those who make the determinations, to have
all the information and evidence they need.
Certainly, we have to make sure that we continue to push
the SSA to have the tools in place that let them effectively
make those judgments. We are talking life and death, as I think
Ms. Ekman made clear, in most cases.
I am troubled that what we are hearing is SSA is having to
try to do all of this with less and less money.
Ms. Lyon-Hart, you mentioned SSA is already struggling. You
have already seen a number of these folks who make
determinations gone.
Have you been losing folks with little experience or lots
of experience?
Ms. LYON-HART. It is a mix. Just as the baby boomers are
getting more disabled, they are also leaving our offices. I
would say it is probably heavy on the--I do not know the exact
numbers, I can get them for you probably with some polling of
my members, but what I hear is they are losing experienced
examiners.
Mr. BECERRA. It is not as if when you do a hire, you
automatically compensate for the loss of that seasoned
examiner.
Ms. LYON-HART. Correct.
Mr. BECERRA. This worries me because we were making
progress. We were getting the wait time down, the backlog down.
I believe, Ms. Lyon-Hart, you also mentioned that the
longer a case sits, the greater the chance we are going to make
some mistakes with it, or it is going to become more difficult
to adjudicate.
Ms. LYON-HART. It was not me that testified we would make
more mistakes, but it definitely takes longer. You end up
refreshing the medical evidence and getting more information.
It becomes more complicated the longer it sits.
Mr. BECERRA. What I take from everything you are saying is
that we have to continue to find the tools to let us make these
assessments, to try to avoid the outlier decisions, whether in
denial or granting the benefits, so that we have more
consistency, but at the same time, do not tie the Social
Security Administration's hands behind its back as it is trying
to move forward with an increasing caseload of individuals who
are filing for claims.
We want to make sure that those who deserve it get it, and
at the same time, we want to make sure that those who do not
deserve it do not clog the system for those who are waiting to
get the benefits they have earned.
Ms. Ekman, you brought up some real cases. I think it is
important to know that we are talking about real people who are
affected, who paid into the system, who are now applying for
those benefits that they worked to have.
What is your sense out there in the community of folks who
are on the verge of securing these disability benefits or
believing they may be on the verge of having to apply for these
disability benefits?
Is there some concern about where we may head in the
future?
Ms. EKMAN. Thank you for the question, Congressman Becerra.
I am not sure for the people who are going to be applying for
benefits, that is a concern. They are concerned about how do I
pay my rent, how do I get my medication.
Mr. BECERRA. Good point.
Ms. EKMAN. I think for advocates, there is a huge concern
that the longer the Social Security Administration and the
state DDSs remain under funded, the worse the conditions will
get. The longer people will have to wait.
It is not an overstatement to say that people die while
they are waiting for a disability determination.
There is definitely a sense that we need to provide
adequate resources to SSA and the DDSs to ensure that they can
make accurate and timely decisions so that people who
desperately need the benefits can get them.
Mr. BECERRA. One final question. I know the Social Security
Administration in an effort to try to concentrate the resources
it has on those services that are most important had to make
other decisions which are tough.
They are closing offices at earlier hours. They are less
able to respond to people who are applying for retirement
benefits so they can deal with those seeking disability
benefits.
Ms. Lyon-Hart, do you think at some point it is going to
become very obvious to the average American who is getting
ready to apply for his or her Social Security benefits that
there is a problem with Social Security because its budget is
being so short changed?
Ms. LYON-HART. I do think it will be obvious if it is not
already.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you. I thank you all for your testimony.
I hope that research can produce some real results sooner than
later so we can apply those.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for bringing these witnesses.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Berg, you are recognized.
Mr. BERG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have one question. Dr. Maestas, when someone is
seeking disability insurance, it takes a long period of time.
There is a detrimental effect on their skills during this
period, and their ability to be employed.
My question is if you could tell us a little bit more about
these findings in your research that looks at that, and also
what is it we can do about that.
Dr. MAESTAS. It has been known for some time that many SSDI
recipients have some employment potential. We are not talking
about full time employment potential at the level of their pre-
disability earnings necessarily, but those effects are rather
large.
For example, we estimate that had many beneficiaries, and
these are the relatively healthy of the disabled beneficiaries,
had they not received benefits, their employment rate could
increase by as much as 28 percentage points.
Again, not the full time employment capacity. If you look
at annual earnings, it is an increase in annual earnings of
about $3,700.
For many people, this will not rise above the SGA
threshold, although for many people, it would.
What this new research is saying is in addition to these
effects of benefit receipt on employment potential and
employment capacity, there are additional effects coming from
the process itself that keeps people waiting.
We have been able to disentangle these two components to
get an estimate of the decay in employability that arises with
every month that somebody waits for a final decision.
The problem is not the initial decisions, per se. Those
occur relatively quickly. The problem is when someone gets a
denial, and of course, most people do get a denial from the
initial determination process, they go on to appeal.
The appeals process takes them into this waiting game that
goes on a very long time. If they are denied at the ALJ level,
many of them go on to pursue appeals at higher levels.
It is well known in economics that as people stay out of
the labor force, and of course, these people have to stay out
of the labor force while they are pursuing an appeal because
otherwise, they would be denied, employability declines. Skills
depreciate. Employment networks erode. Investments in the
latest information and technologies are not made.
Mr. BERG. What do we do about it? What is the solution?
Dr. MAESTAS. It is a hard problem, admittedly. We have to
shorten processing times. We have to shorten waiting times.
It is not only about--the Administration has made good
attempts in this area to actually shorten times by reducing
backlogs and the like.
Part of the problem, what I would like to draw attention to
here, is that too many people perceive that an appeal is
worthwhile.
If we could better align the decision thresholds that are
used in the initial phase and the appellate phase, then we
would not have a system where everybody believes they need to
appeal to get the right decision outcome.
Mr. BERG. We tend to have an automatic appeal when there is
a denial.
Dr. MAESTAS. Exactly.
Mr. BERG. Which extends that period, extends that cost.
Obviously, when someone is out of the workforce, it is hard for
them to get back in, regardless of what the outcome is at the
end of the appeal process.
Dr. MAESTAS. The rules, of course, do require a five month
waiting period.
Mr. BERG. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield
back.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. Marchant?
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a couple of process questions. We talked a lot today
about baby boomers and they are entering the system as disabled
beneficiaries.
Once a person reaches the threshold of age 62 and they have
the ability to go on early retirement, what is the process a
person would go through once they have reached that threshold
but they do not want to take early retirement, but then they
apply for Social Security disability?
Then they are denied initially, and then they are given a
waiting period that might take them past the time whereby they
would enter the system at age 65 in full retirement.
How are you handling people that are entering with those
kinds of problems? I am not sure who to direct that question
to, but perhaps somebody that has some every day experience.
Ms. LYON-HART. Actually, I am just going to speak up to say
that I am probably not the person. We really need to know from
Social Security, because that kind of decision happens in the
field office.
I do know that you can have sort of a simultaneous early
retirement and disability applications going at the same time,
but I cannot tell you exactly how that works.
Obviously, you would not double dip, but that kind of thing
simultaneous applications does occur. I would hesitate to
answer the question.
Mr. MARCHANT. If the person was 62 years old and they
applied for total disability and the total disability benefit
was $1,100 a month, and they were able to receive early Social
Security benefits, they cannot receive Social Security
retirement benefits and receive Social Security disability
benefits as well.
This whole perception of the system being weighted down and
broken because of all the baby boomers that are entering the
system because they are retiring and more and more of them are
becoming disabled, there seems to be a point at which that
would flatten out because they would either go into early
retirement or into permanent retirement. You would not be
receiving both at the same time, would you?
Ms. LYON-HART. No, you would not receive both at the same
time. I misspoke.
Mr. MARCHANT. Dr. Maestas.
Dr. MAESTAS. I can speak to that a little bit. They would
not receive both at the same time, but of course, the early
retirement benefit is an actuarially reduced benefit, and the
disability benefit is not.
They would receive a higher benefit if they are awarded
disability benefits, and then at their full retirement age,
they just convert into the regular retirement program, but
maintaining that higher benefit level.
Mr. MARCHANT. Are any of these things taken into
consideration when the initial claim is made? It would be a
very small cost for a person to have a combination of partial
disability benefit and an early retirement benefit, and why
would someone wait one, two or three years and appeal their
claim if they are going to reach the threshold of retirement
anyway?
Yes, ma'am?
Ms. EKMAN. Thank you, Congressman. A person--as Dr. Maestas
said, if I am 62 and I go and apply for retirement benefits, I
am going to receive a reduced benefit. That will happen for as
long as I receive benefits.
As an individual, I am entitled to get disability benefits
until I reach my full retirement age, which I would point out
is now 66 for people who are retiring now, and will go up to
67.
It is a big disadvantage to me in terms of my income if I
applied for retirement at that point.
In the SSA evaluation for disability, there is a piece that
takes age into account, in the vocational guidelines.
That is considered from that perspective when someone comes
in and applies, but it is up to the individual to decide
whether they want to apply for early retirement or disability,
and if it is an individual who has a disability, it is in their
best interest to apply for disability because their benefit
will be at the higher level, as opposed to reduced for the
remainder of their life.
Mr. MARCHANT. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. You bet. Mr. Becerra, do you have a
clarification question?
Mr. BECERRA. Yes. I just wanted to be sure. Dr. Maestas, I
think during some questioning by Mr. Berg, when you were
talking about the appeals process, I think you may have
mentioned there is an automatic appeal.
There are not any automatic appeals, although a lot of
claimants ultimately do file for appeal, but there is no
automatic right to appeal a case to a higher level.
I just wanted to clarify that. That is the case; correct?
Dr. MAESTAS. The appeals channel is open to everybody, but
there is no automatic appeal. They decide themselves whether or
not to pursue an appeal.
Mr. BECERRA. Right. In other words, it does not go to
appeal immediately if the decision is against you. You have to
actually----
Dr. MAESTAS. You have to initiate the appeal.
Mr. BECERRA. Correct.
Chairman JOHNSON. Their lawyer decides.
Mr. BECERRA. Ms. Ekman.
Ms. EKMAN. If I could also just clarify, I do not have the
exact number in front of me, but will be happy to get that to
you, but a significant portion of people who are denied at the
initial level choose not to continue on appeal.
I think that is an important point, that we are not getting
100 percent appeals of denials.
Mr. BECERRA. That is my understanding as well. If you could
provide those numbers to the Committee, I think that would be
helpful.
Dr. MAESTAS. I have those numbers from our data. It is two-
thirds, almost two-thirds, 65 percent that do pursue an appeal
of the initial denial, as of 2005/2006.
Chairman JOHNSON. They do appeal?
Dr. MAESTAS. One-third do not.
Mr. BECERRA. If you could provide those numbers, that would
be great.
Dr. MAESTAS. Those are in my testimony, in the written
remarks.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Again, I want to thank you all
for being here and your testimony.
I look forward to continuing this discussion on ways to
secure the future of this vital program at our next hearing,
which will focus on what happens when someone appeals a denied
claim.
I want to thank you all again for being here. We appreciate
it. Great time to see the trees outside. You have perfect
timing.
With that, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Submissions for the Record follows:]

AFGE, Statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

University at Buffalo Law School, Statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

NHCHC, Statement

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


