- THE ROLE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS IN IDENTITY THEFT AND OPTIONS TO GUARD THEIR PRIVACY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ROLE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS
IN IDENTITY THEFT AND OPTIONS
TO GUARD THEIR PRIVACY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-SS2

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-880                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY

SAM JOHNSON, Texas, Chairman

KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   XAVIER BECERRA, California
PAT TIBERI, Ohio                     LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
RICK BERG, North Dakota
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska

C O N T E N T S

__________
Page

Advisory of April 13, 2011, announcing the hearing...............     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Patrick P. O'Carroll Jr., Inspector General, Social
Security Administration........................................     7
Maneesha Mithal, Associate Director of the Division of Privacy
and Identity Protection, Federal Trade Commission..............    17
Theresa L. Gruber, Assistant Deputy Commissioner, Office of
Operations, Social Security Administration.....................    34

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Juan J. Martinez, Ph.D...........................................    54
Helene Perry.....................................................    56
LifeLock.........................................................    57
Patrick P. O'Carroll Jr..........................................    62
Maneesha Mithal..................................................    72
Theresa L. Gruber................................................    78

THE ROLE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS
IN IDENTITY THEFT AND OPTIONS
TO GUARD THEIR PRIVACY

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Social Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m., in
Room B-318, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Sam
Johnson [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

HEARING ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

Chairman Johnson Announces Hearing

on the Role of Social Security Numbers

in Identity Theft and Options to

Guard Their Privacy

April 06, 2011

Congressman Sam Johnson (R-TX), Chairman, Subcommittee on Social
Security of the Committee on Ways and Means, today announced that the
Subcommittee will hold a hearing to examine the role of Social Security
numbers in identity theft and options to guard their privacy. The
hearing will take place on Wednesday, April 13, 2011, in room B-318
Rayburn House Office Building, beginning at 2:00 p.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Subcommittee and
for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.

BACKGROUND:

Identity theft is the fastest growing type of fraud in the United
States, affecting 11.1 million victims in 2009, up 12 percent since
2008. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) estimates that identity theft
costs consumers about $50 billion annually. Further, identity theft is
often used to facilitate other crimes, including credit card, document,
or employment fraud. The Social Security number (SSN) is especially
valuable to identity thieves as it serves as the key to authenticating
an individual's identity in order to open accounts or obtain other
benefits in the victim's name.

Although created in 1936 solely to track workers' earnings for
Social Security benefit purposes, use of the SSN has become widespread.
Largely because the SSN is permanent and unique to an individual, SSNs
are used by many industries, including financial institutions,
insurers, universities, health care providers, and government agencies.
While many SSN uses are beneficial and required by law, such as for
purposes of employment and taxation, other uses may not be necessary,
such as displaying it on an identification card.

Despite its important role, there is no Federal law that requires
comprehensive confidentiality protection for the SSN. However, there
are laws that provide limited SSN confidentiality. For example, the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (P.L. 106-102) restricts the reuse and
redisclosure of certain personal information, including SSNs, by
financial institutions. Also, many States have enacted legislation to
restrict the use, disclosure, or display of SSNs.

In 2006, the President established an Identity Theft Task Force to
coordinate Federal agencies' efforts against identity theft. One of
many recommendations in its 2007 report was to decrease the unnecessary
use of SSNs in the public sector. In response to the Task Force's
mandate for the study of private sector uses of SSNs, the FTC developed
recommendations to reduce the availability of SSNs to identity thieves
while preserving legitimate uses.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Sam Johnson (R-TX) stated,
``Americans are rightly worried about the security of their personal
information, including their Social Security number. We must stop
overuse and abuse of Social Security numbers in order to help prevent
ID theft and further protect Americans' privacy.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The Subcommittee will examine the impacts of identity theft, the
role of SSNs in abetting identity theft, and options to restrict its
use. In addition, the role of the SSN in administering Social Security
programs and how the Social Security Administration protects SSNs will
be considered, along with legislative proposals to limit the use of
SSNs.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word or
WordPerfect document, in compliance with the formatting requirements
listed below, by the close of business on Wednesday, May 4, 2011.
Finally, please note that due to the change in House mail policy, the
U.S. Capitol Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House
Office Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical
problems, please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word or WordPerfect format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages,
including attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the
Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the official
hearing record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman JOHNSON. The subcommittee will come to order.
Welcome, everyone.
Identity theft is a lasting and devastating crime. Victims
spend years having to prove who they are, while monitoring
credit reports, fending off collection agencies or the IRS for
charges they never made or wages they never earned. Some are
picked up by law enforcement by crimes committed by the ID
theft using their name. Americans have every reason to be
concerned.
According to the Congressional Research Service, in 2009 ID
theft claimed over 11 million victims and cost consumers about
$50 billion annually. The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse reports
the total number of known records that have been compromised
due to security breaches beginning in January 2005 through last
week topped 500 million. Just yesterday, in my own state of
Texas, the comptroller's office announced the largest security
breach in state history: some 3.5 million personal files were
mistakenly left on a computer file available to the public,
putting current and retired state employees at risk.
Even though Social Security numbers were created to track
earnings for determining eligibility and benefit amounts under
Social Security, the numbers are widely used as personal
identifiers. Some of the uses of these numbers in preventing
fraud are vital to many commercial and government operations.
Examples include enforcing child support, aiding law
enforcement, and compiling information from many sources to
help ensure the accuracy of credit reports.
Unfortunately, as pointed out by GAO in testimony before
this subcommittee, Social Security numbers have become the
identifier of choice, and are used for everyday business
transactions. In fact, in their April 2007 report, the
President's Identity Theft Task Force identified the Social
Security number as the most valuable commodity for an identity
thief.
Even worse, identity theft continues to threaten our
national security. As said in the 9/11 Commission report, fraud
and identification documents is no longer just a problem of
theft. At many entry points to vulnerable facilities, including
gates for boarding airplanes, sources of identification are the
last opportunity to ensure that people are who they say they
are, and to check whether or not they are terrorists.
Congress needs to get to work on identity theft and
limiting access to Social Security numbers is an excellent
place to start. For years, Ways and Means Subcommittee on
Social Security has been working on this problem in a
bipartisan way. In fact, Mr. Doggett and I have been on a bill
year after year to try to do this. We have approved bills to
protect the privacy of Social Security numbers and prevent
identity theft since the 106th Congress, when it first approved
the Social Security Number, Privacy, and Identity Theft
Prevention Act.
The legislation was first introduced on a bipartisan basis
by then-subcommittee chairman Clay Shaw, and then-ranking
member, the late Bob Matsui. Despite numerous attempts,
Congress has not been able to close the deal. Sadly, Social
Security number use is so widespread across so many industries
that the committees of jurisdiction have yet to reach agreement
on the right approach to limiting their use.
Still, I believe this committee can make progress. To that
end, today I am reintroducing, with Mr. Doggett, the Medicare
Identity Theft Prevention Act, a bill to remove the Social
Security number from the Medicare card. It makes no sense that
people are told, ``Don't carry your Social Security card in
order to protect your identity,'' but then every senior citizen
is told, ``Carry your Medicare card,'' which displays
prominently the Social Security number.
The risk of ID theft goes far beyond the card being stolen.
Every medical record at nursing homes, hospitals, and doctor
offices has a Social Security number written on it. The
wholesale amount of Social Security numbers that are available
to identity thieves is staggering and completely unnecessary.
You know, just last night I was dealing with the TV guys on
cable. Guess what they asked for?--my Social Security number to
prove it was me. Can you believe that? Well, I didn't know what
to say.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services have refused
to act. If they won't do what is right for America's seniors,
we will. I thank my colleague from Texas for his work on this
issue, and I urge my other colleagues to support this issue, as
well.
The problem of identity theft is not going to be addressed
with one single piece of legislation. But protecting Medicare
cards carried by 47 million Americans is a good place to start.
I will say that if the military can remove Social Security
numbers, CMS ought to be able to do the same.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses, and
thank them in advance for sharing with us their experiences and
their recommendations. And thank you all for being present
today.
And I now yield to my friend, Xavier Becerra, our ranking
member.
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for calling
this hearing. As you just said, millions of Americans are
harmed each year, due to the misappropriation of their
identities. This subcommittee is deeply concerned about this
particular problem. In fact, we have held 17 previous hearings
on this subject since 2000, the year 2000.
Let me urge this subcommittee to show the same diligence
and thoroughness in examining some other critical issues that
we will be confronting soon surrounding Social Security, such
as the impact of cuts to the Social Security Administration's
(SSA) operating budget proposed for this year, and the
consequences for people, for example, who are waiting for their
disability benefits. Also, the impact of cuts to the Social
Security Administration's operating budget on the ability of
the SSA to prevent waste, fraud, and abuse, and certainly in
regards to the impact on senior's retirement security from the
kinds of Social Security benefit cuts that budget Chairman Paul
Ryan has proposed and praised.
While we may have different views on the importance of
Social Security benefits for today's seniors and future
retirees, we are united in our concern about identity theft.
Identity theft ruins individuals' good names, and destroys
their credit ratings. It has even ruined the future credit
ratings of young children. This subcommittee has heard from
many victims of identity theft, and have described the
extensive harm that they have suffered, as a result of identity
fraud, harm which continues long after the fraud is discovered.
Identity theft crimes carry a total cost to Americans of over
$17 billion.
I welcome the testimony of the Social Security
Administration and its inspector general. I also welcome the
testimony of the Federal Trade Commission, which plays a
critical role in protecting consumers from identify theft.
Chairman Johnson, I look forward to joining you and others
in reintroducing identity theft legislation for this new
Congress, and I am hoping that we can make significant progress
as we work together in that regard.
Before I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman, if I could yield
one minute to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you. While I shared the broader concerns
that Mr. Becerra has just outlined, I just want to applaud your
leadership on this, Mr. Chairman. I agree with every word you
said about the subject that is up today, identity theft.
This is at least the third Congress in which you and I have
been in partnership, trying to solve this problem. We actually
passed it through the House in 2008, despite a lot of
bureaucratic obstacles that were thrown up, and then the
bureaucracy managed to kill it over in the Senate Finance
Committee, or it would already be law.
I think one of the most effective ways for the bureaucracy
to stand in the way of something that they don't want to move
quickly on is to throw up a big cost estimate. And that is what
has happened here. And we have been trying to get the specifics
for months, if not years, from CMS about their claim that it
will be too costly for them to protect the Identity of our
seniors. They need to come forward with their study, and it
needs to be well-founded. And we should not let their
objections stand in the way, again, of doing what is right by
our seniors and, as you said, at least doing for folks who rely
on Medicare what the military has already been able to do for
our military men and women and for our veterans. I thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Becerra.
Chairman JOHNSON. The gentleman from California, you are
recognized.
Mr. STARK. Mr. Chairman, I am pleased that you called this
markup, and proud to be a cosponsor of your bill, and I would
ask you if you would consider, and if the committee would not
object, we introduced legislation that would address the
problem of identity theft for foster children. The foster
children's Social Security numbers often pass through many
hands, and we have encountered problems when the children age
out of foster care, they have found that their identity has
already been stolen, and people have opened credit cards, and
so forth. And we have some language that I hope you would
consider adding to your legislation that would protect these
very vulnerable children.
I know that Mr. Delay worked with us years ago on doing
this, and I look forward to seeing if we can include this in
your----
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes, I am sure Mr. Doggett would agree.
Mr. DOGGETT. Absolutely.
Chairman JOHNSON. We will certainly look at it.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. BECERRA. Chairman, we are pleased that you have called
this hearing, and I would yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Becerra. Let me tell you
we are getting a vote in about 10 or 15 minutes, maybe 20.
There will be four votes and three of them are five minutes. So
we will break when that occurs and come back after the votes,
which will be about a half-hour.
Today we are joined by three witnesses. Our first witness
is the honorable Patrick O'Carroll, Jr. He is the Social
Security Administration Inspector General. Next is Maneesha
Mithal, who is the Associate Director of the Division of
Privacy and Identity Protection at the Federal Trade
Commission. And lastly we will hear from Theresa Gruber, who is
the Assistant Deputy Commissioner, Office of Operations at the
Social Security Administration.
So, all I would ask you is stop dragging your feet and let
us get these things done.
[Laughter.]
Chairman JOHNSON. Mr. O'Carroll, you are recognized. I
welcome all of you, and thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK P. O'CARROLL, JR.,
INSPECTOR GENERAL, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Mr. O'CARROLL. Good afternoon, Chairman Johnson,
Congressman Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you
for the invitation to testify today.
We all understand the serious threat and damaging effects
of identity theft. But to better illustrate the issue, I would
like to present one victim's story. Dr. Juan Martinez, born and
raised in Chicago, was thrilled to accept a teaching position
at the University of Chicago in 2005. Soon after he began
working in his hometown, however, Dr. Martinez received a
letter from the IRS that stated he failed to pay his taxes on
wages earned the previous year in Colorado. The letter arrived
with a substantial bill.
Someone had stolen his identity, and Dr. Martinez was left
to prove his case to the IRS. Dr. Martinez and his wife
struggled for several years, as they disputed charges with the
IRS, and attempted to track down the person who was
fraudulently using Dr. Martinez's name, Social Security number,
and birth date.
In 2010, Dr. Martinez learned that a bank account was
opened in his name in Missouri. Authorities in Chicago referred
the case to one of our special agents in St. Louis. Working
with the bank where the account was opened, our agent quickly
identified and located the man who illegally used Dr.
Martinez's information for five years. The man admitted to
purchasing false identity documents, and using Dr. Martinez's
name to get a job, rent an apartment, and open a bank account.
Last month he was sentenced to seven months in prison and
ordered to pay restitution of more than $5,000 to Dr. Martinez.
Now, Dr. Martinez and his family may finally breath a sigh
of relief. We in OIG are very pleased to have helped Dr.
Martinez. And while he could not be here today, he has prepared
a written statement about his ordeal, and we would like to
enter that into the record.
[Dr. Martinez statement for the record follows:]

As the case illustrates, identity theft places a huge
burden on the victims. Use of the SSN is still widespread
throughout government programs and financial transactions. And
with technology constantly evolving, stealing SSNs and entire
identities has become even easier. As we pursue investigations
similar to the case of Dr. Martinez, our agents participate in
SSN misuse task forces across the country, investigating
identity theft, as well as mortgage, bankruptcy, and benefit
fraud.
My office has done work that led to the removal of the SSN
from the selective service mailings. We have also recommended
its removal from other government documents and IDs, such as
the Medicare card. The Department of Defense recently announced
it will remove the SSN from military IDs, and we agree that
this is a step in the right direction to protect valuable
personal information.
SSA, though, still cannot prohibit the collection and use
of SSNs. Our investigative and audit work has taught us that
the more SSNs are used, the higher the probability that these
numbers can be used to commit crimes. Our recent
recommendations to SSA include: supporting legislation to limit
public and private entities' use of the SSN; continuing efforts
to safeguard and protect personal information; and ensuring the
highest level of online security before offering replacement
Social Security cards over the internet.
We have recently completed audits that question the
collection of students' SSNs in kindergarten through 12th
grade, as well as state and local governments' collection and
use of SSNs. We have also completed reviews on assigning SSNs
to non-citizens with fiancee visas and exchange visitor visas.
Although temporary residents may be authorized to work in the
United States, we question whether they should receive SSNs
which will remain valid for life.
We are currently reviewing SSA's controls over how the
Agency issues SSN print-outs, which are often used as a
substitute for replacement Social Security cards. We plan to
issue that report this summer.
In conclusion, we must continue to ensure the integrity of
the enumeration process, limit the use and public display of
the SSN, encourage SSN protection, and provide meaningful
penalties for those who misuse the SSN or fail to protect it.
My office will continue to work with you and SSA to maintain
and improve the integrity of the Social Security number.
Thank you again for this invitation to testify today, and I
will be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Carroll follows:]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. I am told that most of the
stolen numbers are from young people who have not yet begun to
work. Is that your information?
Mr. O'CARROLL. I would qualify that by saying that a lot of
them belong to children that haven't begun to work. And when
people are vacuuming up numbers that are out there, often times
they are targeting children's numbers. But I cannot say it is
exclusive.
Chairman JOHNSON. That is because they have not ever
recorded them anywhere.
Mr. O'CARROLL. Agreed.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes. Thank you.
Ms. Mithal, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MANEESHA MITHAL, ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR OF THE
DIVISION OF PRIVACY AND IDENTITY PROTECTION, FEDERAL TRADE
COMMISSION

Ms. MITHAL. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Becerra, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am Maneesha Mithal from the
Federal Trade Commission. I appreciate the opportunity to
present the FTC's views on the role of Social Security numbers
and identity theft.
Protecting consumers against identity theft is a critical
component of our consumer protection mission. The Commission's
written testimony describes the widespread use of SSNs in our
economy, as well as its role in facilitating identity theft. In
my oral statement I would like to focus on the FTC's activities
to implement the recommendations of the President's 2007
identity theft task force, which the FTC's chairman co-chaired,
along with the attorney general. I would like to highlight our
implementation of four recommendations, in particular.
First, we have tried to find ways to reduce the use of SSNs
in the public and private sectors. As to the public sector,
federal agencies have taken a lot of steps to eliminate or
restrict the use of SSNs. Most recently, as we have heard, the
Department of Defense announced that it would stop using SSNs
on military ID cards as of June 2011.
As to the private sector use of SSNs, we hosted a workshop
and issued a report recommending federal legislation in a
variety of areas. Among other things, we recommended
legislation to reduce the public display of SSNs, and to
improve consumer authentication.
Second, a key component of our efforts to combat identity
theft is to make sure that consumers' sensitive data, including
SSNs, don't fall into the hands of identity thieves. To that
end, we enforce laws requiring companies to maintain reasonable
security of consumers' information. Since 2001, the Commission
has brought over 30 law enforcement actions challenging
businesses that failed to reasonably protect sensitive consumer
information.
Several of these cases have involved breaches of SSNs. One
example is Choice Point. We sued Choice Point and alleged that
it sold sensitive information about more than 160,000 consumers
to identity thieves. We obtained $15 million in monetary relief
against the company.
More recently, we settled actions against three sellers of
credit reports. These sellers allowed hackers to access
sensitive credit report information, including SSNs. The
settlements require each company to have comprehensive
information security programs in place.
We also brought a case against a company called LifeLock,
which deceptively advertised its identity theft protection
services. Now, you may recall LifeLock's ads, in which the CEO
displayed his own real Social Security number, stating that he
guaranteed protection against identity theft. Of course, he
later became a victim of identity theft. We worked with 36
state attorneys general to bring a case against the company for
deceptive practices, and we obtained $12 million in monetary
relief.
Third, in addition to bringing cases, we provide consumer
assistance and education. We manage a toll-free Identity theft
hotline, along with a dedicated website through which we
receive 15,000 to 20,000 contacts each week. Callers to the
hotline receive counseling from trained personnel on steps they
can take to prevent or recover from identity theft.
We also make available a wide variety of consumer education
materials, including many in Spanish, to help consumers deter,
detect, and defend against identity theft. I am now holding
some examples of our consumer education materials, and I would
be happy to provide additional copies to your staff after the
hearing.
One successful strategy in disseminating our materials has
been to provide them to first responders. For example, because
victims often report identity theft to local law enforcement
agencies, we inform these agencies on how to talk to victims.
The FTC and its partners have provided identity theft training
to over 5,400 law enforcement officers from over 1,700
agencies. Similarly, we have created a comprehensive guide to
pro bono attorneys and legal services clinics who assist low-
income identity theft victims.
Finally, we serve as a clearinghouse for information about
identity theft. We make information in our complaint database
available to over 2,000 law enforcement partners. To assist law
enforcement and policy makers, we also routinely issue reports
on the number and nature of identity theft complaints we
receive. Most recently we announced that in 2010 we received
250,000 identity theft complaints, which represents 19 percent
of the total number of complaints we received. Identity theft
has remained a top complaint category for more than a decade.
Fighting identity theft continues to be a top priority for
the FTC, and we look forward to working with the subcommittee
on this important issue.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mithal follows:]

Chairman JOHNSON. Ms. Gruber, you are recognized for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THERESA L. GRUBER, ASSISTANT DEPUTY COMMISSIONER,
OFFICE OF OPERATIONS, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION

Ms. GRUBER. Thank you. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Becerra, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Theresa
Gruber, and I am the Assistant Deputy Commissioner for
Operations at the Social Security Administration. I have worked
for the Agency for nearly 20 years, starting in one of our
field offices in Minnesota. In my current role I oversee the
operation of more than 1,200 Social Security offices, 8 card
centers, 33 1-800-number teleservice centers, and 8 processing
centers.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss how we assign
Social Security numbers, and the role that the Social Security
number, or SSN, can play in identity theft. My written
statement provides details on the history of the SSN, and I
will focus today on what we have done to improve and strengthen
our enumeration and card issuance processes.
Originally, the only purpose of the Social Security number
was to keep an accurate record of earnings under Social
Security, and to pay benefits based on those earnings. We
provided the SSN card to show what SSN we assigned to a
particular individual, with the idea that, when shown to an
employer, that employer would be able to properly report that
individual's earnings. The card was never intended, and does
not serve, as a personal identification document.
Assigning SSNs has been one of our most important and
significant workloads. Since the inception of the program, we
have assigned about 465 million Social Security numbers. Last
fiscal year we assigned 5.5 million original Social Security
numbers, completed 11.5 million requests for replacement cards,
and processed over 1 billion verifications of SSNs.
Although the card is not an identification document,
unscrupulous individuals use the SSN to steal identities and
obtain false identification documents.
I would like to thank you for helping us to strengthen our
SSN assignment process, for example, through the enactment of
the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004.
As a result of this legislation, we have implemented numerous
changes to our assignment process. We added new security
features to the card to help prevent counterfeiting. We also
limited the number of replacement cards we issue to any one
individual, and established new, rigorous standards for
evidence.
As an agency, we are always looking for ways to improve the
security and efficiency of our records. For example, we know
that we have to expand the pool of nine-digit numbers available
for assignment. To that end, we plan to implement this summer a
new assignment methodology called ``SSN randomization.''
Randomization will help protect the Social Security number by
eliminating any geographic significance in the number, and
making it more difficult to reconstruct an SSN using public
information. As a result, the new process will also extend the
pool of SSNs available for assignment nationwide.
We have also taken a number of steps to improve the way we
assign Social Security numbers. First, we opened two new Social
Security card centers, bringing our total now to eight. These
specialized centers process all applications for original SSNs
and replacement cards in specific metropolitan areas.
In coordination with the Department of State and the
Department of Homeland Security, we expanded the Enumeration at
Entry program, permitting all individuals applying for an
immigrant visa to elect to receive an SSN at the time of
initial admission. This program allows us to use information
collected and verified by both agencies to assign an SSN
automatically.
We have implemented and are continuing to enhance our new
Social Security Number Application Process, which our field
offices use to process SSN applications. This automated system
ensures uniform compliance with our enumeration policies and
evidence requirements.
In conclusion, we must remember that with all the
improvements in the way we assign SSNs, the Social Security
card is still just a record of an SSN assigned to an
individual, and not an identity document. We understand the use
of the SSN for other purposes has grown exponentially over the
years. The challenge we face is to balance our commitment to
assigning SSN numbers quickly and accurately, with the equally
important need to maintain the integrity of the enumeration
system, and to prevent SSN fraud.
I want to thank the Chairman and the Members of the
Subcommittee for inviting me here today, and look forward to
your continued support for our Agency and our mission. I will
be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gruber follows:]

Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you for your testimony. And we will
proceed to questions.
Let me ask you a question, first. How much does it cost to
issue a Social Security card?
Ms. GRUBER. It depends on the manner in which you get the
card. If you come into one of our----
Chairman JOHNSON. You mean all the offices aren't the same?
Ms. GRUBER. Well, actually, if you come into our field
office, it costs about $32. If you go through one of our
automated processes, a process called ``Enumeration at Birth,''
where we assign a Social Security number for a child who is
born, that is about $8. And----
Chairman JOHNSON. Eighty?
Ms. GRUBER. Eight dollars.
Chairman JOHNSON. Oh.
Ms. GRUBER. And if you do it through the Enumeration at
Entry program that I talked about, it is about $5.
Chairman JOHNSON. How about if we charged for that?
Ms. GRUBER. We would be happy to work with the subcommittee
on exploring that option.
Chairman JOHNSON. You all think about that. Let me ask you
a couple of questions.
Mr. O'Carroll, do you have all the tools you need to
protect the Social Security number?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Chairman Johnson, as we have heard during
the testimony here, the number is out of the box, and it is
pretty widely displayed, and it is out there. So it is pretty
hard to keep the SSN as private and secure as we would have
preferred and liked.
But, with that, I think the tools that we could use are any
ways to limit the collection of Social Security numbers, much
like you were saying, when a vendor is asking for it but
doesn't need it. The display of Social Security numbers is a
problem. We have been trying to get SSNs off of government
checks. It is being removed from some government IDs--as you
are proposing now, off of the Medicare card--and that is
another good tool. And the last one is just the collection of
SSNs, in terms of limiting financial institutions' collection
of Social Security numbers, which can end up in a PII breach,
as you discussed in Texas. That is another concern of ours.
So, what we are looking for is more of any tool that will
at least prevent it being displayed more than it is now, and
being compromised.
Chairman JOHNSON. I understand that while we have
restricted the number of Social Security number replacement
cards, people can visit a local office and get a print-out with
their number on it. And that they can easily be used by ID
thieves. Why is it we are doing that? I mean isn't it just as
easy to print them a new card?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Well, we are almost a victim of a success on
that one. And under the Identity Theft Act that was passed by
Congress we have limited the number of cards that are being
issued. So, remember, in the past it was unlimited numbers of
cards going to people. That has been restricted now, and so----
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, it is still free, isn't it?
Mr. O'CARROLL. It is still free, but we are limiting the
number that can be received each year, and the number in a
lifetime. And what that caused is anybody who needs a Social
Security number, hasn't been safeguarding it, doesn't keep it
carefully, is coming into the offices now, asking for the
print-outs instead of a replacement card.
And I think a secondary problem that has come with the
print-out is a lot of employers, rather than get a Xerox copy
of a Social Security card, are asking for what they think is
more recently updated information, and asking for the print-
outs, which is causing another group of people to come in
requesting the print-outs.
And that leads to two of our concerns. One is the
identification requirements for an original card are much more
strict than it is to get a print-out. So what is happening now
is there is this secondary market for the print-outs, and often
times they are not as good a means of identification as Social
Security cards.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, why do we have to do print-outs at
all? Why can't they get a replacement card, if they can?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Well, they can, but only a limited number of
times. And there is also a concern due to the Freedom of
Information Act----
Chairman JOHNSON. Three times ought to be enough. I mean
how many times have you lost your card?
Mr. O'CARROLL. I haven't. I still have the one that my
parents got when I was a little child.
Chairman JOHNSON. Okay.
Mr. O'CARROLL. It was with my father's stuff that I
inherited from him.
But I agree with you. I think that is why there is a limit
to the number of times an individual can get a replacement
card. But a lot of people believe that under Freedom of
Information Act they are entitled to this print-out.
So, I am more concerned with just making sure that the
proper identification is used when they get the print-out so
that we know it is the right person, that they are not using
secondary, less reliable types of identification to get that
print-out, that it has the same level of integrity as the card.
And then, as you had brought up earlier, maybe if there was
a charge for getting the print-outs, it would diminish the
number of times that it was asked for. As it stands now,
employers are charged if they purchase a print-out from SSA;
individuals are not.
Chairman JOHNSON. Okay. Well, I am not hot about that idea.
Mr. Becerra, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Mithal, let me
ask you a question. In the private sector right now we have a
patchwork of regulations to deal with the use of the Social
Security number. Can you give us some examples of industries
that are doing a good job of trying to protect the number, and
perhaps an industry that is not doing such a good job of
protecting the privacy of an individual's Social Security
number?
Ms. MITHAL. I think it would be difficult to provide an
industry example. We can provide examples of best practices.
So, for example, if you do not need the Social Security number,
do not ask for it. It is something that we have implemented as
an agency, at the FTC. I remember when I started over 10 years
ago, I used to have to put my Social Security number on a leave
slip. And we do not have to do that any more. And I think that
is a practice that we would encourage the private sector--if
you do not need the Social Security number, do not collect it.
Mr. BECERRA. Okay. And I have heard that some of these
information resellers have some of the worst practices around,
that some of these Internet information resellers actually
advertise that with little more than your name, your city, and
state, they can sell you a Social Security number for a few
dollars. Is that still the case? Is there any regulation of
those resellers?
Ms. MITHAL. There is. In fact, a couple of years ago we
brought a number of cases against those who were posing as
consumers, and getting information about them. And so we have a
law that prohibits unfair or deceptive practices. And we
alleged that that was an unfair practice. And so there are laws
covering that practice.
Mr. BECERRA. And finally, give us a sense. If you were
addressing people who are concerned about their identity and it
being stolen, as each and every one of us here is, what would
be the best advice you give to any American to try to safeguard
his or her Social Security number?
Ms. MITHAL. There are several things I would say. I would
say treat it like you would cash. Secure it. Do not carry it
around. Any documents that you dispose of, get a shredder. Make
sure that if you are providing your number online, that you
practice safe computing, that you update your anti-spyware and
anti-malware software, that you check your accounts frequently,
and that you order your free credit report, which you are
entitled to once a year, from the three major credit reporting
agencies.
Mr. BECERRA. Good advice. Ms. Gruber, a quick question.
What does SSA say to individuals as they come in contact with
your offices about the integrity of their number and protecting
it?
What--is there anything you tell them, other than respond
to the questions they may have about the reason they are there?
They may be coming for benefits, or to apply for something.
But does anyone take the time to say, ``By the way, you know,
you should be securing your Social Security number,'' et
cetera, et cetera?
Ms. GRUBER. Thank you, Ranking Member Becerra, that is a
very good question. We do. Our efforts are multi-faceted. When
folks come in to apply for a replacement card, we do absolutely
remind them, as both my colleagues have mentioned, to not carry
it with them. In fact, it says that on the card.
On our website, we have a number of publications, and
frequently asked questions--in fact, I think we have 11 of
them--that deal with identity theft, that deal with how to
safeguard the card. And we know that they are very widely used.
We get thousands of hits every month on those types of things.
And when a person does suspect that their SSN has been
misused or stolen, we do talk to them about--and encourage them
to take a number of steps, including working with the FTC,
including working with IRS, and frequently monitoring their
financial accounts, their credit reports. Even if they are not
a victim of identity theft, we encourage folks to do that,
which is what all of our literature, that is pretty widely
available, says.
Mr. BECERRA. Well, I hope, with your good assistance, the
three of you, that this perhaps will be the last time we have
to hold a hearing on identity theft, because perhaps this time
Congress could get together, working with our chairman, to
finally pass a bill out of the House and hopefully out of the
Senate, so we can deal with this, Mr. Chairman, as I think most
of us believe we should have done a long time ago, and get this
taken care of. Because it is a shame that tens of billions of
dollars are lost by Americans and, as well, much of their
sanity in life because somebody stole their identity.
So, I thank you for your testimony, again. And, Mr.
Chairman, I am pleased that you were able to bring them
together to have this hearing.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. We have a good panel. We are
having a vote right now. I am going to recess the committee,
and it will be about 30, 45 minutes before we get back. Thank
you.
Mr. BRADY. Hey, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes?
Mr. BRADY. Can I go on the record saying I really
appreciate Ms. Mithal's recommendation that we carry cash? If
you could talk to my wife about giving me some, I would be very
appreciative.
[Laughter.]
Mr. BRADY. I am with you on that.
[Recess.]
Chairman JOHNSON. The meeting will come back to order. Mr.
Paulsen is recognized for questions.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you. This has been an interesting hearing. Maybe I can start
with Mr. O'Carroll.
You know, in your testimony you mentioned, or you
highlighted at least, the fact that temporary residents may
have authorization to work in the United States for a limited
time, and you questioned sort of the propriety of assigning an
SSN to those folks, which is valid for life. Since an SSN
number may be a key to their ability to overstay his or her
visa, would you briefly overview for us your work in this area,
how you reached this conclusion, and how Social Security has
responded to some of those concerns you raised?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, Mr. Paulsen. We have done a number of
reports on this issue. We looked at both the fiancee visas,
where you come into the country, you say that you are going to
be here to get married, and in that time period you are allowed
months in the United States prior to your marriage. At that
point, the fiancee will come in, get a Social Security number,
and let us say, for example, the marriage does not happen, that
person leaves the country. That SSN that the person was given
is now out there forever.
And then, we also looked at the visas that are issued to
foreign students that come to the United States to work for
summer----
Chairman JOHNSON. Wait a minute. Can I stop you----
Mr. O'CARROLL. Yes, sir.
Chairman JOHNSON. If they are going out of the country, why
can't we stop them at immigration on the way out?
Mr. O'CARROLL. No, meaning what happens with the SSN, then,
is that that number for that individual now exists for
perpetuity.
Chairman JOHNSON. But you don't make them give the card up?
Mr. O'CARROLL. No.
Chairman JOHNSON. Can we?
Mr. O'CARROLL. That is something we will have to look at.
Let me look into that and see if that is a possible solution.
Mr. PAULSEN. If you could give a follow-up to it, Ms.
Gruber, just to kind of get some feedback, too. But please
continue on.
Mr. O'CARROLL. And then, the other one that we were finding
is with the students that are coming in for summer work. That
is a very similar one to what Chairman Johnson was saying. At
the end of their work, at which point they have been issued an
SSN, they work for a summer, they go back to their country of
residence, in many cases never to come back into the United
States again, we have a concern. Why issue a Social Security
number for that?
One of the solutions would be to instruct the IRS to give
them a tax identification number, as opposed to having to give
them an SSN would be a possible solution.
Mr. PAULSEN. Ms. Gruber, maybe you can follow up regarding
the Agency's view on this, and how you and Mr. O'Carroll work
together, perhaps, on some of these issues?
Ms. GRUBER. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Paulsen. A couple of
things. You know, one of the reasons we actually assign an SSN
to someone who might be here temporarily is that we, under law,
are required to do so--if they have DHS or Department of
Homeland Security authorization to work, under the law we have
to assign them an SSN.
There are valid reasons why somebody who has a temporary
status here--as long as they have work authorization--might
actually want to work. And eventually, if they gain permanent
status, they could use those credited earnings while they were
here lawfully, but temporarily for their benefits in the
future. In order to make a change, it would require a change to
the Social Security Act, actually, to not issue an SSN to folks
who are here lawfully, who do have authorization to work.
And one other final thing, Mr. Paulsen. The Social Security
card itself does not really give them the ticket to work. They
have to have the card plus the DHS documentation.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay. Mr. O'Carroll, any other follow-up on
that, or----
Mr. O'CARROLL. I think that pretty well covers it.
Mr. PAULSEN. Okay. Ms. Mithal, maybe I can ask you. The
President's task force, you know, a few years back did a lot of
work on public display of SSNs, and all the problems
surrounding identity theft that I think were a part of that
effort. The 2007 strategic plan referred to identity theft as a
problem with no single cause and no single solution.
However, they did develop a whole list of recommendations,
like 30, 31. You know, the very first recommendation was
decreasing the unnecessary use of SSNs in the public sector.
Why was that the number one recommendation?
Ms. MITHAL. Well, I think it is fairly obviously that one
of the sources of identity theft is the ubiquity of Social
Security numbers that are out there. And one of the things that
we need to do to address the practice is to make sure they
don't get into the hands of identity thieves in the first
place. And it seems that reducing the public display of Social
Security numbers, reducing the use of them, would be a natural
first step. And we decided, well, let us clean our own house,
start with the public sector, before we get to the private
sector.
Mr. PAULSEN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think that makes sense,
in terms of a number one recommendation. So, thank you, I yield
back.
Chairman JOHNSON. Mr. Becerra, do you have another question
you would like to ask?
Mr. BECERRA. Mr. Chairman, I think we probably asked and
had them answer these questions 17 different times. So I think
we know what we have to do, and we just hope that they can
continue to offer us some good advice as we try to move
forward.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes. Well, let me ask one, then. You know
there is close to 50 million Medicare cards floating around
with Social Security numbers on them. How can people protect
themselves from medical ID theft?
Mr. O'CARROLL. Well, that was one of our recommendations
from one of our audits, was the susceptibility of the public to
having their number compromised, because it is on the Medicare
card. And at the time, we recommended to SSA to explore ways of
working with HHS, which has jurisdiction over the Medicare
card, to look into having the number taken off.
And what we found at the time was a couple of things. And I
will ask Terry to elaborate, but about $30 million would be the
cost to SSA of just retooling to take the number off of the
card. And HHS said it would cost about $300 million take and 8
to 12 years to do it. So with that, I will yield to SSA.
Chairman JOHNSON. Okay. Mr. Brady, do you care to question?
Mr. BRADY. Yes, sir. One, I appreciate, Chairman, you
holding this hearing today in the bipartisan nature. Two, I
think the bill that has been or being introduced puts a heavy
emphasis on prevention of the theft in the first place. And I
want to drive the point or the need for that because on the
back end, my understanding is that it is rare that we catch and
prosecute those who are good at identity theft.
And my question is, out of the 11 million victims in 2009,
not all of them were directly victims of the theft created
through the Social Security number. But the average person,
senior, anyone, who is an identity theft victim through Social
Security number, what are the chances that the criminal who
does that gets caught and prosecuted? Any idea?
Mr. O'CARROLL. In the inspector general's office at SSA, we
get about a half-a-million public contacts a year, most related
to allegations of waste, fraud, and abuse at SSA. And we figure
about half of those allegations relate to misuse of the Social
Security number. A large portion of them are either referred to
SSA, HHS, or the FTC. From that group, we generally look into
anything related to misuse of Social Security benefits or
related to Social Security in some other way.
So we investigate about 500 SSN misuse cases a year. That
is about five percent of our investigations. Almost every one
of them will end up with a conviction because by the time we
open a case, we know that it is sufficient enough of a
violation that we will have a positive result.
But again, that is a very small percentage, as you are
seeing. From 500,000 contacts down to about 500 investigations
is what we are looking at from our agency. And I will yield to
the FTC on the more global----
Ms. MITHAL. Yes, but we are not a criminal enforcement
agency, so I would have to defer to DoJ on that. But I can say
that the crime really ranges from a pick-pocket, taking your
credit card for a joy ride, to a terrorist that is stealing
people's identity to commit bad acts against the country.
And so, I think the--there is really no hope of catching
all the identity thieves. And I think you are absolutely right,
that we need to focus on prevention, victim assistance, and
making sure that Social Security numbers do not fall into the
wrong hands.
Mr. BRADY. And actually, just to clarify, I am frustrated
by the lack of prosecution. I am not looking to your agencies,
but overall, I think it is just very rare. My pet peeve is I
see a lot of resources being used, when I turn on the TV and
see time and money being used to pursue Marion Jones or Bobby
[sic] Bonds or Roger Clemens, or issues like that. I look at
those teams and think, ``How many victims of Social Security
identity theft could be helped, you know, if we applied the
same type of rigor and ambition toward catching those?'' One,
we should be preventing in the first place, and two, really
prosecuting them harshly if they are caught. I think it is
right to put an emphasis on prevention. I do think we need to
have a much higher prosecution rate on the back end, as well.
So, Chairman, thank you very much. And, Ms. Gruber, I did
not mean to ignore you. Any comments?
Ms. GRUBER. I think that both of my colleagues summed it up
pretty well, and we certainly know how tough it is when we have
an interview with somebody who is a victim of identity theft.
Their life is turned upside down. And so we understand.
Mr. BRADY. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman JOHNSON. Thank you. Mr. O'Carroll, you got any
ideas how we can, you know, stem the tide of identity theft or
stolen cards or something like happened in Texas, for instance?
Can you talk to that issue? And how can we fix it?
Mr. O'CARROLL. We have several concerns. One, of course, is
identity theft for financial purposes. The other one that we
are running into is identity theft where people are illegally
using other people's numbers to live and work in the United
States. And we all know the problems that follow. Either you
are going to be much like the doctor I talked about, where you
are going to have someone else's wages posted against your
record that the IRS is expecting to pay taxes on, and it takes
years to get that straightened out.
So as we said before, any way that we can prevent the use
of the Social Security number out there is going to shrink the
problem down in size from where it is right now, where
everybody has that concern of losing your identity.
If we are not getting very good results from the
prosecution side, let us focus on the prevention side. And
prevention is a lot of the different tools that we have talked
about. And everybody has got to be very careful with their
information. For instance, sometimes phone calls are made,
where there is the phishing scam to get your information out
there, so don't volunteer it yourself.
Also, I think we are all concerned that the material that
is in your mailbox can be stolen that has all of your personal
information. Often times there is an application for a credit
card in the same stack of mail with your personal information
on it.
So, I think if this committee could consider ways of
preventing the publication of Social Security numbers, it would
be a step in the right direction.
Chairman JOHNSON. Well, we can look at that. You know, I do
not know exactly how we would do that, though. You know, you
can make laws until you are blue in the face, and people do not
follow them.
Mr. O'CARROLL. I encourage the enforcement side, too, as a
deterrent, I must say.
Chairman JOHNSON. Yes. Well, thank you all. I appreciate
you waiting for us.
Do you have any further questions, Mr. Becerra?
I appreciate you all being here today. I look forward to
working with all of you to stem the tide of theft by better
protecting our Social Security numbers. And I thank you for
being here. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:34 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned]
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[Questions for the Record follow:]


