- PROGRAMS THAT REWARD PHYSICIANS WHO DELIVER HIGH QUALITY AND EFFICIENT CARE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROGRAMS THAT REWARD PHYSICIANS WHO DELIVER HIGH QUALITY AND EFFICIENT
CARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 7, 2012

__________

SERIAL 112-HL07

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

78-177                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

Subcommittee on Health

WALLY HERGER, California, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida

Jennifer Safavian, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Cousel

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of February 7, 2012 announcing the hearing..............     2

WITNESSES

Lewis G. Sandy, MD, Senior Vice President, Clinical Advancement,
UnitedHealth Group.............................................     6
David Share, MD, MPH, Vice President, Value Partnerships, Blue
Cross Blue Shield Michigan (BCBSM).............................    21
Jack Lewin, MD, Chief Executive Officer, American College of
Cardiology.....................................................    38
John L. Bender, MD, President & CEO, Miramont Family Medicine....    67
Len Nichols, Director, Center for Health Policy Research and
Ethics.........................................................    77

PROGRAMS THAT REWARD PHYSICIANS WHO
DELIVER HIGH QUALITY AND EFFICIENT CARE

----------

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, the Honorable Wally
Herger [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory of the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
February 7, 2012
112-HL07

Chairman Herger

Announces Hearing on Programs that Reward Physicians Who Deliver High
Quality and Efficient Care

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Wally Herger (R-
CA) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
to explore how private sector payers are rewarding physicians who
deliver high quality and efficient care. With this hearing, the
Subcommittee will continue to examine potential ways to reform
Medicare's physician payment system. The Subcommittee will hear from
witnesses who have developed, supported, and participated in quality
and efficiency measurement programs. The hearing will take place on
Tuesday, February 7, 2012, in 1100 Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 10:00 A.M.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of witnesses
will follow.

BACKGROUND:

Medicare currently reimburses nearly every physician on a fee-for-
service (FFS) basis. While the physician fee schedule generally takes
into account the work, time, and effort associated with each service,
it does not account for the quality and efficiency of the care
provided. Furthermore, the mechanism used to annually update the fee
schedule--the Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) formula--limits spending
growth to growth in the economy but does not recognize value or
quality. There is broad acknowledgement of the shortcomings of the
current payment system, including the disruptive role of the SGR, and
the growing importance of incentivizing patient-centered, high-quality,
and outcomes-oriented care.

In consultation with physicians, many private payers have developed
programs to measure and reward the quality and efficiency of care
provided. Some of these programs also recognize practice transformation
activities. Preliminary results from these programs have shown
reductions in unnecessary emergency room visits, surgical
complications, and repeated procedures. Some physician organizations
are also very active both in collecting data to enhance performance and
in developing programs that recognize physician excellence. These
organizations have encouraged widespread dissemination of clinical
evidence, improved patient outcomes, and reduced unwarranted variations
in care. Such physician-driven programs and activities may offer
valuable lessons for reforming the Medicare physician payment system.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Herger stated, ``As we continue
to seek a long-term solution to the Medicare physician payment system,
this hearing will enable the Subcommittee to learn more about how
programs developed by physicians and private payers are successfully
rewarding quality and efficiency in care delivery while reducing
complications and wasteful spending. The experience of those at the
forefront of these innovative efforts will help the Subcommittee as it
considers how to better reimburse physician services in Medicare.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on innovative quality and efficiency
recognition and reward programs developed by physicians and private
payers.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Tuesday, February 21, 2012. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in Room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Wally Herger [chairman of
the subcommittee] presiding.

Chairman HERGER. The Subcommittee will come to order.
We are meeting today to hear from individuals to have
experience to share that will inform us as we continue our
effort to reform Medicare payments to physicians. At our last
hearing on this topic, we heard about different payment model
options and efforts to test them in the private sector.
This second hearing focuses on more incremental, private
sector-driven approaches to reforming patients. We will hear
shortly from private payers, a physician organization, and a
practicing physician who are engaged in efforts that reward
physicians who provide high-quality and efficient care to
patients. A common theme will be how all of these key
stakeholders are collaborating in private sector efforts to
improve care while lowering the cost of providing it.
All but one of our witnesses, even those representing
health plans, are physicians who are leading efforts to achieve
this shared goal. I fully expect you will find their stories
compelling. Our Democrat colleagues have called an economist
who talk about the need for collaboration but with the view
that government, not those providing the care, should lead the
way.
Our end goal in all of this remains addressing the
Sustainable Growth Rate formula through comprehensive physician
payment reform done in a fiscally responsible manner. This past
December, the House passed a bill that would have provided a
two-year reprieve from SGR cuts. This would have provided the
longest period of stability for Medicare physician payments in
nearly a decade.
It is worth noting that the last time that physicians knew
what their payment updates would be for 24 months was when a
Republican-led Congress enacted the Medicare Modernization Act
in 2003. It would have also provided time to determine a
payment reform policy that constitutes a true solution--it is
important to remember that merely averting cuts is not a fix.
The House bill would have facilitated the collection of
information to assist in determining a sound policy
prescription for paying physicians moving forward. The bill
directed studies by the nonpartisan Medicare Payment Advisory
Commission and the Government Accountability Office. It
prompted this and other congressional committees with Medicare
jurisdiction to consult with physician organizations. The focus
of this information collection effort is, not coincidentally,
the topic of today's hearing, how to reward physicians for
providing quality, efficient care to beneficiaries.
Unfortunately, the Democrat-controlled Senate continued its
habit of providing patches a couple months at a time, which led
us to our current situation, one that again sees us too close
to an unsustainable physician payment cut. While I am concerned
about my Northern California constituents and the other
beneficiaries and physicians throughout the country, I trust
that the Conference Committee will address this issue in a more
responsible manner.
In the meantime, this Committee is focusing on what it can
do now to bring a permanent resolution to the SGR program. I am
confident the experience that our witnesses will share today
will assist us greatly as we continue down this path.
Before I recognize Ranking Member Stark for the purpose of
an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that all Members'
written statements be included in the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
I will now recognize Ranking Member Stark for five minutes
for the purpose of his opening statement.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today to try and explore how the private sector payers
are rewarding physicians who deliver high-quality and efficient
care. This continues discussions we began, I guess, last May to
review innovative delivery and payment system reform efforts.
I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that it is important to
hear from the private sector. But I also would note that we are
only three weeks away from a 27 percent cut in Medicare
physician payments. We keep avoiding the topic of Sustainable
Growth Rate formulas in favor of the easier conversations about
delivery system reforms, around which we have much stronger
agreement. If we don't fix Medicare's physician payment
formula, we are going to lose the ability to collaborate with
the private sector because the physicians will abandon
Medicare.
We all share the blame here. I would like to blame it all
on the Republicans, but I can't. We are more than a decade away
into the debacle known as SGR reform. We have known this hasn't
worked for many years, but neither side has been able or
willing to come together to enact a permanent solution. And the
biggest reason is the cost.
The way the formula was designed, we would have over $300
billion to correct the formula. We have an opportunity. Members
on both sides of the aisle and the capital are agreeing to--
more members are agreeing to the idea of using the war
spending, overseas contingency operations, it is called, as a
financing mechanism to pay off the SGR program.
Without objection, I would like to make part of the record
a letter signed by most of America's physician professional
societies in support of this.
**Information Not Provided**
Chairman HERGER. Without objection.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am encouraged by this conversation and I am curious to
hear from our witnesses today. And I think most of them will
agree that SGR reform is the number one issue facing
physicians. We have got to get this issue behind us, and then
we will be able better to devote our attention to implementing
reforms, as discussed at today's hearing.
I would like to note also that to look at purely private
sector efforts is not exactly the answer. Mr. Nichols, I think,
will highlight the synergy between government initiatives to
change payments to promote quality efficiency in their private
sector counterparts.
Though many of my more conservative colleagues are loath to
hear this, the new health reform law is promoting public-
private initiatives to incentivize high-quality, efficient
care. Examples like the Challenge grants through the new Center
for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, accountable care
organizations, bundled payment initiates, are all public-
private partnerships, and they are moving ahead.
Their impact goes beyond Medicare, and we are testing
models we want to spread across payers. So I am excited about
the synergy that we are seeing between the private sector and
government, and I look forward to hearing from today's
witnesses and hope we can discover new opportunities for
collaboration.
Thanks very much.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Today we are joined by five witnesses, who are in the order
they will testify: Dr. Lewis Sandy, who is the senior vice
president of Clinical Advancement at UnitedHealth Group; Dr.
David Share, who is vice president of Value Partnerships at
Blue Cross Blue Shield in Michigan; Dr. Jack Lewin, who is the
chief executive officer of the American College of Cardiology;
Dr. John Bender, who is the president and CEO of the Miramont
Family Medicine in Fort Collins, Colorado; and Mr. Len Nichols,
who is a professor of Health Policy at George Mason University
and the director of the Center for Health Policy Research and
Ethics.
You will each have five minutes to present your oral
testimony. Your entire written statement will be made a part of
the record.
Dr. Sandy, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LEWIS G. SANDY, M.D., SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
CLINICAL ADVANCEMENT, UNITEDHEALTH GROUP, MINNETONKA, MINNESOTA

Dr. SANDY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member, and Members of the Committee, my name is Dr. Lewis
Sandy, and I am senior vice president for Clinical Advancement
at UnitedHealth Group, a diversified health and well-being
company based in Minnetonka, Minnesota. Our mission is to help
people live healthier lives.
I would like to highlight some of our innovative programs
in transparent physician performance assessment, practice
transformation through payment and delivery reform, and the
importance of aligned incentives, all of which help the
millions of Americans we serve. I thank you for the opportunity
to testify this morning.
Private sector innovations can be applied to the
modernization of public programs such as Medicare. Medicare
need not start from scratch nor go it alone. By working with
and learning from private sector innovations, public programs
can more rapidly be modernized to meet the needs of those they
serve.
For example, we are implementing a large-scale transparent
performance assessment program that provides feedback to both
physicians and to consumers, the UnitedHealth Premium
Designation Program. Anyone inside health care knows there are
differences in quality. Just ask a doctor or a nurse. But how
are doctors to know how their practices compare? How are
patients to know? And how can more information help both?
The premium program uses the extensive data we have from
claims and other administrative data sources and analyzes care
patterns using sophisticated analytics. We evaluate physician
performance on quality and efficient across 21 different areas,
including primary care and specialties such as cardiology and
orthopedics. Quality is measured first, and only those
physicians who meet or exceed quality benchmarks are then
evaluated for cost efficiency.
The measures we use are based on national standards, and
incorporate feedback and guidance from specialty societies and
practicing physicians. We display the results in summary form
on our consumer websites to inform their health care decisions,
and we provide physicians we detailed information to support
their quality improvement.
This program includes now nearly 250,000 physicians in 41
states, and through this program we know that quality and
efficiency variations are significant and that they matter.
Cardiologists, for example, who earn our quality designation
have 55 percent fewer redo procedures and 55 percent lower
complication rates for stent placement procedures. Orthopedic
surgeons who earn a quality designation have 46 percent fewer
redo procedures and a 62 percent lower complication rate for
knee arthroscopy. And the overall incremental savings between a
premium-designated quality and efficient physician and a non-
designated physician is 14 percent.
This program demonstrates that large-scale, transparent
performance assessment can be done today, and that the
information helps physicians and patients. But we have also
learned that information alone will not achieve transformation
and higher levels of system performance.
Thus we have also launched practice transformation programs
and payment and delivery reforms, working again in
collaboration with physicians and hospitals, that combine
support for delivery system improvement with aligned
incentives.
We currently are piloting patient-centered medical home
programs in 13 states, and we are developing 8 to 12
accountable care organization projects this year across diverse
communities that help care providers modernize the way they
deliver care.
These are promising payment and delivery reforms, but even
these are not enough. Another key component is consumer
empowerment and activity, coupled with aligned incentives. For
example, we developed an incentive-based diabetes health plan
to help patients with diabetes stay healthy and adhere to their
physician's recommended care plan.
Many lessons from our experiences can be applied to public
programs.
First, expert physician and specialist society
collaboration is critical in developing appropriate measures
for quality, efficiency, patient safety, and other dimensions
of performance, and these measures in the measurement program
must be fully transparent.
Second, this information must be presented in actionable
format and with aligned incentives. Information alone, while
helpful, is unlikely to move the needle.
Third, financial incentives must be significant and must
come from savings achieved from ongoing improvements in
delivery system efficiency.
Fourth, new models of care, new roles in information
technology support, are needed for true transformation. For
example, embedded nurse care managers in our patient-centered
medical home programs provide vital support for care
transitions, patient education, and coordination.
And fifth, programs such as value-based benefit designs can
help people become more activated and involved in their own
care.
In conclusion, stakeholders must work together to develop
an integrated, comprehensive approach to transform care
delivery.
Thank you for the opportunity to share our experience with
the committee. I look forward to your questions and comments.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sandy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Share, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF DAVID SHARE, M.D., MPH, VICE PRESIDENT, VALUE
PARTNERSHIPS, BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD MICHIGAN (BCBSM), DETROIT,
MICHIGAN

Dr. SHARE. Thank you, Chairman Herger, Congressman Stark,
and Members of the Subcommittee for inviting me to participate
in your discussion about private payers' efforts to improve
provider performance.
I am Dr. David Share, vice president of Value Partnerships
at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, which is a nonprofit
insurer with 4.3 million members. It is one of the 38 Blue
Cross Blue Shield plans covering nearly 100 million people in
every county and zip code in the country.
Decades of private payer and government efforts have fallen
short of ensuring that people have ready access to affordable,
effective, high-quality care. In 2004, BCBSM wiped the slate
clean and began a dialogue with physician leaders aimed at
creating a common vision of a high-performing health system and
an incentive program to help realize it.
A key learning was that imposing solutions on providers is
an extrinsic motivation, with providers putting half of their
creative energy into doing an end run around new expectations
and resisting meaningful change. In contrast, harnessing
intrinsic motivation and professionalism inspires physicians to
devote the full measure of their creative energy to
transforming the systems they use and the results they achieve.
In 2004, the Physician Group Incentive Program, or PGIP,
arose out of these discussions based on communities of
caregivers with shared responsibility for an identified
population of patients, with the aim of enhancing community
well-being and, in doing so, relying on shared information
systems, shared care processes, and shared responsibility for
outcomes at a population level, all guided by the patient-
centered medical home model.
Other requirements for success including physicians forming
organizations with effective leadership, administrative and
technical support, tools to help in reengineering systems of
care, and having both latitude and autonomy. Nearly 15,000
physicians in PGIP serve 2 million Blue members and 5 million
Michigan residents.
The participants include about 6,000 primary care
physicians in over 90 physician organizations comprised of over
4,000 physician practices, and only two of these are integrated
delivery systems, with the vast majority being one to four
physician practices, most of those being in private practice.
There are 780 patient-centered medical home-designated
practices, with another 3,000 actively working to achieve that
status.
In response to an organized system of care program aimed at
aligning and integrating primary care physicians, specialists,
and facilities, 40 nascent organized systems of care have been
established. In contrast, the 700 pages of the ACO regulations
have inspired three prospective Michigan pioneer ACO
applicants.
A culture of cooperation has emerged. At quarterly
meetings, 350 physician organization leaders discuss best
practices and common challenges; and between meetings, regional
learning collaboratives delve more deeply. These collaborative
relationships and physician's leadership role have generated
palpable enthusiasm and a full sense of ownership of the
program and its goals across the state.
We have transformed fee-for-service payment into a fee-for-
value approach, with all fee increases for primary care and
specialty physicians now dependent on system transformation and
population performance. I want to emphasize: Payment is a tool,
not a solution. Without full engagement of physicians, a focus
on community, and an explicit vision and purpose, any payment
method will fall short and can be misused.
Fee for service isn't the problem, and global payment isn't
necessarily the solution. We have established an annual
incentive pool of $110 million, which rewards physician
organizations for modernizing systems of care and optimizing
performance. There are over 30 distinct initiatives available
to these physician organizations, which keeps them constantly
modernizing at the edges of their individual current
capabilities. The more ambitious they are, the more resources
are made available to them.
Physicians in the patient-centered medical home-designated
can earn up to a 20 percent increase in office visit fees,
focusing on relationship-based care, not procedures. Physicians
also can receive additional fee-for-service payments for
chronic illness care management services. And starting in 2012,
hospitals' payment will be tie-barred to population-level
performance, effectively aligning their incentives with those
of physicians.
Early results are compelling, with a 22 percent lower rate
of admission for potentially avoidable conditions, 10 percent
lower ER use, 8 percent lower radiology use, and overall, a 2.2
percent total cost trend or increase for the Blue PPO products.
The physician group incentive program, with its focus on
partnership, system transformation, population management, and
fee-for-service payment, has moved Michigan from procedure-
based care to relationship-based care and from volume to value.
I appreciate your interest and attention, and look forward
to the discussion. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Share follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Lewin is recognized.

STATEMENT OF JACK LEWIN, M.D., CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Dr. LEWIN. Thank you, Chairman Herger and Ranking Member
Stark and----
Chairman HERGER. If you can hit your mike button, please.
Dr. LEWIN. Oh, yes. Thank you. There we go. Thank you,
Chairman Herger, Ranking Member Stark, and committee members. I
am Dr. Jack Lewin, representing the American College of
Cardiology, 40,000 cardiologists, advanced practice nurses,
pharmacists, and other clinicians.
Our purpose is to transform cardiovascular care and improve
heart health, and we are doing that. In the last 10 years we
have had a 30 percent reduction in morbidity and mortality
across cardiovascular care in the United States. And the
science in the pipeline is amazing. We are soon going to be
replacing aortic valves without cracking the chest. We have got
stem cell programs coming, miracle drugs in the pipeline. But
the costs are out of control.
For 30 years, with the American Heart Association, the ACC
has been developing guidelines and performance measures to
bring better science to the point of care. Recently we have
developed appropriate use criteria, new tools for diagnostic
imaging, and for procedures that actually improve quality and
lower cost at the same time.
This isn't cookbook medicine. Clinical judgment is still
important. But getting science to the point of care more
effectively improves quality and improves care for patients,
and lowers costs. That is what is important. And physicians
need to lead these processes.
Now, how does it work? Well, the clinical tools we have
developed that actually bring science to the point of care
include the national cardiovascular data registries. These are
six hospital registries and one called Pinnacle, which is an
outpatient register. Together, we have 20 million patient
records, and we are providing outcomes results to hospitals and
doctors all across America in cardiovascular care. And it is
making a difference.
We have also developed a tool called FOCUS, which helps at
the point of care--and it can be a mobile app--that helps
choose the right image among a bewildering array of new
technologies in these regards that can get the right test the
first time and save significant dollars.
So going forward, we need payment reforms, with incentives,
linked to these kinds of tools to make the kind of changes
needed. In the testimony, you will see that in Wisconsin, we
have a program called Safe Care, applying all these tools
across a large number of medical groups and hospitals to really
achieve some of these results. A similar program is going to
happen in Florida under Safe Care.
We have got a clinical decision support system using the
FOCUS tool to improve the appropriateness of imaging that is
now across the entire State of Delaware. Very exciting. And the
Cardiovascular Performance Improvement Program, where we work
with some of the insurance partners here like United, Blue
Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, and others, actually rewards
doctors for better outcomes and better performance. So we are
moving in the right direction.
Is there any evidence that this can work, that these kinds
of things actually reduce cost and improve quality? Let me tell
you about the Door to Balloon Program. This is a program to
speed up the treatment of heart attack, ``Door'' being the door
to the emergency room, ``Balloon'' being angioplasty and stents
to relieve the obstructed coronary artery in a serious kind of
heart attack called a STEMI.
Using an educational program and our data in the United
States, we have taken the time it took to treat a heart attack,
averaging over two hours, down to what science tells us is
necessary, under 90 minutes, or even better, under 60 minutes.
Now, three years later, using this Door to Balloon Program,
more than 90 percent of U.S. hospitals are under 90 minutes and
half are under 60 minutes.
Here is the point. We have reduced the length of stay from
five to three days, on average. We have reduced the cost by 30
percent. This is over 4- to $5 billion a year. This is
important.
So we have even talked about a big idea of actually putting
a challenge out to hospitals and cardiologists across the
country to say, if you can reduce Medicare costs by 10 percent
over 10 years--by the way, that would be about $300 billion--
why don't we split the difference between the hospitals,
doctors, and Medicare so that people can build these systems
and make this happen. Imagine that kind of a win/win/win for
patients and for doctors.
The conclusion for me would be to say that providing
physicians and other health care providers with data on their
performance and tools to improve their performance is going to
improve quality and lower costs. To do this, to get it done,
Medicare and private payers have got to encourage new
incentives through the development of widespread use of
clinical data registries that allow tracking and improvement of
care systemically, along with payment reforms and incentives.
Put those two together and we are going to see costs go down,
quality go up. And we have got examples of it today.
Thanks for the opportunity to speak about several of these
exciting improvement collaborations underway in cardiology, and
we look forward to working with you to help solve America's
problems in health care costs at the same time we improve
patient care quality. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lewin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Bender is recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN L. BENDER, M.D., PRESIDENT AND CEO, MIRAMONT
FAMILY MEDICINE, FORT COLLINS, COLORADO

Dr. BENDER. Thank you, Chairman Herger and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee on Health. I am Dr. John Bender. I
am a family physician in Fort Collins, Colorado, and I am CEO
of Miramont Family Medicine, which is a network of patient-
centered medical homes.
Now, in 2002, my wife Therese and I moved back to Larimer
County, where we were from, and we purchased one of the oldest
practices in Fort Collins, Colorado. They had been there for
over 40 years, and were basically doing things the same as they
had in the 1970s. They left me one computer and one employee.
That was 10 years ago.
Today we have over 50 employees, 14 providers, including 8
physicians; we have over 80 computers and a centralized data
center, serving four different parts of our state. And we have
about 27,000 patients.
Now, during this same period of time in Larimer County, 34
primary care physicians closed their doors or stopped providing
primary care services. Eight of these were actual bankruptcies.
And yet at the same time, we saw a doubling in the number of
emergency room beds and an increase by the number of emergency
room physicians by 50 percent, suggesting that if patients
didn't have a patient-centered medical home like myself, they
were going to the emergency room at a later stage of their
illness for a higher cost, increasing health care premiums for
everyone across the state.
Now, how is it that Miramont was able to double in size,
grow at 34 percent per year to the size that we achieved, in
this economy while other family physicians were saying, I give
up, and walking away? Well, part of it was, in 2007, we made
the conscious decision that we were no longer going to just
focus on volume.
We were going to make sure that we had a high-quality
product that was safe and efficient, and believed that if we
built the best product in the marketplace, that consumers would
vote with their feet and we would be able to maintain our
solvency--because, after all, I didn't want to be the 35th
practice to close or the ninth physician to bankrupt.
So we pursued NCQA patient-centered medical home
recognition. That is the National Committee of Quality
Assurance. We achieved level 3, which is the highest level of
patient-centered medical home. It basically meant that we,
after a six-month audit period, were able to show improvements
in our work flow and the way we retooled things so that we
could deliver team-approached care.
We also had, for example, a patient portal, where patients
could go online, look up their labs, see their clinic record.
They could send me a HIPAA-compliant email, or they could
schedule appointments. And we also conducted care coordination
through the transitions of care, as people went from hospitals
to nursing homes, et cetera.
Our next big break came in 2008 with the multi-payer
patient-centered medical home pilot. This was the brainchild of
Dr. Paul Grundy and others at IBM, who had compelled the top
payers in the United States, WellPoint, UnitedHealth Group,
CIGNA, Aetna, and Humana, to test the patient-centered medical
home model. It was based on some of the beliefs and work that
Dr. Barbara Starfield had published 10 years earlier,
suggesting that if we put an emphasis on primary care, we could
bend the health cost curve.
So 17 pilots were selected. Miramont was one of them. It
was convened under a group called the Health TeamWorks, and it
was basically an alliance of payers, including insurers,
employers, and physicians. We agreed on the quality metrics
that we were going to track to show improvement on, and we also
agreed on a three-tiered payment system based on fee-for-
service, per-member-per-month fees, and pay for performance.
Now, fee-for-service was included, and I will tell you why.
There was an understanding that volumes in primary care were
actually too low, and if we were going to pull people out of
emergency rooms and urgent care and other high-cost centers, we
would have to incentivize primary care physicians in order to
help them to build the capacity to see the increased volumes.
Per-member-per-month fees ensured that I was able to
provide what was other non-revenue-generating activity such as
having a diabetic nurse educator in-house, or a psychologist,
and doing care coordination.
Then finally, pay-for-performance bonuses made certain that
we just didn't report our metrics to a centralized data
registry, but we were actually working to try to reach certain
target goals to help improve our delivery of evidence-based
medicine.
The results are in, and they are fabulous. UnitedHealth
Group has told us that Miramont reduced hospital readmission
rates by 83 percent compared with our peers. A year ago, the
State Medicaid program joined the pilot, and they said that we
have an ER utilization rate that is a negative 219 percent--
negative 219 percent--compared with our peers.
So I call on the Subcommittee on Health of the Ways and
Means Committee of the House of Representatives to compel the
Department of Health and Human Services to immediately deploy
the patient-centered medical home payment standard nationally
in order to conserve the strength of the primary care
workforce, in order to increase the quality of health care
delivered to entitlement beneficiaries, and to also reverse the
escalating costs that are burdening the American taxpayer by
using a payment method, a payment standard, that has been
proven and is now being adopted in the private sector.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bender follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Nichols is recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF LEN M. NICHOLS, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR HEALTH POLICY
RESEARCH AND ETHICS, FAIRFAX, VIRGINIA

Mr. NICHOLS. Thank you, Chairman Herger. Thank you, Ranking
Member Stark, and other Members of the Committee and
subcommittee. I am honored to offer my thoughts on incentive
realignment today.
My name is Len Nichols. I am a health economist. I direct
the Center for Health Policy Research and Ethics at George
Mason University. I am also the editor-in-chief of a new online
journal, the Community on Payment Innovation, jointly sponsored
by the ACC and the American Journal of Managed Care, which, by
the way, has already published a report by colleagues of Dr.
Share on his innovative PGIP program. I am on the board of the
NCQA, which devised the patient-centered medical home criteria
Dr. Bender just spoke about. And I was recently selected as the
innovation advisor to CMS.
But I do want to make crystal clear at the outset my
written testimony and spoken views are mine and mine alone. I
do not speak for any organization, public or private, nor for
any other person, living or dead.
Let me start with some good news. Health care stakeholders
around the country get it, and they are responding to the
incentive realignment signals now embedded in the Affordable
Care Act. They are devising private initiatives, some of which
you have just heard about; but even more importantly, they are
devising public-private partnerships that are our best hope for
improving health, improving care, and lowering costs for all of
us over time.
It seems to me we face two broad alternative pathways to
achieve our goals. One path entails severely reducing coverage,
eligibility, and prices paid in public programs, or even
eliminating them altogether. In other words, we could cut our
way to fiscal balance, and in so doing, reduce access to care
for millions of Americans. I fear this pathway would likely
fail, for the ensuing cost shift to the private sector would
drive up premiums and cost us yet more high-wage jobs in a
never-ending cycle of decline.
Alternatively, we could align incentives so thoroughly that
we actually link the self-interest of clinicians with our
common interest in cost growth reduction and quality
improvement while covering all Americans. This is by far the
most humane way to our shared objective. Quite simply, we need
value-based payment systems where value has three dimensions:
clinical quality, patient experience, and efficiency.
I will emphasize three points. Number one: While fee-for-
service is part of the problem, in the real world fee-for-
service is also ubiquitous and therefore it cannot be
jettisoned overnight. We must develop transition business
models to enable clinician groups to move from fee-for-service
alone to more sustainable incentive structures without going
bankrupt.
Point number two: The ACA has signaled to the country that
business as usual is over, and business as usual is over
because we can't afford it. Every one of the initiatives you
have heard about today and that Karen Ignagni of AHIP reported
on a fascinating conference in October, referenced in my
written statement. Patient-centered medical homes, bundling,
accountable care organizations, or organized systems of care in
Dr. Share's terminology, all have a conceptual counterpart in
the ACA.
The growing private sector interest in care innovation
emerging from the CMMI is the proof that ideas and efforts in
the public and private sector are converging, which is
extremely good news because every single clinician I have ever
met, and I am old enough to have met quite a few, wants one set
of incentives, one set of quality metrics from payers, one set
of patient acuity adjusters, rather than the Byzantine plethora
they labor under today.
Number three: Neither private nor public sector payers can
do this by themselves. Private payers sometimes need public
payers to help with local provider market power, and as Dr.
Sandy said, public payers can benefit from adopting the supple
nuance with which private payers tailor incentives for
different marketplaces.
I will close with three observations that I think are
relevant. As an editor-in-chief focused on payment innovation,
I have learned that many practicing physicians are skeptical of
new payment models that don't have quality or patient acuity
components.
Second, as an informal advisor to three different
applications to the recent Innovation Challenge grant
initiative from CMMI, I saw the immense value of having a
vision of a community health system. In each case, leadership
originated in a different place--a consumer-oriented health
system agency in one case, a local nonprofit health plan with a
history of collaboration in another, a forward-thinking single
specialty group armed with data and a commitment to quality.
But in each case, local employers, hospitals, plans, and of
course, other clinicians and community voices we recruited, in
two cases including the state Medicaid program, until by the
end only Medicare had not yet joined these promising local
incentive arrangements that are squarely aimed at a sustainable
version of the three-part aim. The point of the applications
and this initiative is to entice Medicare to join the party
that the private sector devises, and others like it.
Finally, as a participant in CMMI's new Innovation Advisors
program, I recently spent two and a half days in a hotel near
Baltimore with 72 of my new best friends. CMMI hopes to deepen
our skills in innovation and quality improvement while we bring
them new ideas from the real world outside the Beltway. But the
best part of this was in seeing the energy and talent from
across the country that is now committed to achieving the
three-part aim in a wide array of institutions and settings.
I would suggest to you that the Innovation Advisors program
is proof that there is now broad recognition that top-down
payment and delivery changes will not work, that frontline
clinicians and managers and nurses and plans and patients all
have to work out the details that will work for them where they
live and work, and that we all need all the tools we can
muster, from the public sector, the private sector, the recent
reform law, and the God we worship in our own ways, to get this
done in time for our health care system and our country.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nichols follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Sandy, I understand that your company's network
includes approximately 650,000 physicians, a number nearly
equal to the number of doctors who participate in Medicare. As
your quality and efficiency program touches many of these
physicians, and considering that other private payers have
similar programs, would you say that a good number of Medicare
participating physicians have exposure to a program such as
yours?
Dr. SANDY. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. We do have close
to 650,000 physicians and other health care professionals,
including nurses, chiropractors, mental health workers, and so
on in our broad network across the country. The premium program
that I mentioned in my testimony encompasses, at current scale
and scope, close to 250,000 physicians across 21 different
specialty areas of medicine.
So given that scope, I don't know the exact answer, but I
would venture to say that the vast majority of those
physicians, aside from those that don't typically take care of
Medicare patients such as pediatricians, have had exposure to
our program and probably similar programs by others in the
private sector, and those physicians also take care of Medicare
beneficiaries.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Share, the number of Michigan physicians participating
in your program is very impressive, and that they group
together in the physician organization is an interesting
feature. As someone who represents a very rural district in
Northern California, I know it has always been a difficult
challenge to develop integrated delivery systems in rural
areas. Can you describe the level of physician participation in
the rural or more remote parts of Michigan as well as the size
of organizations in those areas?
Dr. SHARE. Certainly. The incentive program that we have is
intentionally designed to be inclusive of both sophisticated,
vertically integrated delivery systems and small one- and two-
physician practices, and also to get all of them, regardless of
their size and structure, to come together collectively to
share responsibility for a population in common.
So there are physician organizations in nearly every county
in the state, and there are many, many rural physicians who are
involved in these physician organizations. Some of them,
interestingly, have come together under an umbrella
organization run by the state medical society that provides
comprehensive administrative and technical structure to support
the smaller practices who join in confederations of private
practices, one? and two-person doctor offices, so that they
don't have to create the analytic infrastructure and the
information systems all by themselves.
This has empowered them to be full partners in this
program, equally engaged, equally exciting. There are
individual physicians in one-person offices who have stunning
stories to tell about how they have transformed their practice,
including way up in the upper reaches, far reaches of the Upper
Peninsula.
So I think this program has touched nearly every community
and every type of practice, including rural practices,
absolutely.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. That is exciting.
Dr. Bender, your story of transformation is remarkable. You
note that your practice made these investments without regard
to health care overhaul and without regard to SGR because these
were things you couldn't control. You also note that it would
take other small practices two years or less to complete such
transformation.
What advice would you offer to other physicians who
struggle to make major practice changes, given the constant
pressure placed on them by the reimbursement system?
Dr. BENDER. Well, thank you, Chairman Herger. They need two
things, leadership and courage. Leadership means, to get
involved in a patient-centered medical home, they have to tell
their staff, hey, we are going to do this. They have to believe
in it. The group has to eat, sleep, and drink the model.
This requires delegation. I couldn't have done this without
the superior HR structure that we have at Miramont, with
excellent employees who are committed to this process. Because
it is brain damage. It is very difficult to go through change.
People hate change, but they love progress, and to get to the
point where we are excited about what is new at Miramont as
opposed to, my goodness, we are doing thing differently.
The other part, courage: Physicians are scared. They don't
know what is going to happen with the health care overhaul.
They are worried about regulations, malpractice, et cetera, et
cetera, SGR threats. And really what I tell them is, the
opposite of careless is not always--or, I am sorry, the
opposite of cautious is not always careless, but sometimes the
opposite of cautious is courage.
Are they choosing not to do it just because they think that
it is going to be careless? Or are they choosing not to do it
because they are afraid?
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Stark is recognized.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for participating with us today.
Mr. Nichols, you talked about why public and private payers
must work together to align incentives. So while this hearing
has been informative, it seems to me that the focus just on
private sector initiatives misses a larger picture. Could you
talk some more about the need to combine the public and private
sectors to see if we can get those stars in alignment?
Mr. NICHOLS. Be glad to, Congressman Stark. Basically, the
simple reason they have to cooperate is because most clinicians
treat all kinds of patients. And it turns out in lots of
specialty cases and in some locales, a majority of a
clinician's patients might be public, so they are the biggest
market share. They are typically the biggest market share for
hospitals, and they are often also so for specialists,
including cardiology, I might point out.
So if you don't get the sectors aligned, if you don't get
the incentives aligned, clinicians are going to be both
confused and, as Dr. Bender might say, unhappy about it. And so
the best way to transform patient care is to get them aligned.
That does not mean they all have to pay the exact same
level. I certainly believe in the private enterprise system. I
certainly believe in competition. But I also think it makes
sense for the clinicians to face the very same set of
incentives, the very same set of feedback loops, the very same
set of metrics.
The very idea that United would have one set of metrics and
Aetna a different one and CIGNA a third and Medicare a fourth
and Medicaid and yada yada yada--by the end of the day, what is
the clinician going to do? What they think is best independent
of what they are being paid by.
So the smartest thing to do is to get the incentives
aligned. Now, there are lots of reasons that is difficult to
do, but there are about 300 million reasons it is a good idea
to do as soon as possible.
Mr. STARK. Thank you. Also, it is my understanding that we
are probably the only industrialized nation that does not use a
comparative effectiveness measure. And I hasten to point out
that all the comparative effectiveness programs, whether they
are for pharmaceuticals or medical procedures, don't include
cost. And of course, there is this--for some reason; I think it
is mostly political fodder, but people are suggesting that
using comparative effectiveness would lead to rationing.
I wondered, both Dr. Sandy and Dr. Share, what is your
reaction to that? Comparative effectiveness, if you had that
available to you across the board--some professions or
segments, thoracic surgeons, for instance, have done their own.
For about five or seven years, they have collected data on
every procedure that every member of the club or college,
whatever you call it, has provided to a patient, and the
outcome, and they have tracked the patients. But that is a
small group in the firmament of medical providers.
What do you think about the rationing issue?
Dr. SANDY. Well, thank you, Congressman Stark. The comment
I would say around comparative effectiveness research is, it is
absolutely essential that there be investments in understanding
of the differences in clinical effectiveness between different
treatments so that physicians can have the best science and
information to help inform the choices in their care, and that
patients then can have that information as well so that they
can make their informed choices.
I think what I really would underscore and echo and support
is the phrase that Dr. Lewin laid out. He used the term
bringing science to the point of care, and I would strongly
support that. And I think organizations such as the American
College of Cardiology, the Society for Thoracic Surgery that
you mentioned, these medical specialty societies are really at
the forefront of doing that.
One of the things that in my opinion would be helpful is
that these societies are at the forefront, but there are other
societies that would like to move in this direction to develop
detailed clinical registry information, to help inform the
physicians that are part of that specialty area to collect that
information. That has been a challenge.
It is gratifying--there is a fledgling effort, by the way,
called the NQRN, the National Quality Registry Network, a
multi-stakeholder coalition, to advance this frontier. And we
think that would be a very important development to support.
Mr. STARK. If I may just have another second, Mr. Chairman,
wouldn't the requirement for keeping electronic records, which
now everybody is supposed to do, help toward building this
comparative effectiveness study?
Dr. SANDY. Well, again, one of the things that your
question points out is the issue of the challenges of
administrative simplification and the fact that many physicians
do not have electronic health records. While electronic health
records sometimes aren't architected to collect detailed
information, it is an important start to help promote that kind
of data collection for the purposes that I have outlined.
Mr. STARK. Thank you.
Dr. SHARE. Mr. Chairman, could I just add a brief note in
response to Mr. Stark's question?
Chairman HERGER. Very quickly.
Dr. SHARE. Yes. So we have actually embarked on a very
ambitious approach to empowering the provider community, in the
spirit of our partnership approach, with the workings of
comparative effectiveness research, putting them into the hands
of the provider community.
We have 17 distinct hospital-based, multi-institutional,
data registry-driven, collaborative quality improvement
programs that have dramatically decreased the rate of mortality
and morbidity, and saved money while doing so. And we are now
in the process of linking claims data to the quality data
across the state to empower CFOs, CEOs, and physician leaders
to use that integrated data set to improve value in hospital
care.
Mr. STARK. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Johnson is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Share, it is interesting to learn the improvements you
are making in Michigan. Do you ever talk to Blue Cross in
Dallas?
Dr. SHARE. Do we talk to Blue Cross in Dallas? We talk to
the Health Care Service Corporation, which I believe is a
nonprofit. It is a Blue licensee, so it is a Blue plan. And it
is multi-state. It is in Texas, Illinois, and I am not sure
where else.
We have talked to them a good bit about this collaborative
quality improvement approach using comparative effectiveness
research in daily practice across an entire state, and they are
beginning to adopt that model. We haven't talked to them about
our physician group incentive program yet.
Mr. JOHNSON. So the Blues aren't united across the country?
Dr. SHARE. The Blues are united across the country in terms
of having really rich relationships at the local and regional
level with the provider community, and each developing payment
transformation and practice transformation approaches that fit
the needs and the circumstances of those communities. And we
share experience and knowledge about what works across the Blue
association.
We are now actually working towards developing a set of
tiered incentive programs, tiered in the sense of benefits
being--the out-of-pocket costs for members being lower if you
are using a medical home doctor, for example, to try and bring
our approaches into more alignment while still respecting local
circumstances.
Mr. JOHNSON. And what are your ideas? Do you all have some
innovations that you are trying to share with Medicare?
Dr. SHARE. We are actually partnering with Medicare in the
context of the advanced medical home demonstration project. And
in keeping with Mr. Nichols' comments, we have aligned
incentives where we have 480 of our patient-centered medical
home-designated practices involved in an incentive program that
includes Medicare and Medicaid funding as well as Blue Cross
funding.
It has actually significantly enhanced the focus on a
common set of quality measures, a common set of efficiency
measures, and a common approach to care management across all
of these 480 practices. So working with CMS in this way,
bringing them into our regional innovative approach, has
amplified what we are able to do.
As an example, though, of how sometimes CMS has a bit of a
hard time fully embracing and trusting a local or regional
effort, one of our approaches is to provide the incentive
payments to the physician organization, as I mentioned, for
their collective success at achieving value for a population of
patients. The physician organization can then invest the money
in better care management systems, information systems, et
cetera. CMS has required that its incentive money must be paid
80 percent to the individual medical home practices. That makes
it harder for them to band together and create common systems
with aggregated resources.
So tremendous opportunities to partner with CMS. More
opportunity, I think, to do so in ways that aren't
constraining, that free the local community to do its best.
Mr. JOHNSON. Yes. But what I am hearing you saying is CMS
isn't listening to you.
Dr. SHARE. No, they listen. They are an active partner, and
they are trying to think through the best way to do it also.
And as a partner, they naturally have an instinct to say, well,
we really think it will be best if we tested an incentive
models, where the doctors get reimbursement or an incentive
payment made directly to them. So that is important to us. We
didn't come to yes on exactly how approach that.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you.
Dr. Lewin, you know, as we explore new systems for Medicare
physician payment, in your experience what are some of the key
points we need to keep in mind? And what does Congress need to
do to apply these programs to Medicare?
Dr. LEWIN. Well, the faster Congress really moves forward
with payment incentives, I think we will see progress. We know
that we have to be able to measure our way to success, so we do
need registries. And registries work with electronic health
records.
So you have the electronic health record; a registry tracks
a whole set of conditions and gives feedback to the hospitals
and the doctors in terms of how they are doing so that they can
begin to compete with themselves and with their peers on
producing better and better results. Ultimately that is going
to get reported back to consumers so that people will be able
to choose where they get their health care based on improved
outcomes.
The extent to which Medicare can move more swiftly to
payment reforms, I think we would see progress there. I love
the CMMI grant program, but we will probably take three years
or four years before we can see the results of those programs
and apply them. Meanwhile, our deficit keeps increasing as a
nation.
I would hope that we would begin to do some national
demonstration projects coming right up in 2013 that would split
the difference of savings between Medicare and the hospital and
physician partners. So if we end up ferreting out unnecessary
stents and unnecessary defibrillators, or choosing the right
image and reducing the cost of imaging, and reducing the number
of admissions and readmissions to hospitals by improving the
treatment of heart failure--that is going to reduce the income
to the hospitals. Right? Because they won't have as many
admissions. They won't have as many procedures and images.
So to help offset that, splitting the savings between
Medicare and the provider community of doctors and hospitals is
a way you could get people to move much faster. But we would
need to require that while they are doing that, they are
measuring how much progress they are making in a way that is
effective and scientifically valid, and report that back so
that we can see what we are doing.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. JOHNSON. Thank you, sir.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Thompson from California is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding the hearing.
I would like to just piggyback on something that the
chairman and the ranking member both spoke on, and that is the
importance of fixing the SGR program. I have got to tell you,
in my district that is what I hear about most--from the medical
profession, from patients, people on Medicare.
They have long forgotten all the manufactured crisis that
was sent out on the talking points for the health care reform
stuff. They want to make sure that they are going to get paid
for the medical services that they provide, and Medicare
patients want to make sure they are going to have a doctor to
go to. And it stops right about there.
I have not had one Medicare person stop me on the street
and say, hey, I think electronic records are good, bad, or
otherwise; the Affordable Care Act is doing this, that, or the
other thing. But the SGR is critically important, and I don't
think it is enough to say if the Senate Democrats didn't do
this or the House Republicans didn't do that. We have dropped
the ball on this thing.
I think Mr. Stark nailed it when he said that it is the
cost, $300 billion to fix this thing. Well, the bad news is if
we wait another five years, it is over $600 billion. And I
applaud my colleague and ranking member for raising a proposal
as to how it can be paid for.
We need to come together as Members of Congress, party
stripe notwithstanding, and figure out how we come up with the
dollars to fix this because right now--Mr. Nichols talked about
the importance of partnerships. This is not a partnership. It
is not happening. The Congress is not doing its fair share. If
you use the breakfast analogy, we are bringing the eggs. And
that is just not good enough, and I think we need to move
quickly on that.
Mr. Nichols, on the Affordable Care Act, this has in fact
moved towards--some of these programs have moved towards
payment reforms. And I think that is an important part of this
bill on the part of a lot of us, and so I am glad to see this
happening.
Can you talk about how the ACA reforms are moving private
sector providers to develop and explore new forms of health
care delivery that encourage efficient delivery and quality
care?
Mr. NICHOLS. I would be glad to, Congressman Thompson, and
let me start with the program which I think is the most
comprehensive, and that is the Comprehensive Primary Care
Initiative, which you may know was actually offered to health
plans so that they would indeed apply for the grant.
Then, once selected, what they are looking for is five to
seven markets around the country where they have a sufficient
market share to really reach a large number of practices. And
they will go back and jointly recruit physician practices to
join the program, to join the party, and to devise payment
arrangements that will work for those local communities.
As every member of this panel has said to you, America is a
big old diverse country. The idea that we can make one set of
rules apply everywhere is just a little bit, well, last
century. So here we are, and what is great about CPCI is indeed
you are getting the plans and the government to work together
to find a way to get to exactly what Dr. Share was talking
about, what makes it work in Michigan versus Virginia versus
California. That is among the more interesting ones.
But I also want to emphasize the most recent innovation
challenge grant, which basically was an open-ended invitation
to provider groups, plans, people around the country. And while
CMMI has not released the final numbers that have come in on
applications because the grants have not been made, I know,
from the people that I know who applied, very large numbers of
people were very interested in this program--I mean thousands
around the country. And we know this because when you apply,
you get an email back that says, you are the 400-whatever.
So over 6,000 people exhibited letters of interest. Over
2,000, we think, actually submitted proposals. That tells you
something about the scale of people around the country who are
hungry to do exactly what Dr. Bender talked about, and that is,
how do you make incentives work where we are? And they are
trying to tell the government, this is the best way to work for
us. I can think of no better way to encourage the kind of
partnership we all agree on.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you.
Dr. Share, one of the programs, the multi-payer advanced
primary care initiative--and I think Blue Cross Blue Shield in
Michigan is part of that--do you agree with CMS that CMS can be
a catalyst in increased innovation in a health care system? And
does this participation in this program lend to that?
Dr. SHARE. Yes, I do agree. As it happens, in Michigan--and
by the way, I mentioned earlier, we have 480 medical home
practices in the demonstration project, which represent over
half of the medical home practices in the eight states in the
demo nationally--we actually had our physician group incentive
program several years before in place, so we had a structure.
We had engagement. We had made tremendous strides in developing
medical homes and improving performance.
So in our context, CMS came in and actively partnered with
us, piggybacking on the work, building on the foundation we had
laid. In other communities, they are beginning. They are
starting with 10 medical home practices, with intention to grow
that number. And the influx of support and focused attention
and commonality of measurement approach by CMS has really jump-
started their effort, has amplified their interest and their
ability.
So I think in different communities it will play out
differently. But there is no question the answer is yes.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Kind is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this very important hearing. Again, we have an
excellent panel and your testimony here today is very
appreciate and quite inspirational.
I mean, what I have heard you in your testimony, reading
through your written submission as well, it is hard to find any
inconsistency in what is happening in the private world versus
what reforms are being advocated in the Affordable Care Act.
And Dr. Nichols, I couldn't agree with you more. There has to
be a convergence or harmony in delivery system and essentially
payment reform between both the private and the public spheres
or it is not going to work very well.
I am proud that I hail from a state, Wisconsin, that seems
to be out ahead of the cost curve. And Dr. Lewin, I am going to
go to you shortly here to talk about the Smart Care project
that you have submitted to CMMI for an update on that.
But you look at certain models of care that are proving
very effective, from the Mayo system to Gundersen, to
Marshfield, to Aurora, to Dean, to Theta Care--highly
integrated, coordinated, patient-focused, which provide models
of where we need to drive the health care delivery system, and
hopefully, ultimately--and I think this is going to be the
verdict on any type of health care reform in this country--the
payment reform that is desperately needed.
We have got direct control over Medicare, and I would love
to see fee-for-service die as quickly as possible so we can get
to a value- or quality-based reimbursement system, which sounds
to me what you guys are all working on right now with the type
of initiatives and the type of projects and demonstrations that
you are involved in.
Dr. Lewin mentioned the Smart Care project in Wisconsin.
You are teaming up with the Mayo System of La Crosse, my
hometown, but also UW Health Systems in Aurora in the state.
Could you explain a little bit more what the goal is, how it is
going to assist physicians, how it is going to lead to better
quality outcomes for the patients, and how you see that
working?
Dr. Lewin. Great. Well, it really is a physician-mediated
approach, and it uses really all the tools that we have
developed in cardiovascular medicine to achieve a result of
better outcomes, better patient care at a lower cost.
So a good example will be the use of the Pinnacle registry
in the outpatient setting to better and more consistently
manage high blood pressure, dyslipidemia--you know, cholesterol
and so forth--anticoagulation, and heart failure, to reduce the
number of heart attack admissions, strokes, and heart failure
admissions.
Now, this is billions of dollars nationally, billions and
billions. And in Wisconsin, it is going to be a lot of money.
And even with the integration that you have got there, there is
still a lot of progress that we know can be made.
In addition to that, we are going to be applying the FOCUS
tool on the inpatient side as well to choose the right image.
There is a bewildering array of images now. There are dozen
kinds of echo tests, a dozen kinds of nuclear tests, CT, MR,
positron emission, and the science just keeps growing faster
and faster.
How do you choose the right test for the right patient? Or
does the patient even need the test? Well, staying up with that
science is awfully difficult. So using the FOCUS tool helps
you, with six clicks at the point of care, make sure that
either you are ordering a test or you don't need to order a
test, figuring it out right away, far better than a radiology
benefit manager approach, where you are calling a number and
asking for permission.
They are going to apply that across Wisconsin; also going
to apply appropriate use with shared decision-making to help
prepare patients who have coronary artery disease, determine
whether in their future which pathway they are likely to go
down--medical therapy, angioplasty and stents, or bypass
surgery.
Now, a lot of times people end up in the cath lab on the
table, partly sedated, where they are going to make a decision
about whether they need a stent or not. That is not when you
want to ask that question. You need the shared decision-making
early on. You need to explain to the patient what the options
are, what the complications might be of procedures, and then,
if the anatomy finally says it is a grey zone, you would have
prepared the patient who would have said, I would rather go the
stent in that circumstance, or I would rather take the medical
therapy.
That needs to be done early. And if we do that early, a lot
of people will move toward less intense care. They would try
the medicine, or they would try the stent rather than the
surgery.
So I think applying all these tools across the board and
then using the registries, both inpatient and outpatient, to
give the hospitals, the medical groups, feedback on their
performance----
Mr. KIND. I love your phrase, bring science to the point of
care.
Dr. Lewin. Yes.
Mr. KIND. Another way of saying it is, let's find out what
works and what doesn't and drive that information into the
hands of our providers and patients through share decision-
making. So I don't know why there is all this angst and concern
about comparative effectiveness research. That seems to be the
whole point of driving science into the point of care and into
the hands who need it the most.
Dr. Lewin. Yes.
Mr. KIND. And Dr. Sandy, this sounds very consistent, what
UnitedHealth has been doing with imaging services and trying to
use clinical studies and support tools for physicians in order
to deal with it. We may not have time this round to get your
response, but I would like to follow up a little bit more on
what UnitedHealth has done in that area, too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. Reichert from Washington is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank all of you for
the hard work that you are doing in this field. I know it is
not an easy answer, as we have been struggling with this as a
nation for many, many years.
We have some doctors on the Ways and Means Committee, as
you know. Most of us are not doctors, so we are wading through
the information that you have all given us. But I want to focus
on coordinated care as it relates to chronic care and how that
plays into the doctor reimbursement issue.
We all agree that everyone's goal here is quality care,
efficient care, access, and reduced cost. You have all talked
about cooperation, the culture of cooperation, collecting data,
information, and facts. You have talked about health IT and
clinical data registry.
Well, even in our own government system, the VA we know has
a great health IT system, but the Department of Defense, pretty
much nothing. So how do they even--they can't even communicate.
How do we expect them to reach outside into the private sector?
And it gets more complicated, I know.
So all of this is tied together. It needs to be, I agree
with all of you, a physician-driven, patient-driven solution to
all this. And you are all making progress. But there are a
couple of things that bother me.
I think, first of all, I liked Mr. Nichols' comment about
we need to have Medicare join the party that the private sector
is throwing. I think that is a good point. And this leads me to
my two questions, and I will ask them together.
So we know that the average 75-year-old suffers pretty much
from three chronic health conditions out of five chronic
diseases that most of you have been dealing with--heart
disease, cancer, stroke, COPD, and diabetes. In your opinion,
does the original fee-for-service model in Medicare work going
forward? I am going to guess I know what the answer is on that.
And how do we work together to build this coordinated care for
these seniors who are trying to live with and manage these
three chronic diseases?
The second question, and more specific, is to the issue of
a group that I met with not too long ago, and it is regarding
the illness of lymphedema, sometimes brought on by cancer
treatment, sometimes as a birth illness. Lymphedema is covered
by some insurance companies. The treatments are sometimes long
and drawn out, and you probably all know some of the side
effects when the treatment is not given. And some of the
compression garments, for example, are covered by some
insurance companies but not covered by Medicare.
How do you bring this together? These folks, if they are
not treated correctly, they end up with these compression
garments prematurely. It doesn't do the job. They need to have
massage therapy. They need to have some followup. How do you
tie in Medicare with the chronic diseases that I have talked to
and follow up with those folks that are dealing with chronic
illnesses? Because eventually, this lymphedema issue can result
in infections and even death, as you know.
Anyone who wishes to address the question. Dr. Share?
Dr. SHARE. So you had two questions, the first being that I
think it is essential to align the incentives of the physicians
so that a meaningful proportion of their reimbursement becomes
dependent upon them doing the right thing, not just with an
individual patient but at the population level; also, dependent
with patients with common chronic or multiple chronic
illnesses, which are challenging to address.
It is not as if we can simply successfully address that
within the context of one physician's office because primary
care doctors and specialists and doctors in hospitals tend to
wind up seeing these same patients at different points in time.
So we really need an organized system of care, the language we
are using, where there are clinically integrated systems and
also sophisticated, organized care management approaches that
help providers across settings manage a group of patients. And
it needs to be patient-centric.
So while the work of the cardiologist is really seminal and
important, patients with cardiac illness don't just get treated
by cardiologists. So you have to have a system where the
primary care folks have the same data and the same scientific
evidence at the point of care. So that is one answer.
The second question that you asked had to do with the
frustration that patients and families experience when
difficult medical illnesses have different types of coverage
depending upon the insurer they have. And especially if you are
switching insurers over time, the same person with the same
problem may not have access to the same services.
So I would just say there that the key is to define or
really breathe life into the notion of medical necessity
because most insurers say medically necessary care is covered,
but then we don't have enough evidence to always define what is
medically necessary.
So that is where I think comparative effectiveness research
comes in because it can help to really rigorously define
answers to those key questions.
Mr. REICHERT. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Blumenauer is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lewin, I want to go back to where you left off with my
colleague, Congressman Kind. Your testimony spoke to shared
decision-making, the reference here to giving everybody more
choices and having conversations where they will be the most
productive and useful.
I would say, parenthetically, I have legislation based on
what we had previously with the Ways and Means Committee;
despite a little kerfuffle, it actually was unanimously
supported by Members of the Committee and one of the few areas
of broad agreement, that we need to strengthen not just the
information for patients, but the guarantees that their wishes
would be respected.
You made a reference there that I think is important. Some
people think of this as just end of life. But patients more
frequently are subjected--the patient and the patient's family
are subjected to very challenging circumstances, often when
they are not perhaps in the frame of mind that is clear. They
may be clouded with pain or medication, anxiety, and quick
decision.
I wondered if you could just elaborate on this notion of
shared decision-making, how you envision it moving forward, and
things that the Federal Government might be able to do either
within the ambit of the legislation that is standing or changes
that we should make.
Dr. LEWIN. Thank you, Congressman Blumenauer. It is an
incredibly good question.
We feel like, with cardiologists and physicians in general,
we have these guidelines and performance measures to help us
guide the science. We still use clinical judgment. If patients
had guidelines, I think what they would have is they would
know--we would give them some ability to understand what
questions they should be asking their clinician when they come
in.
So we have developed, at Cardiology, figuring we need the
patients as partners in care with us if we are going to reduce
costs, something called CardioSmart. It is a website, but it is
interactive. It has mobile applications. It allows patients,
when they come in to either their primary care doctor or their
cardiologist, to know enough about their condition to ask the
right questions, and to be able to ask whether, am I really a
better candidate for medicines, or should I be thinking about
angioplasty and stents, or do I need a defibrillator?
Those kinds of questions are not things patients are
typically challenged to think about ahead of time. So we would
like the patient to come in with the questions they need to ask
and work with their doctor, and then truly participate in
deciding how that care is going to go in the future, whether
they really need this test or whether they really need this
procedure or how, in fact--whether they need a generic medicine
or the most expensive medicine on the market.
Those kinds of decisions, if we could get those to be
shared, I think patients would engage in a positive way to
reduce costs and improve outcomes. So we think that this is a
critical part of the overall picture of improving quality and
lowering costs.
Mr. BLUMENAUER. Thank you very much. I appreciate that,
Doctor, and I am hopeful that this is something that we can
have a broader conversation. I will give to you a piece of
legislation that we are working on, but would welcome an
opportunity for further feedback.
Mr. Chairman, I will just say, you recall that we were all
concerned--when we were debating health care reform, we all
were concerned to make sure that patients had the information,
that they could make decisions, and those decisions would be
respected.
You will recall we had some actually touching testimony
from committee members. I think of Geoff Davis from Kentucky,
who talked about a problem that he had with his mother at a
late stage. And I would like to see if this might be an area
that the committee could review.
I will share with each of you legislation to try and--we
call it Personalize Your Health Care, to make sure that we do
everything we can, whether it is Medicare or other mechanisms,
that physicians are encouraged and maybe even paid to have a
conversation like this.
One of the problems that a number of people here have
talked about is that physicians are usually paid when they do
something to somebody. But to sit down and talk to them, to
empower them and to learn, that is off the--that is kind of
either a different code or it doesn't happen.
Mr. Chairman, I would look forward with you and the
subcommittee that maybe we could have a little conversation
about this before our work is done.
Chairman HERGER. I think the point is well made. I look
forward to working with the gentleman and the committee on this
very important issue.
The gentleman from Washington, Mr. McDermott, is
recognized.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Willie Sutton was once asked, ``Why do you rob banks?'' And
he said, ``Well, that is where the money is.'' And it seems to
me that what I am listening to you talk and reading all of this
is that chronic illness is where the money is spent.
Playing off of what Mr. Blumenauer just said, several years
ago, Sandy Levin and I put an amendment into the Medicare
legislation requiring that everybody who applies be given a set
of final directives that they can fill out so that they can
decide a little bit about what will happen to them in the
future. We went back a year later to find out how many had
actually done so, and less than 20 percent had filled them out.
One of the questions I have is, the issue of how an is
going to ever control costs if we don't get the patient
involved early on thinking about what the final process is.
When you get to 65, the wheels are starting to fall off, so at
that point at least you know that you have an end in sight.
When you are 30, it is very hard to get anybody to think about
this stuff at all.
But I am interested, Mr. Nichols or Dr. Nichols. You have
been at the Boeing Clinic and you have been at the Virginia
Mason experience, in my state I know about, and we have heard
about your experience with some other places.
How do they deal with this whole question--and maybe, Dr.
Lewin, you want to join in on this--how do you deal with the
question of getting patients to think about this before they
are in the cath lab, sedated, and then you ask them, do you
want a stent? I mean, how are they doing this to make it work?
Mr. NICHOLS. Well, I can tell you, Congressman, there are a
couple of really fascinating examples around the world,
actually. One class of things is getting people engaged in
assessing their own health. I know of a program in South Africa
where an insurance company actually pays people to do the
health risk assessment. So you get rewarded for doing it.
But then when you do it, you have to go take it to your
primary care doc, and you work with that physician about what
is right for you. And, you know, I have a pretty bad family
history in heart, and my secretary does not, and she is a whole
lot younger, so we have very different pathways. But the
clinician will work out with us what is the best pathway for
you to be healthy. That is the key, sir. How do you want to
manage your trajectory in life?
It turns out this program gets people incentivized. They
start doing the things. They basically give them what you and I
would call green stamps, rewards for doing the right stuff
along the way. This program, they are filling up three
airplanes a day with people taking vacations on the green
stamps they have earned. They are spending 2 percent of the
premium on the promotion. They are saving 5 percent off trend
three years in a row.
So it has to do with incentivizing the patient to begin to
engage in managing their own health with a clinician. It has to
do with hooking them up with a real live doc you know and trust
and takes care of you, who lays out a pathway for you, and then
you get incentivized.
Now, at the end of one's lifespan, one might think about
having that conversation in lots of different ways. But you
probably know of Mt. Sinai in New York, Diane Meier, the person
who invented the--I think it is called the Center for
Advancement of Palliative Care.
What she has is a team that basically--and I know you are a
physician--teaches clinicians how to talk to families because,
as you know, sir, we don't teach them that all that well in
medical school. And most clinicians think about, what I am
supposed to do is save, protect, keep them alive. In fact, what
families and patients often want nearer the end are, what are
my options? What are my choices? What is going to happen to me?
What is it going to be like? What do I really have to choose
among?
That is where those conversations teaching the clinicians
how to talk to families and the patients can often have a heck
of a lot of what I would call effective shared decision-making
down the road, where people tend to take the least invasive
option because they want to spend as much quality time with
their families as they can.
I will turn it to Jack.
Dr. LEWIN. I think that there are some people with heart
failure, for example. We are trying to pull together videos to
help people look on that CardioSmart site at somebody who is in
the same circumstance that they are in and hear about their
story over the next six months.
For many people, the end stage, a class 4, New York Heart
Association class 4 heart failure, the patient needs to know
that they are limited to end stage here, and they can become
comfortable and start doing things to make themselves feel
better and be with their families rather than heading to the
intensive care unit for multiple procedures.
There is also another little element of this we shouldn't
forget, and that is the medical malpractice piece. It is back
to the patient laying in the cath lab. The physician is really
worried there, if the patient hasn't clearly understood that
they would rather go medical therapy if they could. They are
very worried about not doing the procedure because they don't
know whether the patient is going to take the meds.
So I think that there are a bunch of elements there. But we
can do so much better at helping people make their own better
decisions and working with them.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Is there any evidence--Mr. Chairman, may I
ask one question to follow that?
Chairman HERGER. Maybe to be followed up in writing. Time
is expired.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Okay. I want to ask you about how you get
physicians to get patients to sit and talk about it.
Chairman HERGER. I thank the gentleman.
Now the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Buchanan, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
thank our witnesses for taking the time today.
In Florida, like my district, I have 180,000 seniors 65 and
older. And I am very concerned about the quality of care our
seniors are getting. In terms of the way doctors are being
reimbursed, I hear it every single day, many of them that
practice for 20 years--they are afraid to leave their practice
because there might not be someone else to take their practice.
There is not the enthusiasm.
They said every year it gets more uncertain in terms of the
payment plan or how they get reimbursed. It is a very big
issue. I know our cardiologists in one of our big practices in
our area just lost 30 percent. That came out of nowhere for
them.
So I guess, Dr. Lewin, why don't you give us your thoughts
on what is happening with the reimbursement or the
unpredictable pay that doctors are getting reimbursed all over
the country, but especially in Florida, where you have heavy,
heavy Medicare patients.
Dr. LEWIN. Well, as you probably know, Congressman
Buchanan, Medicare changed the payments for diagnostic services
in the private practice setting for cardiologists in 2010, and
they reduced by about 30 percent the modern day stethoscope
tools of the cardiologist in the office, which are stress
testing and nuclear testing and other ways that we use to
diagnose patients.
The result of that was we had almost a wildebeest migration
of cardiologists moving from private practices to hospital
employment. And in fact, five years ago when I first came to
the American College of Cardiology, 70 percent of the
cardiologists were in private practice, 30 percent were in
academic or hospital practice.
Today it has completely flipped. We now have 70 percent in
hospital-based practice or employment and 30 percent in private
practice, and those remaining 30 percent are struggling
because--and it is difficult because we pay the hospital
outpatient portion of that at a much higher rate than the
private practice. And the patient, obviously, pays a higher
copay.
So what has happened to cardiology practices, really, is
the economics--and it is largely Medicare economics--have
forced them to move toward hospital employment.
Mr. BUCHANAN. That is what I hear every day.
Dr. Bender, let me ask you, I am just talking with a lot of
doctors that we have in our area. But I don't know how--as a
business person myself for 30 years, I don't know how people
make decisions in terms of capital improvements however we have
got one large firm looking at trying to add facilities or in
terms of hiring. I got here in 2007 and there has been probably
five or six times where we have had to adjust or deal with the
SGR doc fix.
As someone that has built a successful practice, and
obviously you are also running a business, how does that affect
you in terms of looking to the future, in terms of providing
service to patients and everything?
Dr. BENDER. Thank you, Congressman Buchanan. So I do not
have a part-time patient-centered medical home, as you can
imagine. We offer services regardless of payer source. So right
now, maybe the good news is Medicare is getting my patient-
centered medical home for free because WellPoint, UnitedHealth
Care, and the other groups that are funding it through the
pilot are basically paying for it.
Whether that is sustainable long-term, probably not,
particularly since I am 40 percent Medicare. SGR threats are--
--
Mr. BUCHANAN. In our case in Florida, we are 80, 90 percent
Medicare for a lot of these doctors.
Dr. BENDER. Yes. So it would be much more difficult to have
a patient-centered medical home pilot. And so, for example,
four years ago, when SGR did not get repealed on time and my
Medicare patients were delayed for like 30 days, I called my
bank and I took a $70,000 signature loan, and that is how I
covered my payroll.
Now, since that time we have had the derivative markets and
the Wall Street excesses, and the banking regulations have
changed. I can't call my banker now and ask for a $70,000
signature loan. If SGR is not repealed, we would be bankrupt.
Mr. BUCHANAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Bender, you state that your practice is providing
better quality to patients with diabetes and other common
conditions. How big a role did embracing the concept of being
measured on key accepted quality measures play in facilitating
the quality improvements?
Dr. BENDER. Thank you, Chairman Herger. It is huge. When I
was in paper, I had no idea how many diabetics I had, much less
how many of them were at goal. Now I get a report every month
that basically tells me now just how my individual practice is
doing but how I compare to others in my region.
So, for example, if we are at 80 percent for a certain
metric, that might be good, but it is in a vacuum. Once I learn
that the others in the state are at 95 percent, then I realize,
wow, I need to work on it. Or maybe everyone else is at 40
percent and I am the thought leader. And then they are calling
me, and we discuss in a way that is FTC-proof. You know, there
is no price fixing; it is academic and collegial. But we all
work together to improve our quality in the pilot.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Dr. Lewin, did you have something to add to that?
Dr. LEWIN. Well, I just want to say that it is measure to
manage. You have got to give doctors and hospitals continuous
feedback on outcomes and performance, and when you do, we just
have it built into us. We want to improve.
So making that part of what we do in the future as part of
our whole system is going to make the whole difference in
moving us toward higher-quality care. And if you put payment
incentives with it, then you double the incentive and the
progress.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you.
Mr. STARK. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Yes?
Mr. STARK. Just a moment for a----
Chairman HERGER. Yes.
Mr. STARK. I just wanted to ask Dr. Bender if he knows what
tomorrow is.
Dr. BENDER. Other than Wednesday, I am uncertain.
[Laughter.]
Mr. STARK. Uh-oh. Lewin, you are not doing your job. Do you
know what tomorrow is? Tomorrow is National Heart Day, and my
10-year-old is going to school in fifth grade to jump rope for
Heart Day. Get with it, you guys. You have got to get your PR
machine going here.
Dr. LEWIN. We have got the whole month, sir.
Mr. STARK. If you don't know that tomorrow is----
Dr. LEWIN. It is National Heart Month and National Heart
Week.
Mr. STARK. I expect you all to jump rope.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. You are welcome.
Mr. STARK. Thank the witnesses for excellent----
Chairman HERGER. Everyone in this room will know what
tomorrow is now, so I thank you.
I want to thank each of our witnesses for your testimony
today. Your private sector experience with rewarding physicians
for quality efficiency is of keen interest as we seek to reform
Medicare physician payments. The fact that the different
stakeholders are working together, in many cases, on this
endeavor gives me increasing hope that Medicare can learn from
these efforts so we can find a long-term solution that has been
so elusive.
I appreciate the physician leadership exemplified by our
witnesses because we need the physician community to be active
participants in our reform effort. Together we must find a
better way. The stakes are high. The current rate of growth in
Medicare spending is unsustainable. And the congressional habit
of short-term fixes is creating a great deal of uncertainty for
physicians and beneficiaries.
Further, the program will go bankrupt if changes are not
made. This is our reality. While I, along with many on the
Republican side, believe we ultimately need to bring
competition and market forces into the Medicare program in
order to reduce costs, we will also continue to move forward on
finding the best way to eliminate the SGR and replace it with
responsible reform.
Any member wishing to submit a question for the record will
have 14 days to do so. If any questions are submitted, I ask
the witnesses to respond in a timely manner.
With that, the subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

Public Submissions For The Record

American College of Gastroenterology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

American Society of Clinical Oncology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Center for Fiscal Equity

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Gundersen Lutheran Health System

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Integrated Healthcare Association

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Pacific Business Group on Health

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Alliance of Specialty Medicine

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


