- MEDICARE PREMIUM SUPPORT PROPOSALS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEDICARE PREMIUM SUPPORT PROPOSALS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 27, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-HL10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

79-937                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

DAVE CAMP, Michigan, Chairman

WALLY HERGER, California             SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
KEVIN BRADY, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
DEVIN NUNES, California              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
GEOFF DAVIS, Kentucky                XAVIER BECERRA, California
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana  MIKE THOMPSON, California
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
TOM PRICE, Georgia                   RON KIND, Wisconsin
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               SHELLEY BERKLEY, Nevada
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas
RICK BERG, North Dakota
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee
TOM REED, New York

Jennifer Safavian, Staff Director

Janice Mays, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

WALLY HERGER, California, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
PAUL RYAN, Wisconsin                 MIKE THOMPSON, California
DEVIN NUNES, California              RON KIND, Wisconsin
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
JIM GERLACH, Pennsylvania
TOM PRICE, Georgia
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published
in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the official
version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare both
printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of
converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of April 27, 2012, announcing the hearing...............     2

WITNESSES

Honorable John B. Breaux, Senior Counsel, Patton Boggs, LLP......     6
Honorable Alice M. Rivlin, Ph.D., Senior Fellow, Economic
Studies, Brookings Institution.................................    14
Honorable Joseph R. Antos, Ph.D., Wilson H. Taylor Scholar in
Health Care and Retirement Policy, American Enterprise
Institute......................................................    23
Honorable Henry J. Aaron, Ph.D., Senior Fellow, Economic Studies,
Brookings Institution..........................................    34

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

AARP, statement..................................................    68
AFL-CIO, statement...............................................    71
AFSCME, statement................................................    73
Alliance for Retired Americans, statement........................    78
Center for Fiscal Equity, statement..............................    81
Consumers Union, statement.......................................    86
Families USA, statement..........................................    92
Health Care for America Now, statement...........................    94
HLC, statement...................................................    98
National Committee to Preserve Social Security and Medicare,
statement......................................................   101

MEDICARE PREMIUM SUPPORT PROPOSALS

----------

FRIDAY, APRIL 27, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:00 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Wally Herger
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Friday, April 27, 2012
HL-10

Chairman Herger Announces a Hearing on

Medicare Premium Support Proposals

House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee Chairman Wally Herger (R-
CA) today announced that the Subcommittee on Health will hold a hearing
to examine proposals to reform Medicare through a premium support
model. The hearing will take place on Friday, April 27, 2012, in Room
1100 of the Longworth House Office Building, beginning at 9:00 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear from witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of witnesses
will follow.

BACKGROUND:

The Medicare program was enacted on June 30, 1965, when President
Lyndon Johnson signed into law the Social Security Amendments Act (P.L.
89-97). At the time of its creation, Medicare's Fee For Service (FFS)
design was modeled after the Blue Cross Blue Shield plans that were
prevalent throughout the Nation. However, despite repeated and
significant advances in private insurance over the last 45 years,
Medicare's FFS delivery design has largely remained unchanged.

Medicare's FFS delivery system and its antiquated and siloed
benefit design has also led to inefficiencies and financial challenges
throughout Medicare's history. On numerous occasions, Congress has been
forced to act to slow the growth of Medicare in order to extend the
program's solvency. As a result, today's Medicare program is
unsustainable. According to the 2011 Medicare trustees report,
Medicare's Hospital Insurance Trust Fund is expected to go bankrupt by
2024, 5 years earlier than the trustees projected in 2010.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Herger stated, ``The American
public recognizes that today's Medicare program faces significant
financial challenges. Unless Congress acts, the Medicare program that
seniors and people with disabilities rely on will go bankrupt in just a
few short years. In order to protect the Medicare program for future
beneficiaries, Congress must look beyond simply slashing Medicare
provider reimbursements, which will eventually result in beneficiaries
losing access to care. The premium support model holds promise to place
Medicare on sound financial footing while transforming and modernizing
the program to provide greater choice for beneficiaries. Such proposals
have enjoyed bipartisan support for decades, and it is time to move
beyond partisan arguments and focus on the bipartisan solutions that
will strengthen and improve Medicare for future generations of
Americans.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will review the bipartisan support for implementing a
premium support system in order to modernize the Medicare benefit while
also improving the program's long-term financial solvency.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Friday, May 11, 2012. Finally, please note
that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol Police
will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office Buildings.
For questions, or if you encounter technical problems, please call
(202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TDD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov.

Chairman HERGER. The Subcommittee will come to order.
We are meeting today to examine proposals to reform
Medicare through premium support and the bipartisan support for
such proposals.
First, I think it should be abundantly clear that despite
what some on the other side might say, Republicans support the
Medicare program. The program serves as a critical function in
our society, ensuring that American seniors and people with
disabilities have health care coverage.
Unfortunately, the program faces significant financial
challenges and is slated to go bankrupt in 2024. We cannot keep
tweaking here and tweaking there, hoping to kick the can down
the road for a year or two. As the Medicare trustees again
stated in their annual report, Congress must act sooner rather
than later to reform the program to ensure its viability.
The Medicare program is in dire need of reform and
improvement so that it meets the health care needs of its
beneficiaries in the 21st century.
The traditional Medicare benefit was created in 1965 and it
really hasn't been reformed since, despite the fact that the
delivery of health care and the private insurance market have
changed dramatically.
The Medicare fee-for-service benefit design, with its array
of confusing coinsurance and deductible levels and its siloed
delivery system, has not kept pace with the rest of health
care. Can you imagine buying your hospital insurance from one
insurance company, your doctor's office insurance from another
insurance company, your prescription drug insurance from yet
another company and catastrophic spending protections from a
fourth company? That is exactly what the majority of Medicare
beneficiaries do today. This outdated design breeds confusion,
waste, and even fraud.
Medicare's antiquated design also inhibits care
coordination, incentivizes overuse, and has led to financial
challenges throughout Medicare's history.
So what is to be done? Simply hoping to make the Medicare
program solvent by cutting payments to providers is
unrealistic. The Chief Medicare Actuary has warned that the
cuts already enacted as part of the Democratic health law would
drive Medicare payments below Medicaid levels, which could
result in ``severe problems with beneficiary access to care.''
Further drastic provider cuts may make Medicare appear solvent
on paper, but it would do so at the expense of the millions of
seniors and people with disabilities who depend on the program.
Instead, we should examine reforms that will protect and
improve the Medicare program, and premium support is one way to
do that. Since the term ``premium support'' was coined by Henry
Aaron, one of our witnesses here today, and Robert Reischauer,
both Democrats, it has received bipartisan support.
Moving to a premium support model was advanced by the
National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare, which
was cochaired by Democratic Senator Breaux, another witness
here today. Writing in support of the proposal, Senator Breaux
and former Ways and Means Chairman Bill Thomas stated that they
believe Medicare ``can be more secure only by focusing the
government's powers on ensuring comprehensive coverage at an
affordable price rather than continuing the inefficiency,
inequity, and inadequacy of the current Medicare program.''
Premium support was also a key component of the
recommendations from the Bipartisan Policy Center cochaired by
Senator Pete Domenici and former CBO Director and Clinton
Administration OMB Director Alice Rivlin, who is also
testifying today.
It is in this vein that the 2013 House budget includes a
premium support proposal. We have drawn upon the ideas that our
witnesses have proposed over the past 2 decades and put forward
a plan to protect Medicare for future generations.
There certainly will be differing opinions about how a
premium support proposal should work. That is a healthy
discussion. However, simply hiding our head in the sand is not.
House Republicans have made it abundantly clear that we
will not simply watch Medicare become insolvent. My friends on
the other side may not like our proposal to protect the
Medicare program but where is yours? Relying on $14 billion in
savings from so-called ``delivery reforms'' in the health care
law is not going to save the program. They are already built
into the Medicare trustees' estimates that predict Medicare's
demise in just over 10 years.
There is some time before Medicare faces the dire
shortfalls that would jeopardize access to care. However, we
would be wise to heed the charge given to us by the Medicare
trustees and begin to work together now to place the Medicare
program on solid financial ground. It is my hope that today's
hearing would be the beginning of this effort.
Before I recognize Ranking Member Stark for the purposes of
an opening statement, I ask unanimous consent that all Members
written statements be included in the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
I now recognize Ranking Member Stark for 5 minutes for the
purpose of his opening statement.
Mr. STARK. I would like to thank Chairman Herger for
holding this meeting. I think it is the first hearing that
Republicans have held in the Ways and Means Committee to
advance their plan to end the Medicare as we know it. Basically
Republicans want to take away Medicare's guaranteed benefits
and replace it with a voucher and put the insurance companies
back in charge. I don't like their plan. I appreciate their
honesty in flying their flag to dismantle Medicare high and
proud.
This year they modified their plan by saying that
traditional Medicare would remain an option. That promise isn't
worth very much. Traditional Medicare might be theoretically
available, but would be out of reach of many because the
voucher would not be guaranteed to cover costs.
Traditional Medicare would undoubtedly attract sicker
patients and quickly enter into a death spiral.
My Republican colleagues don't like the sound of voucher to
describe their plan so they have made up a new term called
premium support. They also dislike being the sole owners of
this plan, so they are holding this hearing today. They want to
share the blame and are trying to overshadow the fact that
every single Democrat in the House of Representatives voted
against their budget, which includes their Medicare voucher
proposal. I can count on maybe one hand the Democrats who
support vouchers or similar proposals.
Dr. Aaron actually has the dubious honor of having coined
the phrase ``premium support,'' but his written testimony today
makes clear he is no proponent of the Ryan plan. The only
Democrat I have heard say nice things about premium support is
Ron Wyden, and he quickly disavowed the Ryan budget and said I
didn't write it and can't imagine a scenario where I would vote
for it.
I am going to go on record again making clear the strong
opposition that Democrats have to the House Republican
proposal. By any name it would be devastating to Medicare
beneficiaries, raising their costs, negating the gains made
from Medicare that ensure that all our seniors have quality
affordable health care. Instead they would return us to a time
when private health insurers would control what care seniors
get and what price they are forced to pay.
The CBO has said it would lead to an increase in overall
national health spending as seniors and people with
disabilities are moved into less efficient, more costly private
plans. It simply takes us in the wrong direction.
Now, I have to agree with my chairman that there are
reforms that we can and should continue to make to Medicare. I
am proud of the provisions we included in the health reform
bill that are already moving forward, payment and delivery
system reforms. They are reducing overpayments to private
health insurers and their plans to cost taxpayers tens of
billions of dollars each year, adding years of solvency to the
trust fund through our recent legislation. We did this while
preserving and even improving Medicare benefits, proving that
you don't have to kill the patient to save it.
With that, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Today we are joined by four
witnesses, former Senator John Breaux, who chaired the 1999
National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare; Alice
Rivlin, a Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution and
Cochair of the Bipartisan Policy Center's task force on debt
reduction; Joe Antos, the Wilson H. Taylor scholar at American
Enterprise Institute; and Henry Aaron, a Senior Fellow at the
Brookings Institution. You will each have 5 minutes to present
your oral testimony. Your entire written statement will be made
a part of the record.
Senator Breaux, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN B. BREAUX, SENIOR COUNSEL, PATTON BOGGS,
LLP

Mr. BREAUX. Thank you very much, Mr. Herger, for inviting
me. Ranking Member Pete Stark, he and I have been involved in
this for many, many, many years. Thank you all for inviting me.
Jim McDermott, who served with me in a great capacity when we
had the National Bipartisan Commission on Medicare Reform, and
many of you who I have had the privilege of working with in
different capacities. Thank all of you for inviting me to talk
about one of the most important issues and at the same time one
of the most divisive issues that either party is going to have
to face, and that is what do we do with Medicare reform?
Let me say I had the privilege of serving in this body for
14 years in the House and 18 in the Senate, or the other body
as we like to have called them over here in the House. So I
think I fully understand the difficulties that each Member from
each party has in addressing the very difficult issue of how we
continue to provide quality health care for our Nation's
seniors.
I have observed over the years that some Democrats, not
all, but some have taken the position that in health care the
government should do everything and the private sector should
do nothing. On the other side there are some Republicans, not
all, but some who take and argue the opposite position that the
government should do nothing when it comes to health care and
that the private sector should do everything.
My opinion is that in order to ever reach an agreement
between the two parties, Congress is going to have to combine
the best of what government can do with the best of what the
private sector can do and put the two together. I would submit
to this panel that that is exactly what we did in creating
Medicare Part D. The best of what government can do in that
legislation is, one, help pay for the program which the
government can do through the taxation system. Second,
government can help set up the mechanics and structure of the
program with standards that the government would put into
place. And third, government can make sure that private sector
and companies do not scam the system and can actually deliver
the product. Government does those things fairly well.
On the other hand, the private sector needs to be involved.
The private sector can create competition among competing
plans. The government doesn't create competition, private
sector can do that. Second, private sector can bring invasion
and new products to the market. Government doesn't do that very
well. And third, the private sector can deliver beneficiaries'
choices to allow them to select the best plan for themselves
and their families.
Now our current Medicare program, as all of you know, was
signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson back in 1965. And
the model chosen to deliver those health benefits 47 years ago
was the fee-for-service model, providers do the service and the
government pays the fees. To control the cost the government
fixes the price for everything from bed pans to brain surgery.
Providers now get around the cost gaps by simply doing more
services, and the program has remained much the same as it has
for 47 years.
A former colleague of mine in the U.S. Senate was Harris
Wofford, a great guy from Pennsylvania. He was a truly
committed liberal who served with great distinction in the
Kennedy Administration as well as in the Senate. He argued very
strongly that American citizens should have access to the same
quality health care that his or her Member of Congress has. He
argued that if it was good enough for Members of Congress it
should be good enough for all Americans. Now, what each of you
have and your staffs and millions of other Federal employees,
and myself included as a retired Federal employee, is a health
plan that does combine the best of what government can do with
the best of what the private sector can do. The Federal
Employees Health Benefits Plan, enacted in 1959, required that
the Federal Government write the regulations that set up the
program and then pays up to 75 percent of the cost of the
health benefits. The beneficiary then pays the rest based on a
formula set by law. Over 350 private health plans are offered
under the program and 14 or so are fee-for-service and the
remainder are what is called premium support plans. Premium
support plans have the government paying the 75 percent, and
the government approves a group of private plans that employees
can choose from that are required by our government to deliver
the services. And all of this is implemented by the Office of
Personnel Management.
When I chaired the National Bipartisan Commission on the
Future of Medicare back in 1998 and 1999 we examined several
options on how to improve Medicare. No one, Republican or
Democrat, on that Commission wanted to end the Federal Medicare
and a strong majority, 10 of the 17, supported a new delivery
system based on market based premium support system, where for
most seniors the premium support would be set at about 88
percent of the standard plan. Unfortunately, the statute
created at our Commission did not require a majority to report,
but a supermajority, so our Commission's plan was never
formally submitted to the President nor to Congress. However,
what happened next was that then Republican leader Bill Frist
and I developed complete statutory language, not an outline,
not just a print, not just talking points, but complete
statutory legislation and introduced S. 1895, which
incorporated the fundamental principles of the Medicare
Commission proposal.
The core recommendation of our bill was not to end Medicare
but to rather restructure Medicare, using what each of you have
today, the FEHB program, as a model.
Under our bill beneficiaries would be subsidized by the
Federal Government for participating in any competing private
or government plan offered under Medicare, including the
existing fee-for-service program. The contribution amount by
the Federal Government would be based--this is important--on
the national average of the premiums for a standard benefit
package, weighted by plan enrollment and adjusted for risk and
for geography, not some arbitrary growth rate like GDP. That
standard benefit package would be all services guaranteed under
the existing Medicare statute, as part of the legislation.
Breaux-Frist set the overall Medicare contribution at 88
percent of the national average cost of that standard benefit
package. And under our plan the amount of Medicare's
contribution would be guaranteed. Also, importantly, under our
plan, for rural areas many of you represent, where competition
is less likely, beneficiaries would be protected from paying
premiums that are higher than the current Part B premium.
And finally we established the Medicare Board, and this
would oversee competition among private and government
sponsored fee-for-service plans and would be the equivalent of
the Office of Personnel Management, which today manages the
FEHB program. It would exercise its authority by regulation and
negotiate with the plans. Overall the Commission estimated the
proposal would reduce the Medicare growth rate by 12 percent.
One might ask the question, why tamper with Medicare at
all? Why change the system that has worked well for 47 years?
Well, I used to drive a 1965 Chevy II. I really loved that car.
But I would hate to be driving it today, 47 years later, and
keeping up with the maintenance of that car and I think none of
you would want to do the same thing. Perhaps a better answer,
however, to that question of why tinker with it now is a
statement made by Rick Foster, Chief Actuary for the Medicare
and Medicaid services, just this past week.
Mr. Foster said in the 2012 Trustees' Report on Medicare,
``Without unprecedented changes in health care delivery systems
and payment mechanisms, the prices paid by Medicare for health
services are very likely to fall increasingly short of the cost
of providing these services.''
Some good news out there now is that in addition to the
important changes made in the Affordable Health Care Act,
ObamaCare made to those under 65 in the private insurance
market through exchanges and other things, it also included
promising reforms, moving away from traditional fee-for-service
Medicare but still under the fee-for-service program. Things
like value-based purchasing and bundle payment systems, where
CMS will try to realign incentives and reimburse doctors and
hospitals for the quality of the care they provide and not just
the quantity.
Under the Affordable Care Act, CMS has already started
testing new and innovative payment and delivery programs
through the CMMI, the Center For Medicare and Medicaid
Innovation. The goal of all these payment reforms and
demonstration projects is to improve patient outcomes while
lowering the cost.
In the event that we move to a premium support model where
there is more price competition between fee-for-service and the
private plans, the whole system is going to be better off if
these promising fee-for-service Medicare reforms----
Chairman HERGER. Senator, if you could summarize.
Mr. BREAUX. I am summarizing, last paragraph. I used to
stay that all the time, but they would never stop.
The great challenge today I would just suggest to both my
Democratic colleagues and my Republican friends and colleagues,
former colleagues, is how do both political parties bridge the
gap between the different political philosophies and produce
health care reform for America's seniors?
In 1965, a bipartisan Congress said that fee-for-service
was the best delivery system back then. Let me suggest that in
2012 the best delivery system was still what is contained in
the Breaux-Frist proposal.
If I can be of any help to any of you, please call on me,
and thank you very much for your attention.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Breaux follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Senator. Ms. Rivlin, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. ALICE M. RIVLIN, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW,
ECONOMIC STUDIES, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Ms. RIVLIN. Thank you, Chairman Herger and Ranking Member
Stark. I am delighted to have the opportunity to testify on
reforming Medicare through a premium support model. Medicare is
a hugely successful program that has dramatically increased the
availability of health care to seniors, increased the length
and quality of life of older Americans, and greatly reduced
their fear of being unable to afford care when they need it. We
need to preserve Medicare's guarantee of affordable health care
for older and disabled people and make sure the program is
sustainable as the number of beneficiaries explode and upward
pressure on health care costs continues.
Medicare reform is not just about Medicare. Medicare plays
a crucial role in two of the most daunting challenges facing
American policymakers, the relentless increase and the
proportion of the total spending that Americans collectively
devote to health care and the unsustainable projected increase
in publicly held Federal debt. Medicare reform represents an
opportunity to turn this large publicly funded program into the
leader in increasing efficiency of health care delivery for all
Americans.
I believe that a well crafted, bipartisan bill that
introduces a premium support model while preserving traditional
Medicare can help achieve these goals. I will focus my remarks
on the plan that former Senator Pete Domenici and I devised at
the Bipartisan Policy Center, but it is very similar to the
plan offered by Chairman Paul Ryan and Senator Ron Wyden.
Our proposal would preserve traditional Medicare as the
default option for all seniors permanently. It would also offer
seniors the opportunity to choose among comprehensive private
health plans offered on a regulated exchange. These plans would
be required to cover benefits with at least the same actuarial
value as traditional Medicare and would have to accept all
applicants and would receive a risk adjusted annual payment
based on the age and health status of their beneficiaries.
The regional exchanges would collect and manage the prices
and terms of competing plans within a designated region. And
those plans would include traditional fee-for-service Medicare
as well as qualified private plans. The government's
contribution would be set by the second lowest plan in the
region, subject to their having sufficient capacity.
With more accessible information about cost and patient
outcomes, cost conscious consumer choice will lead the
providers to emphasize preventive measures, managed care
coordination of people with multiple chronic diseases and adopt
more cost effective approaches to the delivery of care.
However, we don't know in advance what consumer driven
competition will do. So we have introduced as a fail-safe,
which we doubt will be necessary, a cap on per enrollee
government premium contribution over time at the rate of growth
per capita GDP plus 1 percent.
There are lots of questions about how well this would work.
One is can't Medicare beneficiaries already choose among
private plans under Medicare Advantage? They can and a quarter
of them do, but Medicare Advantage wasn't properly structured
to give full competition among plans. And our plan we think
would structure the competition so that it actually lowered the
rate of growth of cost.
And people question whether there is evidence that
competition leads to lower cost and better quality. Actually
despite its perverse features Medicare Advantage provides
considerable evidence that competition works. The impression
that it is more expensive derives from the fact that Medicare
often pays plans more than the cost of fee-for-service. But
under our plan that would not be possible and the competition
we think would hold plans down.
Finally, would older and sicker seniors end up in
traditional Medicare and raise its costs? This fear is based on
the assumption that risk adjustment can't work and rules
against cherry picking will not be enforced. But in fact we
believe that these rules can work, that they are working better
in Medicare Advantage than they used to and will work still
better under a new system.
We believe that health care policy is far too important to
be driven by a single party's ideology. No matter how the 2012
election turns out the President and congressional leadership
should strive to find common ground on how to cover the
uninsured, how to reform Medicare and Medicaid while
stabilizing the debt. We believe that our plan contributes to
that end.
Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rivlin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you very much. Mr. Antos, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH R. ANTOS, PH.D., WILSON H. TAYLOR
SCHOLAR IN HEALTH CARE AND RETIREMENT POLICY, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. ANTOS. Thank you very much, Chairman Herger and Ranking
Member Stark.
Medicare is a vitally important program but it is living on
borrowed time. Medicare's Part A trust fund will be depleted in
2024, as you said, and the program faces $27 trillion in
unfunded liabilities over the next 75 years. With retirement of
76 million Baby Boomers over the next 2 decade the program will
consume an ever increasing share of the Federal budget unless
policies are adopted to bend the Medicare's cost curve. Reform
based on a principle premium support can responsibly slow the
growth of Medicare spending and help set this country on a
sustainable fiscal path. Such a reform relies on market
competition among health plans to achieve high quality coverage
at low cost. That is essential if we are to protect the
Medicare program for future beneficiaries.
I will address four points about the design of a premium
support reform.
First, should traditional Medicare be offered as a
competing plan option under premium support? I think that is
the most reasonable course. Perhaps as many as 57 million
beneficiaries will be enrolled in traditional Medicare 10 years
from now which is when most proposals will start competition
under premium support. Traditional Medicare will not disappear
when premium support begins, even if we do not allow any new
enrollment. Moreover, traditional Medicare is likely to retain
a stronghold in rural areas and other markets that are
dominated by a few providers. For that reason we must find ways
to reduce unnecessary spending in traditional Medicare in the
near term as well as after premium support is in place.
Premium support does not need to exclude traditional
Medicare. Premium support lets consumers decide for themselves
which plan provides the best value and gives them a clear
financial stake in that decision.
Second, will premium support shift huge new costs to
Medicare beneficiaries? Let's be clear, the Affordable Care Act
already shifts costs to beneficiaries. The law imposes
unprecedented cuts in provider pay rates to generate $850
billion in Medicare savings over the next decade. According to
the Medicare actuary, these payment reductions mean that 15
percent of hospitals and other party providers would lose money
on their Medicare patients by 2019. That figure rises to 25
percent in 2030. Large across the board cuts in provider
payments without changing incentives threaten access to care,
and that is a real cost to patients that is not reflected in
higher premiums.
In contract premium support changes the incentives that
have driven up Medicare spending. Plans that hope to increase
their profit margin need to seek more efficient ways to deliver
necessary care rather than adding another test or procedure.
There is plenty of room to improve efficiency in health care,
and plans that ignore opportunities to cut costs will lose
market share and see their bottom line shrink.
There is also the market test in premium support. If
private plans fail to offer a good product at a good price,
beneficiaries will move to traditional Medicare which remains
an option. This is an important safety valve that ensures
seniors will be protected.
Third, what index should be used to limit the growth of
Medicare subsidy? An index that ties Medicare spending growth
to the economy, provides some budget discipline and helps with
the CBO score, but let's not fool ourselves into thinking that
the spending target is what produces the reductions in the cost
of care. Efficiency and innovation in health care, in health
care delivery determine whether Medicare savings can be
sustained in the long term.
Finally, what other reforms are needed? We obviously needed
modernized Medicare, we need to make the program fairer, we
need to reduce unnecessary spending. That means we need better
information, clearer financial incentives and a reformed
subsidy structure that reinforces rather than undercuts efforts
to slow spending.
In my written statement I list a number of reforms. There
are many that need to be done. Certainly reforming the
confusing structure of traditional Medicare's cost sharing to
make it more clear to people what they are paying would be a
good first step in giving people good information about their
health plans so that they can make good choices is absolutely
vital.
So in conclusion, there is broad agreement that we need to
bend the Medicare cost curve. The argument is only over how to
do it. Premium support is not an academic theory, it has been
effective in lowering cost and enhancing value in the Federal
Employees Health Benefits Program for the past 5 decades and in
CalPERS since the nineties. A well design premium support
program can take full advantage of market competition to drive
out unnecessary spending and increase Medicare's value to
beneficiaries. It is about time we tried it, and I think we can
find bipartisan agreement about moving forward.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Antos follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Antos. Mr. Aaron is
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. HENRY J. AARON, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW,
ECONOMIC STUDIES, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Mr. AARON. Thank you, Mr. Herger and Ranking Member Stark.
Also special greetings to Congressman Price, with whom I have
had the privilege of working in the past.
You have my written statement and I understand it is going
to be entered into the record. I would like to begin with what
I think is the central issue that divides those of us who are
opposed to the premium support idea from those who are in favor
of it.
I think all of us recognize that there are reforms to the
existing Medicare program that could improve its operation. All
of us would like to see cost competition play an enhanced role.
All of us would like to see delivery system reforms that result
in better quality and lower costs. And we hope they will work,
but maybe they won't. If they don't, who bears the risk of
costs rising faster than projections?
Under traditional Medicare those risks are pooled broadly
across the population and over time across all Americans. Under
premium support those risks are shouldered by Medicare
beneficiaries who will be faced with higher out-of-pocket costs
themselves. That is the choice I believe, the fundamental
choice that needs to be made in determining a position on this
issue.
Now some years ago Bob Reischauer and I, as you noted,
coined this term ``premium support'' and we did so with respect
to a particular plan, which was more than vouchers, and
actually incorporated one of the features that Senator Breaux
mentioned just now, that the index to which benefits are tied
should be a health index not an economic index. And I would
note that none of the proposals now under discussion meets
Senator Breaux's standard in that respect.
In the 17 years since Bob Reischauer and I put this idea
forward, I have changed my mind and I would like to just list a
few of the reasons why I have changed my mind and I think I
would urge you to consider them as well.
The whole environment of health care policy has been
transformed. We wrote in the wake of the failure of the Clinton
health reform effort and at a time when projections of
insolvency of the Medicare Trust Fund were becoming steadily
worse and were very near term. Both of those elements has
changed. And in particular the passage of the Affordable Care
Act means we have put in place a key element of the premium
support idea for the rest of the population; namely, health
insurance exchanges. We are finding those are difficult to
implement. They are politically controversial. I think they
will succeed and those problems are solvable.
The Medicare population is vastly more difficult to deal
with than the population served under the Affordable Care Act.
We should prove that the Medicare--that the health insurance
exchanges work, get them up and running before we take
seriously, in my view, calls to put the Medicare population
through a similar system.
The regulatory climate has changed. It is far more hostile
to the kinds of regulatory interventions, pretty aggressive
regulatory interventions that Bob Reischauer and I thought were
essential to the functioning of a premium support plan.
We at the time said that no premium support plan should
move forward until risk adjustment was good enough to
discourage competition based on risk selection. At the time,
like Alice, we thought oh, well, it is doable, some time it
will happen. Alas, it hasn't happened yet. A recent study has
shown that the risk adjustment algorithm used under Medicare
Advantage actually has increased the degree of risk selection
that occurs through Medicare Advantage. We are not there yet.
When we are, that would be the time to consider whether premium
support merits consideration.
And finally, the idea that competition is going to save
money, as an economist I really want to believe that. I got my
degrees in that and I was pledged to like markets, I really do.
The evidence to date is not encouraging. The higher costs of
Medicare Advantage are not attributable solely to the extra
payments that are made to them, nor is it attributable to a
selection of patients. After controlling for all of those
factors, Medicare Advantage plans are more expensive than is
traditional Medicare. Furthermore, even Part D drug benefits
which have come in below cost have come in below cost by less
than other drug spending outside of the Medicare system has
come in below the projections that were made at about the same
time.
So I want to believe that competition will work and save
money. The evidence is not supportive at this time. And given
the risks involved it seems to me important to continue to
spread the risks from rapid growth of health care spending
across the general population rather than to impose them on a
very vulnerable group of people, the elderly and people with
disabilities.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Aaron follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman HERGER. Thank you, Mr. Aaron.
Senator Breaux, I think it is important to get this out of
the way right at the beginning of this hearing. Do you think
premium support will ``end Medicare'' as we know it as some
have claimed?
Mr. BREAUX. I think the whole debate politically about
ending Medicare as we know it, I think we want to change
Medicare. We want to keep Medicare. I think we want to improve
the delivery system. I think everybody is committed to having
the Federal Government provide adequate quality health care for
our Nation's seniors. But we don't have to do it under a
delivery system that was formed in 1965. Just like my Chevy II,
things have changed, things have improved, so our
recommendation is that we keep Medicare of course, it is a
great program, but change the way it is delivered to our
Nation's seniors so they get a better deal, a better product at
a better price.
Chairman HERGER. So then you would say that premium support
does have the potential to improve the Medicare program and
shore up its long-term finances by harnessing private sector
innovations?
Mr. BREAUX. My answer would be yes, but you don't have to
take my word for it. Look at the things we have done in the
areas where we implemented premium support. Medicare Part B is
a classic premium support system. The government helps pay for
it, and they help set it up with the private sector competing
for the right to deliver the product. Let me suggest it is a
program that is more popular today than the Congress that wrote
it, and I include myself in that group because I was there. The
seniors love it.
Second, the second example is even better, every one of us
up there and me have a premium support Federal Employees Health
Benefits Plan, that is a classic premium support. People can
choose from, they can continue fee-for-service if you want to
stay there, but the Federal Government sets up a premium
support. We have the Office of Personnel Management
guaranteeing that everybody that participates can deliver the
product and negotiate for the price. That combines the best of
what government can do with the best of what the private sector
can do. So don't take my word, look at the two times we were
able do this, and I would think you would agree it works very
well.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Antos, I think it is important for all
of us to focus on what the Medicare program is facing today.
The Medicare trustees released their 2012 report just this
week. When do you expect the Medicare hospital insurance trust
fund to go bankrupt?
Mr. ANTOS. Well, I rely on the trustees, who are the
Secretaries of Treasury, Labor, HHS and two public trustees,
and they rely on Mr. Foster, who is the Chief Actuary. If
current law is actually implemented, which means major cuts in
payments to hospitals and other Part A providers, then their
projection is that the Part A trust fund will run short of
funds by 2024. However, under other assumptions it would be
much earlier than that. And in fact under the so-called high
cost assumption that the trustees also present, it is 2016.
Chairman HERGER. So even with the projections that we were
to make these major cuts, which most dealt very much we would
make to hospital, what with the bankruptcy--you say 2024, what
was the bankruptcy date in last year's Trustees' Report?
Mr. ANTOS. 2024. So some people say that we've held our
ground. Another way to look at it is we are 1 year closer.
Chairman HERGER. In other words, we are 1 year closer, as
you mentioned, to this looming, addressing this looming
problem.
The trustees stated that Congress and the executive branch
``must work closely together with a sense of urgency.'' In
other words, now is the time to address significant reform of
the Medicare program.
Do you agree with this assessment?
Mr. ANTOS. Yes, sir, it is absolutely vital.
Chairman HERGER. Ms. Rivlin, the plan you worked on with
Senator Domenici is similar to the 2013 House passed budget as
private plans that compete against traditional fee-for-service
Medicare.
Can you please explain how this competition will control
costs, not only for the beneficiaries enrolled in the private
plans but also for traditional Medicare?
Ms. RIVLIN. Yes. On a structured exchange where you can
really see, where the consumer can really see what the choices
are, the plans that participate would offer their wares and
they would have to agree to take everybody who wanted to join
their plan and to give actuarially equivalent benefits to fee-
for-service Medicare and they would be competing directly with
fee-for-service Medicare. There are lots of new innovations in
how you treat people, including people with chronic diseases
and there is evidence that plans can offer better services and
bring down the cost of treating Medicare beneficiaries. We
believe that would happen and that through the bidding process
the cost of the plans would maybe not come down, but not
increase as rapidly as they otherwise would. And that fact that
the government contribution would be slowed would be of benefit
to everybody, including those in fee-for-service Medicare.
Chairman HERGER. In other words, quality could be higher,
service could be higher, but the cost could be more?
Ms. RIVLIN. Yes, we think that would be true. Fee-for-
service Medicare would compete and would probably get better
over time because otherwise people would leave it. But there is
a lot of evidence that fee-for-service doesn't coordinate care
very well. I am a Medicare beneficiary. I watch this happening
and the coordination among providers is terrible. If you are
looking at comprehensive capitated plans, whose responsibility
is to take care of everybody in that plan, you are likely to
get better results.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you very much. Mr. Stark is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. STARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Aaron, would the
Medicare Trust Fund become insolvent sooner under the
Republican plan to repeal ACA?
Mr. AARON. The ACA contained many provisions that extend
the life of the Medicare Trust Fund. It was a major improvement
in the financial status. There can be--is grounds for
legitimate debate about whether every element of the ACA is
going to be enforced down the road, but there are additional
revenues and a host of payment reforms that are designed to
lower cost with scorable savings and others that while not
scored by CBO contain virtually every idea for payment reform
that analysts have come up with.
Mr. STARK. I have a letter from CMS that indicates that
without the ACA the trust fund would expire 8 years earlier,
and I would ask the chairman to make that letter a part of the
record.
Chairman HERGER. Without objection.
[The letter from CMS follows: The Honorable Pete Stark]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. STARK. If we had vouchers, or whatever you want to call
premium support things, the Medicare would stop being a defined
benefit plan and become a defined contribution plan, would it
not?
Mr. AARON. That is exactly what I meant in my opening
comment about who bears the risk if costs rise more than are
anticipated.
Could I inject one comment which I think is important?
Mr. STARK. Please.
Mr. AARON. The statement has been made a couple of times
that Medicare is the same as it was 47 years ago, that just
isn't true.
Mr. STARK. You are right, I remember the change.
Mr. AARON. It has evolved in a number of very important
ways. It has pioneered in payment reform with the DRG system
with respect to payment. And as various people have noted, it
does contain in one form or another, we may like it or not, the
options for individuals to choose among a large number of
competing private plans.
Mr. STARK. I have always suspected it was Republicans, but
you know these guys who march outside with the billboards over
them saying the world's going to come to an end. They have now
crossed that out and say that Medicare is going to come to an
end in 2024 or whatever--12 years. I can remember when those
signs said it was going to end in 1 year. And I can remember
years when the trustees report said we had 20 years.
But the fact is that to change the existing--the life of
Medicare costs relatively so little to the population at large,
I believe that the figure to extend the solvency of Medicare
beyond the 75-year target that people have talked about would
cost less than say a 3 percent total increase in the premiums
or lifting the cap or doing a host of those types of things, so
that it hardly seems unless you so strenuously object to
anything that sounds like a tax or a fee, which many of my
colleagues do, but if you are willing to ask the public who
will benefit from this plan to pay a reasonable amount over
their lifetime, I see no reason that it can't be extended
forever without hurting job growth or putting the country
further into deficit. Does that make sense to you?
Mr. AARON. Yes, it does, but I would modify it in one
direction. I haven't a clue what is going to happen in the
health care world in 50 or 75 years. What is science going to
produce, what will be the impact on longevity? In my view,
trying to look 50 or even 75 years ahead, with respect to
health care, pensions are different, with respect to health
care in my view is a fool's game. And it was a bad day when the
actuaries were required to look 75 years ahead in the case of
health care. Look 25 years ahead, that is quite a long time and
there is a lot of uncertainty within that. Over that period you
could close the Part A trust fund gap with an increase in
payroll taxes of .35 percent each on workers and employers, or
more cost sharing on some Medicare beneficiaries, or additional
payment cuts through what we would hope backed up by
improvements in delivery, which is one of the goals of the
Affordable Care Act.
So I think the idea that Medicare is standing on the brink
of a dangerous precipice for as far ahead as it is reasonable
to look is simply incorrect.
Mr. STARK. Thank you. The 75-year target doesn't bother me
much, but I will come back and ask Mr. Herger, he will find out
what it is like. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman HERGER. Well, I would agree to a degree we have a
tough time estimating what is going to happen next year, let
alone 5 years, 25, 75 years, but one thing we do know, 10,000
Baby Boomers are now going on Medicare every day and that is
something we are aware of. And again we have to hopefully in a
bipartisan way work together to solve this so it does remain
stable for our children and our grandchildren.
With that, Mr. Ryan is recognized.
Mr. RYAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I hesitate to
say this, but, Dr. Rivlin I think I agreed with everything you
said in your opening statement. And the reason I hesitate is
every time I say something nice about a Democrat it gets them
in trouble, they get viciously attacked. So in light of Mr.
Stark's opening statement and comments, I am considering making
really nice comments about you. See if I can direct it over
from Alice to you. So I will be working on that.
Look, there seems to be this attempt to undermine premium
support and how it came to be. Let's remember that it started
as a Democratic idea. We have the grandfather of the original
idea here, the author in Congress of its last iteration here.
And so there is clearly room for the two parties to talk to
each other about this issue. If we could just calm down a
little bit, we might be able to save this program.
Recently I worked with Ron Wyden. I know that is a name. I
probably got him in trouble right there saying that.
Here is what Ron Wyden tells me--first of all I think if we
want real lasting Medicare reform in my judgment it does have
to be bipartisan. So here is what a Democrat, Ron Wyden, tells
me: Democrats can't support a proposal that does not have an
ironclad Medicare guarantee. It must maintain traditional fee-
for-service as a viable option. It needs to guarantee
affordability for the Medicare consumer and protect the low-
income. It must have strongest consumer protections for seniors
and aggressive risk adjustment to protect the marketplace.
So this is what a Democrat in good standing and Member of
the Finance and Budget Committee in the Senate tells me are
sort of the essential principles for premium support to move
forward.
That seems hardly irrational to me. That, to me, strikes me
as these are ideas we should talk about with each other and
there is plenty of room for conversation with one another, and
we ought to have that conversation. So I think we need to put
this in perspective.
This is a program that is going bankrupt. We have the
actuary come here all the time, whether it is the Budget
Committee or the Ways and Means Committee, telling us providers
are going to leave the system, they are going to stop seeing
Medicare beneficiaries, the trust fund is going bankrupt. All
those things are known to us now, and it is just so much
smarter given that 10,000 are retiring every single day to get
ahead of this problem and prepare the program so that it can be
a guarantee that is not only there for today's seniors, but for
tomorrow's seniors.
There is one thing, Dr. Rivlin, that you convinced me of
from all our conversations over the years on this, that we
modified our plan for this, and that is competitive bidding. It
seems to me a far smarter way to set the rate system. Give me a
quick synopsis of why competitive bidding is superior, what are
the attributes to it, and how you propose to set it up, the
second lowest plan bid and the like?
Ms. RIVLIN. Yes. I think competitive bidding among plans,
including fee-for-service Medicare, in a regional exchange, and
by ``regional,'' we mean a metropolitan area or a large rural
area, how this would work is the plans would offer their plan
and bid on the opportunity to serve Medicare beneficiaries with
the same benefits. And the second lowest bid would determine
the government contribution. If you chose the lowest bid plan,
you would get the money back. If you wanted to go higher up the
scale, you could. You could choose a more inefficient plan or
one that offered additional benefits for higher cost.
But most people would look at how can I get these benefits
at a cost that I can afford. And the government contribution at
the second lowest bid would then mean if you are in fee-for-
service Medicare, you would have the option, if that plan was
higher, of moving to one that cost you less and getting the
same benefits.
There would be parts of the country where the fee-for-
service plan might be the best plan and you could stay there,
or other people in other plans could move there. But it seems
like a good bet for offering seniors comprehensive services at
the best possible price.
Mr. BREAUX. Can I add something just really quick to that,
Congressman Ryan. And that is the point that in some rural
areas you may not have competition, so you have to take steps
to protect rural areas where there may not be any competition.
And we did that in Breaux-Frist by saying that no beneficiary
would have to pay more than the current Part B premium for his
standard plan. So you can take care of those areas where there
may not be sufficient competition to really create a
competitive model.
Mr. RYAN. Five minutes goes fast. Thank you.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Gerlach is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Rivlin, looking at your testimony and specifically
quoting you to say I believe a well-crafted bipartisan bill
that introduces a premium support model while preserving
traditional Medicare can help achieve these goals, and then you
go on to say that the Domenici-Rivlin proposal is very similar
to the bipartisan proposal presented by Chairman Paul Ryan and
Senator Ron Wyden in December of 2011.
So as a result of that testimony, I would take it then you
consider the Ryan-Wyden plan to be a premium support plan, is
that correct?
Ms. RIVLIN. Yes, I do.
Mr. GERLACH. Okay. And since the Ryan-Wyden plan was
incorporated into the House Republican budget and passed a few
months ago, therefore that plan as passed by the House is a
premium support plan, is that correct?
Ms. RIVLIN. Yes. I think there are some differences between
the plan put in the budget. A budget resolution is just a
budget resolution. It isn't a draft of a Medicare law.
Mr. GERLACH. Correct.
Ms. RIVLIN. So it is a bit elliptical. And I would stick
with my statement that I support Ryan-Wyden.
Mr. GERLACH. As I think of the word ``voucher,'' I think of
a situation where government would provide a payment to a
private citizen, either cash or some sort of check form of
payment, and that citizen would take that and then purchase a
product or a service with that money received from the
government. Is that a typical or rational definition of what a
voucher is?
Ms. RIVLIN. That is what a voucher means to me, and premium
support as we define it is definitely not a voucher. You don't
get a check from the government, you get a choice among plans
and the plan gets a risk-adjusted payment, a payment that
reflects your age and health condition. And you don't even know
what that is as the individual bidder, as the individual
beneficiary. That is between the government and the plan.
Mr. GERLACH. So the Domenici-Rivlin proposal was not a
voucher program, correct?
Ms. RIVLIN. No, it was not a voucher program.
Mr. GERLACH. And the Ryan-Wyden proposal was not a voucher
program.
Ms. RIVLIN. Not as I understand those terms. No.
Mr. GERLACH. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. Thank you. Mr. Thompson is recognized.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all
the witnesses for being here.
I am a little heartened actually. There seems to be a lot
of agreement. Everybody agrees we need to fix Medicare, we need
to make it work, and so that is the best news I have heard on
this topic for a long time.
I would submit, Mr. Chairman, that it might be helpful as
we are looking at this if we had a plan in front of us. We have
heard a lot of criticism about Mr. Ryan's plan. We have heard
criticism about the Ryan-Wyden plan. We have heard those who
are proponents of that suggesting that maybe it is not what the
critics say it is. It would be good if we had a plan. We could
actually see the details of that plan and be able to get down
in the weeds and look at it. Until that happens, we are just
going to maybe be spinning our wheels.
But I do know a couple things for sure. I know that as I
travel my seven county district, that includes both rural
areas, Senator Breaux, as well as urban areas, I hear a lot
from the people that I represent about Medicare and what they
think about Medicare. And I hear them tell stories juxtaposing
the Medicare they have today vis-a-vis what their parents or
grandparents had, and it is clear, and I hear it all the time,
they like what they have now with Medicare. They like that.
Now, I hear criticism of Medicare. I hear people say don't
cut my benefits, and I also hear people say keep your
government hands off my Medicare, which is one that I always
kind of chuckle at, because I guess everyone hadn't gotten the
memo yet that Medicare is, in fact, a government program. But I
have never heard anybody say please, please, go to a voucher
system, do away with my defined benefit program. And I don't
think I am in the minority there. The Kaiser Family Foundation
did polling on this, and I think 70 percent of the people agree
with that.
I think we really need to keep in perspective the fact that
providing health care to seniors and to people with
disabilities isn't a huge money maker. It is not a huge money
maker. And I think that it is important that we note, and I am
glad that Mr. Antos pointed out the fact that he puts great
belief and credit in what the trustees say. I want to reiterate
what Mr. Stark said. The trustees just said that accountable
CARE Act lengthens the life of Medicare by 8 years, and the CBO
has said that if we put in place my friend Paul Ryan's
proposal, they project that the total health care spending
would grow faster under that proposal and for the typical 65-
year-old, there would be an increased cost between 50 and 66
percent.
Mr. Aaron, could you comment on the effects to society of
health care spending growing that fast and what would it do to
the, not only health care, but to the greater economy?
Mr. AARON. I don't think there is a lot of difference among
the four witnesses on the fact that rising health care costs
are a problem in this country. They squeeze public budgets,
they squeeze private compensation. For that reason, systemic
health care reform is the key to moving ahead. I think there is
a serious risk of trying to screw down on the costs of just one
element, even a large and significant element such as Medicare,
while not attending to the rest of the health care system.
For that reason, I think that the key now, the most
important thing to do now is to move ahead with systemic health
care reform. The law of the land is the Affordable Care Act.
Nobody I think regards that law as perfect in every way. We are
going to learn new things as it is implemented and we will
probably change it down the road.
But the first job is to make, to the best of our ability,
to make that system work. To the extent that we do that, we
then should, in my view, be open minded and willing to come
back in future years and consider whether changes such as the
ones that are being proposed here today should be enacted and
implemented. But I think now is not the time to do that.
Mr. THOMPSON. Thank you. My time is expired. I yield back.
Chairman HERGER. I thank the gentleman, and I just would
like to emphasize that as our witnesses pointed out, the trust
fund is going bankrupt in 2024. The trustees indicated it was
going bankrupt in 2024 last year. That means we have 1 year
less than we did a year ago. So this is something the sooner we
begin on a bipartisan manner working on this, and not using
hopefully scare terms like ``voucher.'' I don't know of anyone
except a few people on the other side that are using that term.
The purpose of this hearing is to talk about premium support,
which is a bipartisan suggestion on how we might be able to fix
the system and preserve it. So I would just like to make that
point.
With that, Dr. Price is recognized.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to commend
the chairman for holding this hearing, and I want to also
recognize and commend the chairman of the Budget Committee, Mr.
Ryan, for his work within our conference in educating people
about the need for reform, but also the positive nature of
premium support.
I also want to thank each of the panelists. You all have
put really a life's work into many things, but not the least of
which is positive suggestions and reforms for our health care
system. As a physician, I can tell you that folks are hurting
out there, not just patients and not just doctors. There are
real challenges in the current system that we have.
By way of clarification and to make certain that folks
understand that our proposal is a guaranteed proposal for
seniors, it is stated in all of the communication that we have.
It is also stated in the legislative language. It is a
guarantee. So seniors need to appreciate that what we are
trying to do is save and strengthen and improve Medicare in a
positive way.
There has been some talk about what is Medicare going to
look like in 25 years, in 75 years, what the finances are going
to be. I want to share with you just what the current system
looks like out there in the real world.
The status quo is clearly unacceptable. There are new
Medicare patients. We talk about 10,000 folks reaching
retirement age or getting on Medicare every single day. If you
are in a community and you are currently a non-Medicare patient
reaching Medicare age tomorrow, and you are currently being
seen by a physician who does not see Medicare patients, the
challenge that you have in finding a doctor to see you as a
Medicare patient is huge. The difficulty of new Medicare
patients to find a physician seeing new Medicare patients is
massive.
The physicians out there are going crazy with this current
system. It doesn't make any sense at all, and it is more and
more onerous, more and more difficult to be able to just care
for patients. One out of every three physicians in this country
limits the number of Medicare patients that they see. One out
of every eight physicians in this country sees no Medicare
patients at all. That is not a system that works. So we need to
find a positive solution, which is what we have been trying to
put forward on our side of the aisle.
Ms. Rivlin, I was encouraged by the tenor of your testimony
and commend you for the work that you have done in the area of
premium support. You mentioned that your proposal differs some
from the Ryan-Wyden proposal, and when I got to that area of
your testimony, which wasn't in your spoken testimony but was
in your written testimony, one of the areas that you differ
with the Ryan-Wyden proposal is that you believe we can move to
a premium support system for seniors sooner than is in our
proposal. Is that correct?
Ms. RIVLIN. That is correct.
Mr. PRICE. And would you expand on that? Our concern was
that if we didn't what we call grandfather the grandfathers,
that we would not only take political heat, but the challenge
of moving in that direction that quickly would be too great.
Please help me understand why you think we can move there
sooner?
Ms. RIVLIN. Because we preserve traditional fee-for-service
Medicare as the default option. I mean, it does grandfather
anybody who is in it, and it is a permanent option. If you
reach that age you are in it, unless you opt into something
else. And we believe that the changes that would take place in
the competitive bidding are substantial challenges, but they
could be met by, say, 2018. We will have some experience in
setting up exchanges under the Affordable Care Act by then, and
there is no reason not to start sooner and let everybody have a
choice.
You can view this as an improvement on Medicare Advantage
that makes the competitive bidding--introduces competitive
bidding and makes Medicare Advantage more accessible and
better, and if you do it that way, it is not such a big deal.
Mr. PRICE. I want to thank you for that. And we will go
back and scrub our numbers, but I want to thank you for what
hopefully will be the genesis of a new found bipartisan
opportunity to move forward and save and strengthen and improve
Medicare by providing for those choices, but guaranteeing that
seniors have the option of remaining on the current Medicare.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. STARK. Would the gentleman yield? I happen to be a fan
of his bill to get rid of this idea that if a physician doesn't
take Medicare, they are out of the system for 2 years. I join
with him in trying to see that we get that changed, because
that doesn't help anybody. You are to be credited for seeing
that and trying to change it. Thank you very much.
Mr. PRICE. Thank you, Mr. Stark. I may fall into the
category of Mr. Ryan, though. If I start saying nice things
about you, we may all be in trouble. Thank you very much.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Kind is recognized.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. And I want to thank the witnesses for
your testimony here today.
Senator Breaux, this is always a delight to hear you and
your comments. But just for the record, I still have a '68
Chevy Malibu convertible that I love to drive around. And it is
one of those cars where you can get under the hood and do your
own tune-up and oil changes, and you don't have to be a
computer whiz to do it. And my guess is that if you asked the
typical senior in Medicare, they feel kind of comfortable with
the Medicare system right now, and they think it is essential
to the quality of their life. They want to see improvements
made, but they also don't want to see it decimated.
I am one of those dwindling breeds here apparently in
Congress these days, a moderate, centrist Member of Congress
trying to find different pathways forward, hopefully in a
bipartisan fashion, to address the challenges of our time, and
I can't think of a bigger challenge than the dysfunctional
health care system and the impact it is having not only on
people's lives, but on our budget and our national finances.
I have been encouraged listening to a lot of your testimony
because there appears to be a lot of agreement on the panel
today that a lot of the tools that we put in place in the
Affordable Care Act need time to move forward. Delivery system
reform, so we get better integrated, coordinated care leading
to better outcomes; payment reform so it is value-based, not
volume-based.
In a lot of respects, this hearing and this discussion we
are having is premature, and Mr. Aaron and I agree. I think the
Affordable Care Act needs a chance to move forward to see if
this stuff works before you can actually have a serious
conversation about a voucher or a premium support plan, and who
ultimately is going to bear that risk.
But I have always been interested in just three things when
it comes to health care reform: Better quality of care for a
better bang for the buck, and making sure that all Americans
have access to that type of care in this country. And how we
get there is something that we have to continue to talk about.
But one of my concerns with the Republican budget proposal
and their voucher or premium proposal is the risk in and who is
going to bear it. But a bit of a parochial concern that I have
from the State of Wisconsin, we have traditionally historically
been one of the lowest Medicare reimbursement States in the
entire Nation. We share that with the Pacific Northwest and
some other regions. And under their proposal, apparently the
rates will get locked in at the lower of either the current
fee-for-service reimbursement rate, or the second lowest plan
in that region, which would guarantee in Wisconsin that our
providers are locked in at the lowest Medicare reimbursement
rate, which they are struggling to live under today, which
tells me that they are going to have to continue to cost shift
the inadequacy of Medicare reimbursements on to the backs of
businesses large and small, on to the backs of private health
care plans.
Mr. RYAN. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. KIND. In a second, so I can make my point.
This will not only continue the death spiral that our
health care providers are experiencing in the State of
Wisconsin, but the death spiral that businesses in Wisconsin
are facing with rising health care costs because of the cost
shifting that is currently impacting them, making it harder for
them to compete, not only at home, but globally. And it does
not make sense that we go down this road, not until at least we
find out whether delivery system reform and payment reforms
actually have a chance of working.
I have tried in my way to work in a bipartisan fashion in
this Committee. Mr. Aaron, you pointed out that it is crucial
that these exchanges have a chance to move forward and show
whether or not they are viable or not. I have been the author
in previous years of the SHOP Act, which was the basis for
these health insurance exchanges, and every year I introduced
that proposal, I had an equal number of Republicans and
Democrats on that bill. We put it in the Affordable Care Act
and my Republican colleagues ran for the hills.
I was one of the authors with Mr. Blumenauer on reimbursing
our health care providers for counseling on advance directives.
And every year we introduced that bill, we had at least five or
six Members of the Committee, Republican Members, who were on
that legislation. That was put in the Affordable Care Act and
that turned into ``death panels'' and my Republican colleagues
ran for the hills. So having that bipartisan conversation is
difficult to have when you have principles or issues that we
had previously agreed on that suddenly divide us today.
I agree with Mr. Thompson, Paul, that to have a serious
conversation, we need a plan. We need words on paper so we can
actually see, because we all know, and I think everyone on this
panel would agree, that the devil is in the details on how any
type of premium support or voucher plan is ultimately
structured. And we don't have that.
I talked to Ron Wyden too, and sometimes I feel like I am
talking to two different people who are embracing the same type
of plan. What Paul understands what the plan would mean, and
what Ron Wyden understands sometimes they are talking past each
other.
So unless or until you put something on paper so we can
truly analyze the impact of this what this is going to mean,
all this is theoretical.
Mr. RYAN. If the gentleman would just yield kindly, I will
send to you and Mr. Thompson the plan that Senator Wyden and I
coauthored with our signatures, and I will send it over to your
office.
Mr. KIND. All right. But, again, I think, Mr. Aaron, I hear
from you, and John, I think you testified too, that it is
important that these delivery system and payment reforms as
part of the Affordable Care Act right now have a chance to
continue to move forward. And if, for some reason, the Supreme
Court or this body decides to overturn everything, I think that
is just going to lead to an absolute state of chaos right now
in the health care system that may take a generation to recover
from if we go back to square one again.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. Mr. Pascrell is recognized.
Mr. PASCRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panelists.
I have heard, and I said many times health care reform is
entitlement reform. Folks on the other side don't want to hear
that. We haven't touched entitlement reform in the health care
bill. I think that is utter nonsense. One-third of the health
care bill is devoted to Medicare and Medicaid. It is very
specific about the recommendations, and those are
recommendations that we should be considering if we weren't
trying to suffocate this legislation before it breathes fully
in the next 2 years.
Not only are we going to reduce costs for Medicare, but
also the Health Care Act reduced costs for beneficiaries,
unless you don't agree with the CBO numbers. The majority's
attempt to repeal reform and turn Medicare into, let's not use
a voucher program, let's not use that word, I call it the more-
out-of-your-own-pocket-folks program. I think that will hurt
beneficiaries. And there is no doubt about it, this is going to
mean more money out-of-pocket. No one has denied that. No one.
So according to the CBO office, the Republican budget will
dramatically cut spending in Medicare for new beneficiaries by
more than $2,200 per person per year. That is what the CBO
says. And we conveniently use the CBO when they support our
position, and then we tell them that they don't know what they
are talking about when it doesn't support our position. And
starting in 2030, by $8,000, by 2050. If you want to talks
about the future, let's talk about the future.
We don't have to scrap the current system. In fact, as we
are sitting here today talking about strengthening Medicare,
the health care reform bill is already hard at work actually
testing new payment and delivery systems that will lead
innovation not only for Medicare, but for the entire health
care system. And let's talk about that health care system.
You are talking about competition. Let's increase
competition in terms of Medicare. We don't have competition in
the health care system. Many States have only two or three
companies who write health insurance. Why don't we do something
about that? If we want to foster competition, let's foster
competition. We don't merely mean it. This is--it is empty.
These are words that we use back and forth. This is one-
upmanship. That is all we are after.
The basics of health care will be changed by the Health
Care Act for the better of Americans. It will not be a
socialistic system, thank God we graduated from that, since
more insurance companies will be involved in order for us to
gain favor with the people that we are dealing with.
You know, we are heading back to 1964. I am convinced that
that is the direction we want to go in, when senior poverty was
at the greatest since the Great Depression. That is where we
want to go. Why don't we just say that? We are using a lot of
pretty words.
Yes, you may shake your head, Ms. Rivlin, but I am telling
you, we are marking time in place while many seniors are being
stopped at the door because they are under Medicare. That is
what we should be addressing. That is what we should be saying,
enough of this. The health care system is not working. The
health care system has been totally taken over by the health
insurance companies of this country. You know it and I know it.
We don't have competition.
In New Jersey, what would do we have, three or four
companies that write health insurance? This is competition?
What is this competition? You say, so we will narrow it. Maybe
next year we will have three companies. Maybe Co. C will take
over Co. D. In how many States do we have only three or four or
less companies writing health insurance, and you want to put
our seniors into that situation? That is not competition. That
is a joke. You know it and I know it.
By the way, Mr. Aaron, I want to congratulate you on the
work you have done. I know since I have been here for 16 years,
you have been at the forefront of talking about these issues.
These are critical issues for all of us. I know that it is not
very popular to try to hold down out-of-pocket expenses. That
is not a popular position, Mr. Aaron. But I don't care whether
it is or isn't. You have done the right thing. I admire what
you are doing.
We have enough here to work with within the legislation to
change Medicare, but let's not throw away everything because we
want to get to a few who will profit only. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. The gentleman's time has expired.
Dr. Boustany is recognized.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for
holding this hearing.
I think this has been a nice reprieve where we actually get
to talk about policy, and I want to thank all the panelists
here today for the serious work you have done over many, many
years to advance the debate and to advance real solutions to
solving health care.
Senator Breaux, let me publicly thank you for your many,
many years of service to our State of Louisiana and our country
and to your continued willingness to do this and to serve in a
public capacity to advance the debate in health care.
Mr. Aaron, you raised the point about competition and the
fact that it has not lowered costs. I would submit that we are
really stuck right now between a price-controlled system and
vastly imperfect competition. We don't really have the kind of
competition that is necessary, both in the health care
financing arena as well as in the delivery system aspect of
this. And I think if we could get to more perfect competition
there, we would see the advantages of lowering costs and
enhancing quality. And that is coming from somebody who has had
many years practicing in the health care system as a physician.
I have some really deep concerns about the tilt toward
price controls in this, which I think it is pretty indisputable
that that is what we are operating under right now. And the
problem is we already have a serious shortage of physicians and
nurses in this country, and if we continue on this path where
we have seen--we are facing the cuts in sequestration, we have
seen cuts year after year to providers, what is this really
going to mean for access? Because coverage does not equate to
access to good high quality care.
I know, Senator Breaux, you and I, actually even before I
got to Congress back in the 1990s had serious concerns about
trends we are seeing in the Medicare program whereby, for
instance, as a heart surgeon, I would see a patient in the
emergency room and do an emergency coronary bypass operation,
and then in the aftermath of all that, we couldn't find a
primary care physician to take care of the patient's basic
health care needs. I would have to get on the phone and start
begging physicians in my community that I knew well and worked
with to take on a new patient. And the whole issue was the
cost. The cost of care and the cost to these physician
practices is not being met by reimbursement. So if we can get
to a system that brings us back to a real competition, I think
it makes a difference.
I want to compliment Chairman Ryan. I know he walked out.
But he has actually taken a lot of the work that Dr. Rivlin and
Senator Breaux, Mr. Antos, you have worked on, and Mr. Aaron,
and put it into a body of work along with Senator Wyden to try
to get us to that. And I don't know of any other alternative.
So, would anybody comment? Is there another alternative out
there other than the premium support model?
Mr. AARON. I think the key to solving the problems that you
have described, and quite eloquently, I believe, regarding the
fragmentation of care comes in some of the innovations that are
in the Affordable Care Act, in particular, two that I would
focus on.
One is the creation of accountable care organizations,
which are groups of providers who would be paid to assure the
health of people who enroll with them, much as health
maintenance organizations do; and the second would be bundled
payments, so that in the event of a coronary artery bypass
graft surgery case, a payment would be made not just for the
act of surgery, but for the follow-up care as well, so that
you, together with a primary care physician and perhaps a nurse
practitioner who would regularly contact the patient to make
sure that he or she was taking recommended medications, would
all work together. That is the key.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Mr. Aaron, one of the fundamental problems
not addressed in the Affordable Care Act is the--in the context
of accountable care organizations is we still have Federal
barriers in place that prohibit physicians to integrate care
with hospitals, and that has not been addressed adequately. We
need statutory relief in that area if we are going to see those
kinds of innovations.
Mr. AARON. I agree with you completely, and it is an
illustration of how the law may need to be amended.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Senator Breaux.
Mr. BREAUX. In alternatives, and I think that Congressman
Kind had pointed this out, Ron talked about the demonstration
programs that are in the Accountable Care Act. I remember when
I was in Congress when I wanted to stop something from
happening, I used to offer an amendment to do a study, or maybe
to do a demonstration program, hoping it never got completed.
But I think the things that are in the Accountable Care
Act, the demonstration programs, are very important, but you
can be for both going to a premium support system and a
demonstration project in the Accountable Care Act. If the
demonstration programs work, it will improve the fee-for-
service delivery system, and then if you have premium support,
they will be better competitors. And that is what we are trying
to bring about.
I think the demonstration programs are helpful, they are
important, but they are not an either/or situation. You can
move to a premium support system and support the demonstration
projects and hope that they work very well.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Dr. Rivlin, do you want to comment?
Ms. RIVLIN. Yes, I fully support what Senator Breaux just
said. It is a mistake to think of these as alternatives. At
least our plan envisions that the Affordable Care Act
continues, that the demonstrations and the various institutions
that were set up to improve the delivery system go ahead, and
we hope that works. We are only saying that there ought to be
another way to get these innovations into use, and that would
be competition.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you. Mr. Antos.
Mr. ANTOS. I agree with that. But it would also be a
mistake to believe that these things are going to materialize
overnight. As someone said, the devil is in the details, and
accountable care organizations are devilish.
Mr. BOUSTANY. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman HERGER. I want to thank our witnesses for your
testimony today. This has been an extremely interesting
discussion, one that highlights the need for Congress to act
soon in order to place Medicare on sound financial footing.
Premium support proposals like those we heard about today hold
promise to improve how care is delivered, better protect
beneficiaries against Medicare's cost sharing requirements, and
utilize competition to control costs for the program as a
whole.
As a reminder, any Member wishing to submit a question for
the record will have 14 days to do so. If any questions are
submitted, I ask the witnesses to respond in a timely manner.
With that, this Subcommittee is adjourned.
[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


