- SMALL BUSINESS HEALTH INSURANCE TAX CREDIT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SMALL BUSINESS
HEALTH INSURANCE TAX CREDIT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

of the

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-OS8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-181 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2013

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CHARLES W. BOUSTANY, JR., Louisiana, Chairman

DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               JOHN LEWIS, Georgia, Ranking
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               XAVIER BECERRA, California
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
TOM REED, New York
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published
in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the official
version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare both
printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of
converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of November 15, 2011, announcing the hearing............     2

WITNESSES

Honorable J. Russell George, Inspector General, Treasury
Inspector General for Tax Administration.......................     5
Sarah Hall Ingram, Commissioner of the Tax Exempt/Government
Entities Operating Division, Internal Revenue Service..........    22
Patricia Thompson, Chair, AICPA Tax Executive Committee, American
Institute of Certified Public Accountants......................    49
Todd McCracken, President, National Small Business Association...    58
Matthew Hisel, Co-Director, Home Resource........................    71

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

National Association of Professional Employer Organizations,
statement......................................................    96
National Federation of Independent Business, statement...........    98
Small Business Majority, statement...............................   101
The Center for Fiscal Equity, statement..........................   108

SMALL BUSINESS
HEALTH INSURANCE TAX CREDIT

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2011

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:33 a.m., in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Charles
Boustany [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

ADVISORY

FROM THE
COMMITTEE
ON WAYS
AND
MEANS

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

CONTACT: (202) 225-1721
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Tuesday, November 15, 2011
OS-8

Chairman Boustany Announces a Hearing on

Small Business Health Insurance Tax Credit

Congressman Charles W. Boustany, Jr., MD, (R-LA), Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight of the Committee on Ways and Means, today
announced the Subcommittee will hold a hearing on the Small Business
Health Insurance Tax Credit created by the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act. The hearing will take place on Tuesday, November
15, 2011, in Room 1100 of the Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 10:30 a.m.

In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, oral
testimony at this hearing will be from invited witnesses only. However,
any individual or organization not scheduled for an oral appearance may
submit a written statement for consideration by the Committee and for
inclusion in the printed record of the hearing. A list of invited
witnesses will follow.

BACKGROUND:

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub. L. No. 111-
148) (PPACA) included a limited-time tax credit to encourage small
businesses to provide health care coverage to employees. The Small
Business Health Insurance Tax Credit (Small Business Tax Credit) is
available to certain small businesses and covers some of the cost of
employee health insurance.

The Small Business Tax Credit covers 35 percent of an eligible
small employer's contribution to employee health insurance premiums for
each tax year from 2010 to 2013. After 2013, the credit amount
increases to 50 percent, but a taxpayer may only elect to take the
credit for two consecutive tax years. The calculation to determine
eligibility is a complex sliding scale involving employee hours of
service and wages, along with certain exclusions.

As the costs of health insurance continue to rise, it remains
unclear whether the Small Business Tax Credit is beneficial to a
meaningful number of small businesses or whether the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) is administering the credit appropriately. Due to the
complex calculations associated with the Small Business Tax Credit,
government watchdogs have warned that it leaves room for calculation
error and opens the door to potential tax fraud. A recent report by the
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration found that only
228,000 taxpayers took advantage of the credit as of May 2011, despite
earlier claims by the Administration that four million employers would
be eligible. The Inspector General also found that the manner in which
the IRS is administering the credit has created concerns over tax
compliance.

In announcing the hearing, Chairman Boustany said, ``Much of the
President's new health care law will be administered by the IRS, and
this is the first credit provision to come into effect. With small
businesses hurting from a stalled economy and rising health insurance
premiums, the Oversight Subcommittee will explore whether the Small
Business Tax Credit is providing meaningful help to employers or if it
is opening the door to more improper payments.''

FOCUS OF THE HEARING:

The hearing will focus on whether small business employers are
currently benefiting from the Small Business Tax Credit, problems they
may be encountering when calculating the credit, and whether the IRS is
administering it in a way that ensures tax compliance.

DETAILS FOR SUBMISSION OF WRITTEN COMMENTS:

Please Note: Any person(s) and/or organization(s) wishing to submit
for the hearing record must follow the appropriate link on the hearing
page of the Committee website and complete the informational forms.
From the Committee homepage, http://waysandmeans.house.gov, select
``Hearings.'' Select the hearing for which you would like to submit,
and click on the link entitled, ``Click here to provide a submission
for the record.'' Once you have followed the online instructions,
submit all requested information. ATTACH your submission as a Word
document, in compliance with the formatting requirements listed below,
by the close of business on Tuesday, November 29, 2011. Finally, please
note that due to the change in House mail policy, the U.S. Capitol
Police will refuse sealed-package deliveries to all House Office
Buildings. For questions, or if you encounter technical problems,
please call (202) 225-1721 or (202) 225-3625.

FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:

The Committee relies on electronic submissions for printing the
official hearing record. As always, submissions will be included in the
record according to the discretion of the Committee. The Committee will
not alter the content of your submission, but we reserve the right to
format it according to our guidelines. Any submission provided to the
Committee by a witness, any supplementary materials submitted for the
printed record, and any written comments in response to a request for
written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any
submission or supplementary item not in compliance with these
guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.

1. All submissions and supplementary materials must be provided in
Word format and MUST NOT exceed a total of 10 pages, including
attachments. Witnesses and submitters are advised that the Committee
relies on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing
record.

2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not
be accepted for printing. Instead, exhibit material should be
referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material not meeting
these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for
review and use by the Committee.

3. All submissions must include a list of all clients, persons and/
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears. A supplemental
sheet must accompany each submission listing the name, company,
address, telephone, and fax numbers of each witness.

The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons
with disabilities. If you are in need of special accommodations, please
call 202-225-1721 or 202-226-3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four
business days notice is requested). Questions with regard to special
accommodation needs in general (including availability of Committee
materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Committee as
noted above.

Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on
the World Wide Web at http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov/.

Chairman BOUSTANY. The Subcommittee will come to order.
Good morning, and welcome to this morning's hearing on the
implementation and effectiveness of the small business health
insurance tax credit.
Small businesses are the backbone of our economy. They
account for more than half of America's private gross domestic
product, and employ about half of its private-sector workforce.
As our economy struggles to recover from the worst downturn
since the Great Depression small businesses are bearing the
brunt of the pain. Consumer demand is down, costs are rising,
and too often Washington exacerbates the problem through new
regulations, higher taxes, and burdensome red tape.
As a former small business owner running a small medical
practice in Louisiana, I certainly know the challenges facing
small businesses across this country. And so I take special
interest in the subject of today's hearing, because I know
small business owners need real help when it comes to the
rising cost of health care.
The problem is worse today than ever before. The cost of
premiums for family policies have gone up by an average of 9
percent in the past year, and I've heard complaints of premiums
for small businesses going up by as much as 43 percent. A
recent survey by the National Small Business Association found
that 32 percent of small business owners have held off on
hiring new employees, due to rising health care costs.
Today we're here to consider how the small business health
insurance tax credit has been implemented, whether it is
effective in reducing health care costs for employers. When it
was enacted as part of the President's health care overhaul,
supporters said the credit would provide access to affordable
insurance, and help small employers insure their employees.
Two years later, we see that the results do not match up to
the promises. Instead, it is a convoluted tax credit that
temporarily subsidizes the cost of employee health insurance in
a very small number of cases. Employers must undertake
complicated calculations to determine whether they even qualify
for the credit.
The instructions to the form are eight pages long and
somewhat complex. And, in fact, we have a chart--and I don't
know--we have a chart on the screen here. This chart shows the
complex analysis an employer has to undertake before knowing
whether they can claim the credit, or how much it's worth. If
employers are able to navigate the calculations and confirm
they are eligible, they must limit additional hiring and
employee compensation in order to keep it, oftentimes.
Although the credit does not appear to be providing
meaningful assistance to small business owners, it is still the
IRS's job to implement it, and to do so in a way that protects
taxpayer dollars from erroneous payments. So, we are here today
to discuss two critical issues. Is the IRS administering the
small business health insurance tax credit in a way that
reduces the risk of erroneous payments and provides necessary
information to taxpayers? And two, why is the credit then
ineffective in helping many small employers reduce the cost of
health insurance, or incentivizing employers not previously
offering insurance to begin doing so?
These are important questions, and I look forward to
today's discussion. And I want to thank both of our witnesses
for joining us here this morning.
Before I yield to Ranking Member Lewis, I ask unanimous
consent that all Members' written statements be included in the
record.
[No response.]
Chairman BOUSTANY. And without objection, so ordered. Now I
yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I want to
thank you for holding this hearing on the small business health
care tax credit. In these tough economic times, many Americans
fear they are just one medical emergency away from losing their
home, their businesses, or their savings. This tax credit is
designed as a temporary measure to help small employers afford
health insurance for their employees. It is the bridge to
broader reforms that will help small businesses purchase
affordable, high-quality health insurance in 2014.
To date, more than 300,000 small businesses have claimed
and benefited from over $400 million in tax credits to help
them provide health insurance to employees. Still, some
question whether the credit is meaningful. Maybe I should
repeat this. Still, some question whether the credit is
meaningful.
It would be a mistake to draw conclusions from the early
claim number currently available. Many small businesses request
extensions and file their tax returns in September and October.
Returns receive in October are still being processed. And, the
agency does not expect to finish processing these returns until
December of the end of this year. It is simply too early to
tell how many businesses will claim the credit.
Finally, we must also remember that any serious discussion
of the administration of tax credits must begin with fully
funding the IRS.
Today's hearing provides a real-time example of how the
$600 million in budget cuts proposed by the House Republicans
may affect small businesses and employees. The Inspector
General's report states that the agency needs about $24 million
to administer this credit next year.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today, and
look forward to hearing from each of you. As we have
successfully done in the past, I would like to work with the
Inspector General to provide the agency with any additional
authority it needs to administer this tax credit.
Mr. Chairman, again I want to thank you, sir.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the Ranking Member for his
opening statement. And now I want to welcome our first panel of
witnesses.
We have Mr. Russell George, who is Treasury inspector
general for tax administration, and Ms. Sarah Hall Ingram, who
is commissioner of the tax exempt and government entities
operating division of the Internal Revenue Service. I want to
thank you both for being here today, and to provide your
testimony. You will each have the customary 5 minutes to
present your testimony with your full written statement
submitted for the record.
And, Mr. George, we will begin with you.

STATEMENT OF HONORABLE J. RUSSELL GEORGE, INSPECTOR GENERAL,
TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR TAX ADMINISTRATION, WASHINGTON,
DC

Mr. GEORGE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Chairman Boustany,
Ranking Member Lewis, Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify on the Internal Revenue
Service's implementation of the Small Business Health Care Tax
Credit.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act amended the
Internal Revenue Code to provide the credit. As noted, the
credit was designed to encourage small employers and certain
tax-exempt organizations to offer health care insurance and
receive a credit for the employee health insurance expenses
that they have incurred. It took effect January 1, 2010. The
Congressional Budget Office estimated the credit would cost $37
billion over 10 years.
As it pertains to which taxpayers qualify for the credit
and how to calculate the credit amount, the law is very
complex. To address this, the Internal Revenue Service issued
two Notices which set forth detailed guidance on claiming the
credit, copies of which are included in my written testimony.
There are multiple steps to calculate the credit and seven
worksheets that must be completed in order to claim it. These
worksheets are required to determine the correct amounts to
enter on 8 of the 25 lines on IRS Form 8941, which is the form
used to claim the credit.
Despite IRS efforts to inform over four million taxpayers
who could potentially qualify for the credit, the volume of
claims for the credit has been low. Through mid-October 2011,
the IRS reported that just over 300,000 taxpayers, including
tax-exempt taxpayers, had claimed the credit for a total amount
of $416 million. This is substantially lower than the
Congressional Budget Office estimate, that taxpayers would
claim up to $2 billion of credits for Tax Year 2010.
There is a risk of errors occurring when the credit is
claimed or processed. The credit is new, and both taxpayers, as
well as IRS employees, will need to educate themselves with the
procedures for claiming the credit. Our review found that the
complexity of the rules make them difficult for taxpayers to
follow. The IRS also had to complete new computer systems'
programming to update the new Form 8941 and identify potential
compliance risks.
While the credit is specifically targeted to small business
employers, some taxpayers may claim it even when they have not
filed required employment tax returns. A lack of employment tax
returns could indicate an erroneous claim and that the taxpayer
is not an employer. However, it could also mean that the
taxpayer is using the services of a professional employer
organization, also known as a ``PEO.''
PEOs, acting as the employer, file employment tax returns
under their own Employer Identification Number, and the client
businesses where the employees work, claim other employment-
related expenses, and the related deductions and credits that
they paid. This presents a challenge to the IRS to determine
whether a company which does not file employment tax returns
qualifies for the credit without corresponding with or auditing
the company.
We identified the issues by tracking the relationships
between the PEOs and client companies in a previous review. In
that report, TIGTA recommended that the IRS work with the
Department of the Treasury to explore all options, including
the use of the revised Form 2678, which is the Employer/Payer
Appointment of Agent Form, to document the relationship between
PEOs and their clients. The IRS agreed to establish such links
between PEOs and their clients. However, their efforts were not
successful.
To administer employment tax laws and to effectively use
scarce compliance resources, the IRS needs to be able to
identify businesses that begin using the services of a PEO, as
well as when they terminate those services. Without this
ability--which, again, the service does not possess--the IRS
may not take appropriate actions against the businesses that do
not pay employment taxes or improperly claim credits.
Some errors and omissions made by taxpayers when claiming
the credit were not identified by the IRS. Early in 2011 filing
season, TIGTA auditors evaluated whether tax returns with
errors were identified by the IRS. The types of errors we
identified included errors in calculating Full-Time Equivalent
employees, incorrect application of percentage allowances or
phase-out rules, missing Form 3800, among others. The IRS was
not identifying these errors, but has stated to us they are
taking steps to address this as a result of our report.
Some errors that the taxpayers made could be addressed with
the IRS's existing authority to correct mathematical and
clerical errors, which is known as ``math error authority.''
However, the lack of authority for other types of errors could
hamper the IRS's compliance efforts. This authority could allow
the IRS to stop credit amounts claimed by taxpayers who do not
appear to be qualified for these credits.
Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis, Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide TIGTA's
assessment of the IRS's administration of the Small Business
Health Care Tax Credit.
[The prepared statement of Mr. George follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. George.
Ms. Ingram, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF SARAH HALL INGRAM, COMMISSIONER OF THE TAX EXEMPT/
GOVERNMENT ENTITIES OPERATING DIVISION, INTERNAL REVENUE
SERVICE, WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. INGRAM. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Sarah Hall Ingram, and
I am commissioner of the tax-exempt and government entities
operating division at the Internal Revenue Service. And I also
serve as the executive lead for the IRS operational planning
and implementation of the tax law provisions of the Affordable
Care Act of 2010. I appreciate the opportunity to testify with
you here today.
My purpose this morning is to discuss the credit and what
actions the IRS has taken and plans to take to help insure that
small employers that may be eligible for the credit are aware
of it.
The small employer health care tax credit is designed to
help small businesses and tax-exempt organizations afford the
cost of premiums for health coverage for their employees. In
general, the credit is available to small employers that
primarily employ low and moderate-income workers and who pay at
least half the cost of single coverage for their employees.
For tax years 2010 to 2013, the maximum credit is 35
percent of premiums paid by eligible small businesses, and 25
percent of premiums paid by eligible employers that are tax-
exempt organizations. After 2013, eligible employers will be
able to take the credit for 2 additional years, and the maximum
credit will increase to 50 percent for eligible small
businesses, and 35 percent for eligible tax-exempt
organizations. I provided further details on how the credit
works in my written testimony for the record.
Now, to claim the credit, a small business uses Form 8941
to calculate the credit amount, and then includes that amount
as part of the general business credit that it takes on its
income tax return. A tax-exempt organization, which generally,
by definition, has no income tax liability, uses the same Form
8941 to calculate its refundable amount, but then claims the
credit on Form 990T.
Because the credit was enacted mid-year in 2010 but was
effective immediately--in fact, back to January 1--the IRS was
concerned that not all small employers that might qualify for
the credit would know about it, and would claim it on their
2010 return. So the IRS launched a significant outreach
campaign in the months following enactment.
In April, to increase awareness in the community, the IRS
mailed postcards to more than four million small businesses and
tax-exempt organizations that were identified as potentially
eligible for the credit, based on the limited payroll data
maintained by the IRS, which gives a general indication of the
number of employees and their wages.
The IRS issued detailed guidelines in May. And based on our
continuous engagement with the small business and practitioner
communities, we have regularly added materials and tools to a
dedicated webpage on IRS.gov, including frequently asked
questions, multi-language videos, practical tool kits, and even
a recorded webinar.
Since the provision was enacted, the IRS has held or
participated in more than 1,500 outreach events targeted at
small businesses and the tax practitioners and business
professionals who serve them, both to increase awareness and
knowledge in the community, and also to obtain practical
feedback on our outreach strategies and on our materials.
The IRS is now developing a new outreach campaign to ensure
that small employers that are eligible for the credit in 2011
will know how to claim it on their returns filed for the 2012
filing season. Based on our experience to date, and feedback
from the community, this campaign will focus on working with
our partners and stakeholders, including the tax software
industry, insurance agents and brokers that work with small
businesses, and the tax practitioner community.
The IRS is working to enhance information available through
IRS.gov, as well as through social media and other venues in
order to better communicate information to the small business
community and the professionals who advise them.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my oral testimony, and I'd be
happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ingram follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Ms. Ingram, and I appreciate
your testimony.
We're talking about a relatively new tax credit that
appears to be somewhat complex for the small business owner
trying to navigate through it. And now we have preliminary
figures that show that it's not being utilized or claimed to
the extent that was initially thought would be the case.
And so, Ms. Ingram, I know IRS has gone through great
efforts, sending out 4.4 million postcards, holding numerous
outreached programs, as you outlined, and it's certainly
detailed in your written testimony. Yet, as of mid-October, the
figure that we have is 309,000 taxpayers out of a potential 4
million have taken the credit. And while we recognize it's
early and we're not finished with the season yet, do you have
more recent numbers as to who has filed for the claim--or for
the credit?
Ms. INGRAM. No, Congressman. The 309 figure is the most
recent.
Chairman BOUSTANY. The most recent. What's the cost to date
to the IRS for the outreach program and for the implementation
efforts?
Ms. INGRAM. I don't have figures broken out by this
provision. We use many of the same people to work on a number
of provisions. So we would have to reconstruct that carefully--
--
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay.
Ms. INGRAM [continuing]. And provide that followup.
Chairman BOUSTANY. If you could provide that to the
Committee----
Ms. INGRAM. Yes, we will give you what we can.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I appreciate that. And, Mr. George, I
think TIGTA estimated that it's been about $29 million that's
been spent on this?
Mr. GEORGE. Well, we know that the IRS has requested that
amount. And to assist my colleague here, they've expended over
$1 million in the effort to inform the potential eligible
taxpayers about this tax credit. But again, they have requested
over $24 million to help implement this credit.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. And, Ms. Ingram, TIGTA's
report noted that the IRS has asked industry groups and
professional organizations to determine why businesses are not
taking the credit. Does the IRS engage in similar outreach
programs, and for other types of tax credits? For instance, an
R&D tax credit?
Ms. INGRAM. We have a fairly continuous process of talking
to the practitioner community or industry associations about
how their understanding and implementation of provisions are
that affect that particular group.
Whenever we have new provisions coming into the tax laws,
we do take opportunities to try to get focused feedback, both
about the level of awareness, and anything we can do to assist
people in either understanding whatever the provision is, or
improve our tools so that they can take advantage of them.
So, for example, in our summer tax forums, which is a
practitioner--gathering of tax professionals every summer
across the country, we do focused feedback sessions with
practitioners to get at that kind of information.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. And does the IRS want math
error authority for this particular tax credit? And if not,
why?
Ms. INGRAM. We engaged in some good conversations with the
TIGTA audit team about how the current math error authority or
augmented legislative math error authority could be used in
this setting. And we have shared those conversations with the
Treasury Department, who is looking at ways in which there
might be some policy choices around this credit.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. And is there some concern at
this stage--this tax credit was proposed as a means of helping
to mitigate the high cost and rising cost of health insurance
premiums for small businesses, which are under tremendous
pressure right now.
And my sense is, based on testimony I've read and other
reports, that this tax credit is not achieving that goal of
helping to bring down those costs, and helping, you know, small
businesses to provide health insurance for their employees. Is
there a concern right now at the IRS, or are you just focused
now on purely the administration of this tax credit?
Ms. INGRAM. Well, the analysis about the policy and
economic impact would be better addressed to the Treasury
Department. My role is to take what we have and implement it as
well as possible. And, as I mentioned, my two goals are to
educate the community and get them what they need, and listen
to them about what they need, and then to make sure that what
gets filed is an appropriate claim for the credit.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. George, in the TIGTA report on IRS
efforts to implement this tax credit, you discuss problems with
tracking employees when employers use professional employer
organizations. I read your written testimony with great
interest on this. And can you explain what the problem is with
regards to this particular tax credit, and how the IRS could
potentially fix this particular problem?
Mr. GEORGE. Yes. Again, in effect, the IRS has--or there
are entities called, again, PEOs, which are outsourced to by
small businesses and the like, so that certain aspects--
accounting, you know, leave, medical leave, what have you,
these businesses will take over those responsibilities for a
small or, you know, individual practitioner to help alleviate
that burden from that person, and they will be paid a fee. The
PEOs will be paid a fee.
And so, the problem is there is a disconnect between what
the IRS knows and doesn't know, as to who is actually paying
the employee taxes and the various taxes, as they relate not
only to this credit, but to other credits. And we recommended
in a report over two years ago that the IRS, seek legislative
help from the department--because it is the department who has
responsibility for developing tax policy--and to address better
ways in which the IRS could develop processes, internal
processes, to match the various Employee Identification Numbers
between the PEOs and the organizations with which they
contract.
And for some reason, which--I will defer to the IRS--that
hasn't been done. And had that been done, it would assist not
only in the implementation of this particular credit, but in
others.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Before I turn to the Ranking Member, Ms.
Ingram, do you want to respond to that?
Ms. INGRAM. The issue of how to handle professional
employee organizations has been a matter of discussion as we've
tried to work through the extent to which what is needed is
legislative change, and to the extent what is needed is changes
in systems and forms.
I don't think that we have any difference of philosophy
about what would be advantageous. I think as we work through
the logistics of what we can do administratively, in addition
to sharing analyses with the Treasury Department, we continue
to welcome all of the advice we get from TIGTA about ideas of
how to do that.
There were some additional ideas in this report, and we're
working on those now, and I assume we will have further dialog,
in case we have questions about TIGTA's advice.
Chairman BOUSTANY. So, are you confident that that can be
fixed?
Ms. INGRAM. The----
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without legislation?
Ms. INGRAM. We could do some things. We have to make sure
that we're not burdening legitimate arrangements, and that we
do it in a way that enables us to check what we need to check
without being burdensome on people who are otherwise just
following the rules just fine.
So I think those logistical issues we want to continue to
work on internally.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank your, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner Ingram, I
believe it is too early to draw any conclusions about the
credit. Commissioner, many businesses request extensions and
file their returns in October and November. Is this correct?
Ms. INGRAM. Yes, they do.
Mr. LEWIS. When will the agency finish processing these and
other tax returns?
Ms. INGRAM. As you stated earlier, sir, it's toward the end
of the year that we would finish processing and posting the
returns all the way through the season. In fact, today is the
last day that the exempt organizations could file and claim
those credits. So, they would--returns are still coming in for
this credit. It will be the end of the year.
Mr. LEWIS. Commissioner, early data show less than 5
million business returns have been processed through mid-
October, and that over 10 million business tax returns were
processed in 2010. Is this correct?
Ms. INGRAM. I don't have the figures directly with me, but
I believe--the difficulty with those figures is that it depends
on which returns you look at, if you look at 1120s and 1120Ss
and 1065s, or whether you also include the 1040 returns that
include schedule C's and the other schedules that indicate
business activity. So I would prefer to respond afterward, with
a full set of data.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you. With respect to small corporations,
the so-called, I guess, S-corporation, early data show that
less than 2 million returns have been processed through mid-
October, and that about 4 and a half million returns were
processed in 2010. Do you believe this to be correct?
Ms. INGRAM. Again, I'd like to make sure I can confirm that
after the hearing.
I think what is true is that the partners in flow-through--
the recipients of flow-through adjustments like this credit, if
they're filing on extensions, would go to October 15th. And the
data that we were able to pull for the request for this hearing
would not include everybody who had filed on the October 15th
date, for a variety of reasons, whether they came in on paper,
or whether they were in the queue for posting and processing.
So it is an incomplete data set at this point.
Mr. LEWIS. Commissioner, so with less than 50 percent of
business returns processed through mid-October, is it too early
to know how many businesses will claim the tax credit this
year?
Ms. INGRAM. It is definitely too early to know how many
total claims we are going to get. And, as I mentioned, although
the tax-exempts are a very small portion of this picture, their
deadline is not even until today. So, yes, we do not have final
numbers.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much. Mr. Inspector General, what
grade would you give the Service on its outreach effort for the
health credit? If you had to give a grade right now, this
moment.
Mr. GEORGE. Well, if I may, sir, answer the question in the
following manner, the overall implementation of this credit by
the IRS, we would give them a B to a B+. We think they have
done an effective job implementing the credit, reaching out to
people, and changing the computer processes that are needed to
be changed to help accommodate it.
Again, the challenge is the complexity of the law itself.
And so that is a different issue. But overall, we would--I
would give them a B, B+.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Chairman, I am concerned that the proposed
Republican budget cuts would hurt taxpayer service such as
outreach efforts, compliance, and enforcement.
Without objection, I would like to enter into the record an
October letter from the Commissioner that provides an example
of how the budget cuts would hurt small businesses.
Without objection, I would also like to enter into the
record the Commissioner's November notice to employees
announcing an early out, or buy-out program.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Without objection, both will be entered
into the record.
[No response.]
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Inspector General, in your testimony before
this Subcommittee in September, you stated that the Service had
limited resources to examine claims after energy tax credits
had been paid. Does this statement apply to the health care tax
credit?
Mr. GEORGE. It does, sir. I mean the IRS--one of the
previous commissioners of the IRS used to use a formula of
customer service plus enforcement equals compliance. And that
theory still exists today. That concept, I believe, is still
accurate now. For the IRS, it is almost a zero-sum gain. They
have limited resources. They have to make a determination as to
whether they are going to focus on this aspect of their
responsibilities or that aspect. So, whether it is customer
service, or whether it is enforcement.
And so, yes. Unless there are additional resources, a cut
in their appropriations would adversely impact their ability to
do their job.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the Ranking Member. Ms. Black.
Ms. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to go back
to the issue of the supporting documents. The chairman started
to explore the documentations with the PEOs. But while many
credits do not require supporting documentation to be submitted
to the IRS, the small business tax credit appears to be
especially complicated. And despite the fact of this
complication, what, I think 8 pages that they need to fill out
since $435 million in credits have already been claimed, and
the IRS does not require filers for the small business tax
credit to provide documentation to support their claims.
Would additional documentations--this question is for you,
Ms. Ingram--do you believe that additional documentation would
help the IRS to administer the credit and prevent any erroneous
payments?
Ms. INGRAM. Well, Congresswoman, we're always looking for
ways to prevent or reduce erroneous payments. It is important
to remember about this credit that the credit that is available
to small businesses is one of many credits that fall into the
general business credit category. And those are not refundable
credits. And we do not ask for attached documentation in most
instances. And compliance is generally quite high.
Where we are worried, particularly on the refundable credit
side, we sometimes do ask for additional documentation. We did
that with the adoption credit this year, because of the timing
of having--when we could implement that.
On the refundable side of this credit, which is what the
tax-exempt organization small employer could get, we have not
asked for additional documentation but we have put in
additional filters that are particularly suitable for a
refundable credit. So on the--where the risks are higher with
refundable credits. And we do freeze those refunds and
correspond, as needed, with that taxpayer.
But more than 95 percent of the credits claimed--at least
as far as we can tell at this point--are being claimed by the
taxable small employers, and that is one of the many credits
that goes into the general business credit.
Ms. BLACK. So you don't feel that you need any legislative
authority to go further with any additional documentation. You
have all the authority you need right now, if you see that
there is a need for additional documentation?
Ms. INGRAM. I think we have--yes, I think we have the
authority if we wanted to ask for more documentation. But we
are also very mindful that additional documentation, in
connection with the return itself, changes the dynamics around
electronic filing, it can add burden to the compliant taxpayer.
And so we try to use that very carefully, particularly when
we don't have information that shows that we have a real
compliance problem, or where it is the type of credit or the
type of refundable credit that might indicate a higher risk,
and the need to do that. So, we try to balance those, those
things.
Ms. BLACK. Mr. George, could you also weigh in?
Mr. GEORGE. Yes, thank you. As you are well aware,
refundable credits are available to people, even--whether or
not they have a tax obligation. And as Ms. Ingram indicated, it
is the tax-exempt community in this instance that has access to
this credit on a refundable basis.
We have estimated that there are over $36.4 million in
refundable credits that have been requested thus far, using
this credit, and that overall, the non-business, so the non-
refundable credits, are at around $379 million.
I believe that additional information can be helpful, if it
is used. The IRS requests a lot of information that it does not
necessarily utilize. And so I share Ms. Ingram's concern about
overburdening taxpayers unnecessarily. But at the same time,
again, any information that can help stem inappropriate
requests, improper requests for the credit, that--will help the
IRS better do their jobs.
Ms. BLACK. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Becerra, you are recognized.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to the two of
you, thank you very much for the update on the information.
We could get very technical sometimes, and when you go into
the weeds you lose a lot of folks. But at the end of the day,
what we are talking about is trying to figure out how to make a
tax credit that is going to small businesses who offer health
care to the employees work. And we need to get the information
out there, because it is a new tax credit. These small
businesses that have been filing taxes didn't have this before.
Many small businesses are making decisions on whether or not to
offer to their employees health insurance to begin with. And
sometimes these small businesses are trying to file their taxes
without a lot of professional help, because it is expensive to
get professional help.
And so, it is good that we are doing a hearing. But
Commissioner Ingram, as we have just heard, we can't make--or
can't reach--conclusions yet without all the information to
know how it is working best, where we can make changes. And I
think, Mr. George, you would agree that once we have the full
set of data that help us understand how this credit has worked
so far, you can then come back to us and really give us some
concrete ideas of how to make it work best.
This, at the end, is a bridge. This tax credit is a bridge
to get us to the point in 2014 when we have the full
implementation of the historic health care reform, so that
small businesses will be able to offer to their employees real
health insurance.
Now, I just wanted to check on something. Small businesses
are paying, on average, for health insurance for their
employees, for an individual employee, something in the order
of $5,300 a year. And if that employee has a family, and if the
business offers an insurance policy for the family, it is about
$14,000 a year. That is a chunk of money that a small
businessman or woman who is trying to survive a business is
making, in terms of a commitment to his or her employees.
And I think all of us applaud a small business man or woman
who figures out a way not only to make a profit, but at the
same time to offer decent affordable health care to their
employees. So this tax credit, which gives them some assistance
to be able to offer that, or to keep offering that health
insurance, is something we should try to really make work well.
And so we thank you for your testimony.
But my concern is this. And, Commissioner Ingram, you know
this directly, because you work in the IRS under the
Commissioner. If the Commissioner is sending us a letter
essentially saying, ``The budgets you are sending us don't give
us a chance to do the outreach, don't give us a chance to do
the enforcement''--sometimes the enforcement brings to the
American taxpayer savings of $7 on every dollar of enforcement
we spend, because we are able to go after the tax cheats and so
forth--that we do more harm for programs like this tax credit
if we don't give you the ability--which I think Inspector
General George would agree is necessary for you--to police the
activity of this new tax credit.
And so, let me paraphrase what the Commissioner said in a
letter recently to Congress. Cuts of the magnitude in their
budget contemplated in the current appropriations bills would
lead to noticeable degradation of both services and
enforcement, and would have a serious detrimental impact on
voluntary compliance for years to come. He goes on to give some
specific examples of how this would hurt small businesses if we
don't provide the IRS the funding it needs to do its work
properly.
And so, I hope what you will do is let us know what
resources you need, one, to make the credit less complicated;
two, to do effective outreach to make the credit work for those
small business men and women; and three, let us know what
resources you need to not have this impact the work that you
have to do not just on this tax credit for small businesses,
but for everything else you have to do to make sure that those
who are willing to voluntarily comply with the Tax Code do so
in a way that isn't harmful to them.
It is hard for me to ask you a lot of questions, because
the data you have is incomplete. But I do appreciate that you
are willing to give us an update, and point out some of the
areas where we can try to help you make this work. But I would
hope that what we don't do is make it harder for a business
that right now is willing to offer health insurance to its
employees at a time when times are so tough. We make it more
difficult for them to take advantage of a tax credit that was
meant to help them offer to American people who are working a
chance to get decent, affordable health care.
And so, I appreciate your being here. I look forward to
hearing from you again, once we have the complete data and can
make some real judgements about the program.
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing, and
I thank the witnesses for having been here.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Becerra. Ms. Jenkins.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing, and thank you both for being here.
Proponents of the tax credit claim that it has been
designed to provide an incentive to small businesses to offer
health insurance to their employees. However, according to the
Small Business Administration report released in September,
this credit will primarily benefit those businesses that
already offer health insurance.
So, for both of you, from your experience with this credit,
is there data available that could tell us whether the tax
credit is being used by small businesses that otherwise have
not offered health care? And do you have any data on the amount
of small businesses--those with 10 or fewer employees--that
offer health insurance coverage to their employees?
Mr. GEORGE. Actually, I do not at this time, Ms. Jenkins,
have that information.
Ms. INGRAM. At the IRS we don't have a good way of knowing
who already offers health insurance. So the data question isn't
one that we can really help you with at this point.
I think the key is when we go out and we ask people what
their experience was in the first filing cycle, one of the
things they mention is that because the act was passed in
March, or toward the end of March, that many of them had
already locked in to their health care decisions, because they
tend to make--in the industry they tend to have calendar-year
health packages for their employees if they have health care.
So, what we have been told by small businessmen is that
even if they don't have health coverage today they will
consider it. But we don't' have any data that would be
responsive to your question.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Well, thank you. If data becomes
available, I hope you will share it with us.
And Commissioner Ingram, the IRS agreed with TIGTA that the
use of professional employer organizations pose a problem with
regard to the small business tax credit, and it appears that
this is a long-standing problem for the IRS. How do you intend
to address the problem with regards to this credit?
And, given that it is really not a new problem, are you
confident you can resolve the issue so that the IRS can
properly link employers and their employees?
Ms. INGRAM. Well, Congresswoman, I always get a little
nervous about getting too specific about methodology of finding
problems, because I don't wish to give anybody any ideas. But
in the conversations with the inspector general's team, and in
the suggestions made in some recent reports as well as in this
one, we are looking closely at what we could do
administratively to make the kind of connections and the kind
of crosswalks that Mr. George has mentioned.
There are a lot of ideas, and we are working through the
logistics of each one. I would say most of them cost money, and
we need to do it efficiently. And we also, as I mentioned
before, need to do it in a way that doesn't throw taxpayers who
have no problem into a filtering system that creates work for
them.
So, I think there are some things we can do. We are working
on the logistics and the ideas that we continue to throw back
and forth between our teams.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, thank you. Inspector General George,
this hearing was designed, I think, to highlight the complexity
of the tax credit as a key factor as to why small businesses
maybe have not raced to embrace the credit. This is despite
TIGTA's findings that the IRS made extensive efforts to
implement the credit. And I think our next panel, we are going
to hear from small business men and women about the burdens
that they are dealing with.
But I am just curious, Mr. George. This tax credit also
puts an administrative burden on already scarce resources for
the IRS. So can you elaborate on the amount of time and effort
the IRS has devoted to administrating this credit, and if you
have any ideas on what we can do to simplify it?
Mr. GEORGE. Yes. I would just simply elaborate on a point
that I embraced earlier. When I made reference to the IRS
expending $1 million trying to alert people as to the
availability of the credit, that $1 million was spent simply on
sending 4.4 million postcards to taxpayers. So that was just
the start of this.
Again, they have requested almost $25 million in the most
recent appropriations to help implement this credit. And I
would simply note also again--this goes back to an earlier
point that you raised--the IRS did a lot of focus groups. They
did good outreach to people. And a lot of the responses that
they received was that this is such a complicated credit in
which to implement, that a lot of their customers were
uncertain as to whether the cost benefit analysis really paid
off for them.
Ms. JENKINS. Just to clarify, so have we requested nearly
$25 million to implement a credit that in 2010 was supposed to
cost $2 billion?
Mr. GEORGE. That is my understanding, but I think I would
defer to Commissioner Ingram for the exact figure.
Ms. INGRAM. The President's proposed budget had about $24
million--something like that--in it, which was requested in
order to work on the examinations coming out of the first
cycle, as well as to work with the second cycle of filings. It
also was to cover the work around the adoption credit which, as
I mentioned earlier to Congresswoman Black, was--did involve
additional documentation and a much different process.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased that
we are having a hearing, but I am not quite sure of the value
of it, because I learned very early--I think it was in geometry
in about sixth grade--that with one point you can't draw a
line. You have to have two points or three points or four
points. And the only points we have are 228,000 and then
309,000, which looks like things are going up. So I think that
it means that more people are taking advantage of this.
But what I am struggling with is trying to figure out how
do you get a credit like this known by the small business
people in this country. These are people with 25 or less
employees and their employees are paid less than $50,000, on
average. And they are struggling to keep it together in the
worst economy in years. And so they get a card.
Now, I don't know how many people have ever received a card
from the Federal government that they didn't pay total
attention to. Or, how many of you received a political brief
from somebody on a card that you didn't pay total attention to?
But you send out four million cards.
Now, I understand that you sent them to businesses under 25
employees, and average salaries of less than 50,000. But you
had no data about who had or who was offering health insurance.
Is that correct?
Ms. INGRAM. That is correct.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So, a tax credit aimed at people who are
offering a tax credit, and one that is in the middle of a year,
they are going to get a card in July. People are saying, ``What
am I getting a card in the IRS in July about?'' Because this
says something about tax credits. ``I am not filing until
January,'' or whatever.
Give me a better design to get it to the people who would
benefit from it. Because it defies my understanding of why
somebody wouldn't want to figure it out if they could save
money, if they could get 35 percent back of their premiums that
they have paid, why wouldn't they apply for that?
I mean what should have been done to make it better? How
would you make it simpler--help us.
Mr. GEORGE. Well, Mr.--if I may?
Ms. INGRAM. Go ahead.
Mr. GEORGE. Thank you. The community which, for the most
part, would take advantage and be involved in this credit is
such that they most likely would use tax preparers. And so, it
would have behooved the IRS to focus their efforts on reaching
out to tax preparers, the tax preparer community, and they have
done that.
But, that focus, whether it is through the national tax
annual programs they put around the country, or through more
directed mail to groups that represent tax practitioners--the
National Association of Tax Preparers and the like--to help
spread the word, there could have been much more of a targeted
approach here, I think, that would have helped address the
question you are raising.
Ms. INGRAM. Yes. I think that one reason we turn to the
postcards, any time there is a new piece of legislation and--
that is immediately effective, and we are worrying about how do
people, A, know about it in the first place, and then who is--
who needs to know detailed information about it and how to do
it, and so forth, we have tended in the small business
community to look at--the small businesses need to be aware,
but they tend to turn to their practitioners and advisors to
solve it for them. So, we have received anecdotes of
practitioners telling us, ``Yes, my client brought me the
postcard.''
So we tried to do a two-prong track during 2010 to get both
of those needs addressed, both awareness and the professional
ability to assist their clients in figuring out what they
wanted to do as a business. Because some of those decisions
needed to happen during that year, we were anxious to do that
outreach ahead of what we might normally do with the filing
season cycles, and that is why we acted----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Okay. So in about a month or 2 months, we
are going to start a new filing season. And all the filers, now
all the preparers, will have had 2 years to know this exists.
Is that correct?
Ms. INGRAM. They have been through one cycle and be
starting their second cycle.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. They will be starting their second cycle.
And they will have had at least one notice from you. Have they
had any further notices about the fact that this tax credit
exists?
Ms. INGRAM. We haven't done direct mailings of the same
kind, but we have tried to be very visible out at conferences
and programs. We have tried to do cost-effective tools like
webinars for busy practitioners and small business men who have
trouble taking time away to go to a conference, and we have
tried to increase the kinds of materials from alert flyers, all
the way to how-to kits that are available for practitioners to
use themselves or with their clients.
This evolution of the materials that we have been
developing and the outreach we have been doing is very much in
response to the feedback discussions that we have had with
small businesses themselves, as well as with the practitioner
groups.
So the advice that we have received, consistent with what
Mr. George said, was, having done the awareness to a certain
point, to turn to the professional channels and focus on tax
practitioners, those assisting businessmen in decisions around
insurance products, and the software industry, to see if
through tools like different software or different return
filing mechanisms, things could be made more clear and easier
for the businesses themselves.
So, that is our shift from the first filing cycle to the
second filing cycle to try to reach the right people and
leverage that.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So we need another hearing at another time
to find out the results of your efforts.
Ms. INGRAM. Whenever you would like to ask me to come, sir.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Marchant.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are all going
through tough economic times now. We are trying to reduce the
Federal budget, the spending cuts. That is what we have been
sent to Washington to do. In these hard economic times, all of
the government has to find a way to work more efficiently. And
the IRS will be no exception.
What is the IRS doing on trying to stop fraud on this
particular credit that is being requested? Ms. Ingram.
Ms. INGRAM. We have a two-prong approach, sir, on this
credit. One is designed around the non-refundable credit, the
one that is going to more than 95 percent of the people
claiming the credit, the business side, and an augmented
methodology that we are using on the refundable credit side
with the small exempt organizations or employers.
All the returns go through certain kinds of checks that are
the same for both groups. And these involve filters and checks
that are a comprehensive set developed based on all of our
experience with other kinds of credits, including advice that
we received from people like TIGTA and GAO.
And then, on the refundable side, we add certain additional
filters that might be particular to that type of community,
that type of group, because those--with the refundable side, we
are pulling before payment is made.
Mr. MARCHANT. Yes, sir.
Mr. GEORGE. Mr. Marchant, if I may, again, while they are
doing yeoman's work in certain areas, this is an Achilles heel
for the Internal Revenue Service. If they don't address
problems--and especially in the refundable credit area--at the
outset, during the processing of it, the moment the credit goes
out the door it changes the dynamic of the situation entirely,
in that it costs much more to try to recover dollars that have
already been sent out the door than it would to prevent them
from going out in the first place.
And so, again, while this is a tax policy issue, and we
touched on this earlier, if they could buttress up their math
error authority policies in both this area and elsewhere, that
would allow them to prevent--make corrections to tax forms
before they go out, as opposed to having to subsequently audit
and/or reach out to organizations and individuals who
inadvertently received or erroneously received tax credits.
Mr. MARCHANT. With the time I have left, the biggest
concern I have about this tax credit was when the
Administration was selling this affordable health care act to
the public, millions of small businesses heard the message that
they were going to get a tax credit, they were going to benefit
if they provided health care for their employees. Yet when we
are given an explanation of this tax credit and given this
chart, I don't know of a small business in my district that
would look at this chart and say that this is a simple tax
credit.
And my biggest concern is that the compliance, the cost
that it would take for a small business to employ an accountant
to simply navigate through this chart and navigate through the
qualifications, in many cases, would far outstrip any savings
that they would get from the credit. So I think it is a
testament to the complexity of this, the Code, to say that 4.4
million people were told, ``You might qualify by it,'' and
309,000 claimed it.
Do you--have you figured out what the average tax credit
issued to an applicant that takes advantage of it is, Ms.
Ingram?
Ms. INGRAM. I tend to be somewhat allergic to raw data, but
it is several thousand. And it depends very much on the
situation of that small business. I have heard from small
businesses that they received 5,000, and I have heard from
small businesses that it has been smaller. So it very much
depends on where they land, in terms of their size and the
kinds of premiums that they pay.
Mr. MARCHANT. Thank you very much.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Paulsen.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
holding this hearing. It is pretty clear from some of the
discussion testimony this morning that you have a tax credit
that small businesses were probably primarily hoping to take
advantage of, and it is obviously the folks that are taking
advantage of it or using it is substantially lower, or
significantly lower--surprisingly lower--than was ever
expected, about 8 percent of those that are eligible.
I know we are going to hear from some folks in the next
panel that will be able to talk a little bit about why that
might be the case, but I want to dive a little bit deeper. And
I assume a lot of it is about the complexity, but I do want to
follow up a little bit and ask this question. Because it does
seem that it is the burden perspective that is one of the
reasons why companies are not participating in it.
And I just--I remember I spoke to one small manufacturing
company in my district about health care in particular, and to
its credit this company does provide health insurance for its
employees. And like many companies, this company is seeing its
health insurance rates go up. But I think the reaction that I
heard from the leaders that I talked with at the company when
they say, ``Look, we are covering our health care costs, we
wish Congress would address the cost issue, but we are not
going to participate in any of the potential benefits in the
new health care law, because we are not convinced it is worth
the time and the effort to participate in these potential
benefits.''
And so, I mean that is of concern. I think it adds to the
whole factor of uncertainty and how companies are investing in
their people and in their equipment in the down economy.
But let me do this. Let me ask this question, because we
talked a little bit about fraud and accuracy. I want to dive a
little bit deeper. Mr. George, in the report on the IRS efforts
to implement the small business tax credit, you discuss the
problems with tracking employees when employers are using these
professional employer organizations. Can you explain a little
bit about exactly what the problem is in regard to the credit,
and how the IRS can fix the problem for--when these
organizations are actually used?
Mr. GEORGE. Yes. One of the points that I raised earlier
was simply having the IRS have the ability to cross-check the
Employee Identification Number between the PEO, the
Professional Employer Organization, and the entity which they
are representing.
Now, I don't know whether or not the commissioner thinks
that the IRS needs legislation in order to accomplish that. But
again, we recommended that over 2 years ago in a report that
related to this.
Going back to your point about complexity, sir, what we
have found in our study of this matter is that the taxpayer, in
order to take advantage of this, has to determine which
employees may be counted for credit purposes, what constitutes
a qualifying arrangement, determining the number of FTEs for
the purposes of the credit, determining the annual wages for
purposes of the credit. The premium payments for purposes of
the credit are capped, so they have to make sure that they
don't exceed that. The phasing out of the credit, if the number
of FTEs exceeds 10, and the average amount of wages exceeds
$25,000, as you pointed out, and then the effect that state and
local credits have on the overall issue. I mean that is a
factor that needs to be taken into consideration.
So, I know there--this is an extraordinarily difficult
credit to implement. Very few people would be able to do it
without the help of professional preparers. But I will, again,
yield to the commissioner.
Mr. PAULSEN. Well, and let me just--because it sounds like,
okay, there is complexity, obviously. But if the math is
correct on the form, the company could be complying from the
math perspective but there could be erroneous--not fraud,
potentially, but erroneous reporting based on these
professional service organizations that may be employing the
individuals, rather than the true small business.
And so, I mean, how do you get away from doing an actual
audit? You know, Ms. Ingram, Commissioner Ingram, how do you
get away from doing an actual audit? Does the IRS plan to audit
more companies, more businesses? And, in particular, now that
tax-exempt entities are eligible for this credit taken against
income, which has not been a practice in the past, from what I
understand, with other credits, I mean, does the IRS plan to
audit and increase audits for tax-exempt entities?
Ms. INGRAM. Well, one of the interesting things on the tax-
exempt entity side is, because that is a refundable credit and
we have additional filters involved, we have been very
interested in what kinds of folks are getting kicked out by
those filters.
And so, learning from the profile, the demographics of
which organizations seem to be hitting filters on that side has
been important for us to monitor and to figure out how to tweak
or cross-check those filters to make sure that we are getting
the folks who do appear to have a reason that we should
correspond with them prior to payment, and those which are
getting caught up, and which we could resolve without contact.
A good example would be--is if you were going to check
certain databases about an exempt organization, you might find
that a church that has no requirement to apply to be exempt,
nor a requirement under the statute to file an annual return,
might get kicked out and yet is filing an employment tax return
and has the right range of employees and wages.
So, that is a good example of kick-outs where we want to
look at what is getting kicked out, and make sure that we are
calibrating it to fit what really needs to be pursued----
Mr. PAULSEN. And, Commissioner, I know my time is just out.
But can you just tell me, so does the IRS intend to do
increased audits of tax-exempt entities as a part of this now?
Ms. INGRAM. If a tax-exempt entity has claimed a credit
that we can't be comfortable with, we will correspond with them
prior to payment.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Kind.
Mr. KIND. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you holding
this important hearing. Hopefully, we will have another
opportunity at some point to reconvene and have another hearing
and an update because I think, in a lot of respects, it is a
little premature. Obviously, the credit didn't take effect
until last year. The Affordable Care Act didn't pass until
March of last year. We are still waiting to see all the small
business filings coming in, and the impact, who is going to
take the credit. So, in some respects, it is a little bit
premature.
But let's get to the complexity a little bit, because I
think we all have a shared goal. When you take a look at the
number of uninsured individuals in this country, the vast
majority of them are working people in small businesses. In
fact, for small businesses the size of three to nine employees,
less than half of them are offering health care coverage for
their employees today.
So, if we are going to be serious at all about trying to
attack the number of uninsured, you have to do something to
deal with small businesses to make it more affordable. And that
is why, in previous years, there has always been bipartisan
support for providing tax relief to small businesses and
providing health care coverage for their employees. That is
what we are trying to attempt here.
Now, if there is a problem with complexity, let's address
that and come up with some recommendations on what we can do to
tighten it up and make it less complex. That is what I hope we
can try to accomplish at a hearing and the feedback that we are
getting.
But, Mr. George, based on your study and analysis of the
credit so far, have you offered any recommendations on how to
simplify the tax credit to deal with the complexity that is out
there right now?
Mr. GEORGE. Again, it is the Secretary of the Treasury that
has delegated substantive tax policy to the Office of Tax
Policy. And so, I am not here to advocate any particular----
Mr. KIND. Right.
Mr. GEORGE [continuing]. Substantive tax policy. That said,
something as simple, again, as math error authority, expanding
it----
Mr. KIND. Sure.
Mr. GEORGE [continuing]. So that--to keep the IRS from
having to send out money when they know there is a problem, and
yet they don't have the authority to keep that money from going
out, which would be a simple solution to this.
Mr. KIND. I am talking from the employer's point of view,
trying to simplify so that it is easier for them to take
advantage of the tax credit.
Mr. GEORGE. Well, when you----
Mr. KIND. Are there any recommendations that you have
there?
Mr. GEORGE. Well----
Mr. KIND. Ms. Ingram, has IRS been looking at this at all,
as far as steps that we could take to try to simplify it, or
can IRS do it on your own?
Ms. INGRAM. I think that what we have to do, from our
perspective, is look at whether we can simplify forms, simplify
instructions, get better how-to kits in people's hands, help
them with decision trees to reduce the number of questions they
need to ask themselves.
Many of the portions of the provision are getting at more
complicated business arrangements, and not everybody needs to--
--
Mr. KIND. Right. Well, Ms. Ingram, just for the sake of
clarification now, it is not mandatory that a taxpayer complete
the worksheets and the instructions in order to claim the tax
credit. Is that right?
Ms. INGRAM. Absolutely.
Mr. KIND. Now, just so I am clear--and I have my own
calculator on my website for small businesses to plug in
information to see what they could qualify for under the tax
credit--check me if I am wrong, but is it basically three
pieces of information a small businesses owner is going to need
or provide the accountant in order to take advantage of the tax
credit? One, individuals considered as employees; two, employee
hours of service; and three, employee wages paid. Are those
basically the three criteria that they are going to need to
plug in, in order to determine their tax credit under this?
Ms. INGRAM. That is where most of the math questions are,
yes. They do need to make sure that the insurance they are
providing and the employer's share of the contribution also
meets the rules.
Mr. KIND. And that is the 50 percent rule.
Ms. INGRAM. Yes.
Mr. KIND. And most states, like Wisconsin, already require
that at the state level. So, that is not a problem. I mean that
is something that already applies.
But those are basically it. And I can't think of a small
business owner who wouldn't know that data or those facts that
they could just plug in. Otherwise, your business probably
isn't going to be open very much. If you don't know how many
employees you have, how much you are paying them, and how many
hours they are working, there is a problem, I think.
Am I missing something here? Is it more complicated than
that?
Ms. INGRAM. I think the thing that we have been trying to
listen to when we talk to stakeholders and small businesses and
advisors is to try to hear where they would like assistance,
where we could make it simpler, where we could say, ``Answer
these couple of questions, and if the answer is yes for each of
them, go straight to''----
Mr. KIND. And the only reason you see a chart like this is
just to score cheap political points and to confuse people. I
mean realistically, this is what this is all about. But do you
know, Ms. Ingram, how many small business owners that are
filing taxes have a paid preparer, professional preparer, doing
it for them?
Ms. INGRAM. I don't have the exact statistic, but it is
high.
Mr. KIND. It is pretty----
Ms. INGRAM. It is high.
Mr. KIND [continuing]. Pretty high number. Right.
Ms. INGRAM. Yes.
Mr. KIND. And they are the ones who are supposed to have
the expertise in being able to take advantage of all the
credits, all the deductions that small business owners can
claim anyway. Is that right?
Ms. INGRAM. Yes, it is why we are shifting our strategy for
outreach for the next cycle, to include the----
Mr. KIND. Professional preparers.
Ms. INGRAM [continuing]. Tax preparation industry, the
electronic industry, to see what they can also do.
Mr. KIND. Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. George, your point
was very well taken about chasing the money once it is already
out the door. That is a very practical point. Coming from a
small business world, I know exactly what that issue relates
to.
So, my question actually is to Ms. Ingram. You talk about
the filters as being kind of a primary tool--if I am hearing
your testimony correctly--the filters being the primary tool to
prevent that from occurring. Can you just articulate what are
you--what kind of filters are you deploying? How are you
determining those? What are you--how does that process work?
Ms. INGRAM. I will try to be responsive, but again I am
going to be a little cautious about specificity.
But the--for all returns we do a certain number of layers
of validating the return itself, of looking for basic
indicators of fraud that might be, for example, of interest to
our criminal investigation unit. So there is sort of the basic
process that returns go through.
In addition, we have a set of filters that are designed
around cross-checking secondary information inside the service,
information that we would not be able to use the ordinary type
of math error to address. And, depending on whether it is
refundable or non-refundable--because historically, the risks
are quite different in our experience--we either use the
additional filters to kick out any real outliers immediately,
but otherwise to identify cases in which we would like to
correspond, even if the return is processed first. Whereas, on
the refundable credit side, we do all of that before any
dollars leave the house.
Mr. REED. Okay. And then, so what kind of success rate are
you demonstrating with utilizing those filters, for example, on
this credit? How are you--what is the metric that you are using
in the agency to determine whether the filters are working or
not?
Ms. INGRAM. Well, we do that a couple of ways. And really
telling how well they are working here is going to take a
little bit of time.
One of the things we looked at in designing our program was
the work that we had done around the COBRA issue a couple of
years ago. And GAO actually came in and looked at our filters
there, threw some fake test cases at us, which we caught all
of. So we thought we had a pretty good methodology developed
through that experience, thought we had gotten some good advice
in that case from GAO. And so we took a similar approach here.
In the general business credit area, as I mentioned before,
we are just not seeing the big issues in the early kick-outs in
this return, in this issue.
Mr. REED. Okay. So then, beyond filters, what other tools
are being utilized to make sure that it is being monitored
appropriately?
Ms. INGRAM. Well, the filters are particularly good for up-
front identification, and the trick always is to get the
filters right, feedback from our own observations, as well as
from our oversight bodies.
The other thing is to check on whether the filters are
effective is also to sample and look at some returns, some of
which went through filters and some of which did not kick out.
There are various ways in which we try to look at sort of
control groups--I don't know what you want to call that--to see
what is being caught and what didn't get caught.
Mr. REED. Okay. Mr. George, did you have any additional
information on that?
Mr. GEORGE. Again, I am repeating from my oral statement--
the IRS does have a program to attempt to identify taxpayers
who don't file employment tax returns, and yet might still be
able to have this legitimately paid by a PEO, the Professional
Employer Organization. But the IRS truly can't tell the
difference between whether or not the PEO had the
responsibility to comply with this, or that the employer does.
And so, when it is something that basic that they still
can't determine, it is troubling. It is problematic, and I
think would lead to more difficultly.
Mr. REED. And that is a great point, because that would
be--that would seem to me to be a very simple check. If you are
doing the payroll tax and you are filing that, that you would
match that up with the provider. What is the barrier to that?
What am I missing?
And that seems like a very simple--Ms. Ingram, what am I
missing, why that doesn't match up with each other?
Ms. INGRAM. I think the issue is if one of our filters for
the small business is to compare their information about this
credit with their employment tax filings, and if they have
hired a firm to do that for them, the information may be in the
system under two different employer identification numbers, and
it is the connection that Mr. George is referring to.
Mr. REED. So how do we fix that? How do we fix that, Mr.
George?
Mr. GEORGE. Their computer systems need to be updated.
There is no question about that. That would seem like low-
hanging fruit, but it depends on the resources available to
them, and their priorities.
Mr. REED. All right. My time is up. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Inspector General
George and Commissioner Ingram, we thank you both for being
here today and for testifying in front of the Subcommittee.
Please be advised that Members may have written questions they
would like to submit to you, and we would ask that you respond
to those, and they will be made part of the official hearing
record.
And with that, we will conclude our first panel. Thank you.
Mr. GEORGE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. INGRAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I will ask the second panel to come up
and take their seats.
I would like to welcome our second panel. We have Ms.
Patricia Thompson, who is with the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants, and is chair of its tax executive
committee. We have Mr. Todd McCracken, who is the president of
the National Small Business Association. And Mr. Hisel is co-
director of Home Resource. I want to thank you all for being
here today to testify in front of the Subcommittee.
You will each have 5 minutes to present your oral
testimony, with your full written statement being made a part
of the official record. And, Ms. Thompson, we will begin with
you.

STATEMENT OF PATRICIA THOMPSON, CHAIR, AICPA TAX EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS,
WASHINGTON, DC

Ms. THOMPSON. Good morning, Chairman Boustany, Ranking
Member Lewis, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Patricia Thompson, I am a CPA and chair of the AICPA tax
executive committee. I am also the tax partner at a small CPA
firm in Rhode Island. And I would like to thank the
Subcommittee for the opportunity to appear at today's hearing.
This credit was designed to encourage small businesses and
small tax-exempt organizations to offer health insurance to
their employees for the first time, or help them afford
coverage they already have. The AICPA does not have a position
supporting or opposing this incentive. My testimony today is
based on our members' experiences with working with small
businesses, and will focus on the technical aspects of the
credit, and address how they can be improved to make the
exercise of the tax credit simpler and more transparent.
The AICPA has a long-standing tradition of advocating for
sound tax policy. The tax law should be simple, so that
taxpayers can understand the rules and can comply with them
correctly in a cost-efficient manner.
Transparency is an important partner with tax
simplification. Transparency is the basic notion that taxpayers
should know, namely, that a tax or a tax incentive exists, and
how and when the tax incentive applies to them.
Based on our members' experiences working with small
businesses, we believe there are a number of areas where the
new code section 45-R could be made simpler. We understand the
challenges Congress faces as it tackles the complex issues
inherent in drafting tax legislation, and appreciate your
diligence in trying to do the right thing for taxpayers.
The IRS should be complimented on providing guidance on the
application of the credit, and also on informing taxpayers and
tax professionals on the availability of the credit.
Since most small employers did not know until the end of
the year or later, when their tax returns were prepared,
whether or not they qualified for the credit, there was less
incentive for them to provide health insurance coverage. Also,
many of the variables, such as the number of full-time
equivalents and the hours worked per employee are difficult to
estimate early in the year. It was not very helpful for most
employers with 10 or more employees to begin testing
eligibility or potentially calculating the credit before the
end of the year.
Many taxpayers found the credit to be quite complex,
because the definitions of ``eligible small employer,'' ``full-
time equivalent employees,'' and ``employee'' are not
straightforward or consistent with other definitions in the
Code. For example, the definition of ``eligible small
employer'' was unique to this provision. The business was
required to accumulate information sometimes not readily
available, and perform several complex calculations before it
knew whether or not the provision applied to them.
It is also necessary to evaluate each qualified health plan
to determine if the employer makes sufficient non-elective
contribution on behalf of each employee, as well as determining
the premiums eligible for the credit.
Other complexities include the calculation of the number of
full-time equivalent employees, and the phasing out of the
credit, once an employer's full-time equivalent count exceeded
10, or its average annual wages exceeded $25,000. For small--
some small employers, it was not uncommon this year for tax
preparers to have spent a significant amount of time necessary
to prepare an entire small business return, just on the credit
calculation, only to find that the client did not qualify for
the credit.
The AICPA believes the tax credit should be simplified. We
suggest that you consider changing the definition of a small
business to either base the definition on gross receipts or
employee count from the prior year, or the average of the prior
two years. Prior-year information would be readily available,
allowing small businesses to calculate early in the year the
tax savings for purchasing or continuing the health insurance.
We also suggest that the phase-out calculations for the
employee count and the annual salary be eliminated. Phase-outs
create difficulties in estimating an employer's benefit from
purchasing or continuing to provide health insurance coverage.
We appreciate your efforts in examining some of the
difficulties that businesses face in navigating through the
rules of this credit.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I am
happy to answer any of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thompson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Ms. Thompson.
Mr. McCracken, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF TODD McCRACKEN, PRESIDENT,
NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, DC

Mr. MCCRACKEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Boustany
and Ranking Member Lewis, we appreciate the opportunity to be
here today to speak to the Subcommittee, and we appreciate your
commitment to finding ways to find workable solutions to get
affordable health coverage in the hands of small companies.
Again, my name is Todd McCracken, I am the president of the
National Small Business Association. And we are a national
small business advocacy organization that has worked on these
issues for many, many years.
Our sources indicate that there is still a very high level
of confusion about the health care law among the small business
community that extends, I think, to this tax credit. Part of
the confusion, I believe, stems from the start date of the law,
2014. I think there are still some companies that don't believe
that some of these credits really begin until that timeframe.
That said, I think the IRS actually has done a pretty good
job of outreach to the small business community. I think that
they have engaged a lot of small business organizations in
creating awareness of the tax credit. We certainly try to get
information to our members, so that if there is a credit that
they are able to claim, they are making sure they are doing it.
But I think there is still a huge vacuum there, because
it--the overall complexity of the Tax Code plays a significant
role, I think, in this as well, because there are so many
aspects, so many credits, so many things we are trying to
induce or incent companies to do or not do, that to a large
extent it becomes sort of a white noise for them, and it
becomes very difficult to get their attention on a particular
provision to affect the way they do business.
And as my colleagues from the AICPA have pointed out I
think very capably in their written statement, the calculation
is relatively complex, especially for small companies that
don't have a stable work force. They have employees that come
in and out of service that work differing hourly schedules on a
week-to-week basis, those that have seasonal and part-time
employees. It can be relatively complex for them to calculate.
And that is a lot of companies. It is more standard for many
small businesses to have that kind of work force than to have a
very stable, it's pretty much the same all year kind of work
force. For those companies it would be relatively simple.
But I think the single biggest issue that this credit faces
is that it is a credit chasing an audience that is just very,
very small. If you look at the provision of health insurance in
the smallest companies, most--by quite a lot--companies do not
offer health insurance to their employees. If you look at the
number of those very small companies--ones who would be most
eligible to receive the full 35 percent tax credit that are
fewer than 10, have low-wage workers, less than $25,000 a year,
a very high percentage of those companies employ family members
in the business. And those family members are specifically
precluded from taking this tax credit if they are an employee
in the business.
So, you may have a situation where a small business offers
health insurance, and most of the low-wage employees who are
eligible decline the coverage, because they simply cannot
afford to pay their half of the premium, which is clearly
understandable in that labor market. And so there is really
nothing left for that company, even though they technically
offer health insurance, there is nothing left for them to take
a tax credit against, because they don't have that expense.
And when you look at the raw numbers that have been--that
the IRS and Treasury have provided, granted, they are
preliminary and they need a thorough analysis when they are all
in. But if you look at the numbers, there is about 300,000
companies that have claimed the credit for about $400 million,
a little above that in both cases. That works out to an average
of about $1,300 per business. And $1,300 is $1,300. But in the
larger scheme of how much health insurance costs, that is not
even 25 percent of one employee's single coverage value.
So that leads me to believe it seems very likely that there
is a whole bunch of companies who are taking it at the margins,
who have more than 10 employees, have average wages more than
$25,000 a year, and have--did the whole calculation, and
figured out they could get a very small sliver of the tax
credit. But it winds up being a very small percentage of their
overall health insurance costs, which could be 80, $100,000 a
year. So I suspect that may be what is happening here.
But all this being said, we have always believed that the
best way to subsidize health insurance is to look at
individuals, look at their own personal situation, and not to
do it through businesses. And to bring down the overall cost of
health insurance is the fundamental issue I think this congress
needs to grapple with.
Thank you for having me today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McCracken follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you.
Mr. Hisel, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW HISEL, CO-DIRECTOR,
HOME RESOURCE, MISSOULA, MONTANA

Mr. HISEL. Chairman Boustany, Ranking Member Lewis, and
Subcommittee Members, thank you for the invitation to testify
today. I appreciate the opportunity to share my experiences as
a small employer with the ACA health insurance tax credit. My
name is Matthew Hisel. I co-direct Home Resource, a building
materials reuse center in Missoula, Montana.
We collect and sell reusable building materials to reduce
waste and promote a more vibrant and sustainable local economy.
We also partner with a range of work training programs and
offer educational classes. Home Resource, Incorporated is a
non-profit under section 501(c)(3) under a special category for
resource conservation. When we founded Home Resource in 2003,
my co-founder and I were the only people on payroll. Now we
employ between 15 and 20 people.
At Home Resource we believe our employees work best when
they are healthy. We also know our health care benefit is key
to attracting and retaining great employees. We have offered
health insurance to employees who work more than 30 hours a
week since 2004, and we pay 100 percent of the premiums.
Skyrocketing costs have made this difficult to sustain. We
face double-digit increases practically every year, sometimes
as high as 39 percent. We have had to shop around for a new
plan almost every year, and we have had to increase our
deductibles and reduce benefits. We now have a $5,200
deductible. It is the kind of insurance that works fine until
something goes wrong, as I can attest to personally from an
emergency hospital stay that left me with bills totaling around
$4,000. I had just barely been able to achieve the American
dream of homeownership a few years before, and these bills
forced me to sell my home.
In the past year the ACA has changed our situation
significantly, and for the better. This is thanks to both the
tax credit and also other parts of the law. In 2010 we paid
close to $11,000 for our employees' health insurance. The tax
credit cut our costs by over $2,000. For a small business
struggling to keep health coverage, that makes all the
difference. We were actually considering dropping our insurance
in June of 2011, but knowing we would get the tax credit for
2010 tipped the balance and helped us maintain coverage.
I found the credit pretty straightforward. I prepared the
worksheet to determine if we qualified myself. It took me less
than 10 minutes. Our accountant spent a little over an hour
preparing the final forms, at a cost of $195 to Home Resource.
That is $195 to get more than $2,000 back. A small business
like mine cannot ask for a better return on investment than
that.
While I was aware of the credit from following the debate
over health care reform, and my accountant was aware when I
asked her about it, I do believe there would be value in a
broader education effort to ensure that all small business
owners and their accountants are aware of the opportunity to
claim it. If utilization of the credit is lower than expected,
I would encourage you to consider building on it to help more
businesses benefit. This could be done by raising the
thresholds for FTEs to 50 and wages to $75,000. Since the
Congressional Budget Office scored the credit at 38 billion, I
believe Congress should make sure all of these resources are
getting to small businesses to help us with our health care
costs.
The tax credit isn't the only piece of the health law that
is helping us. There is the requirement that insurers cover
free preventative care. There is the end to denying coverage
for kids with pre-existing conditions. I lost one of my best
employees before this provision went into effect, because our
insurer wouldn't cover his kid, who was a cancer survivor with
Downs Syndrome.
And finally, after years of steep increases between 19 and
39 percent a year, this year's increase was only 9 percent.
Combine this with the tax credit, and we will see our effective
health insurance costs go down by double digits this year.
There are other benefits we are looking forward to in the
health care reform, as well: the state insurance exchange,
which will give small businesses more transparency, better
choices, and more bargaining power; stronger rate review to
protect us from unreasonable rate hikes; the minimum medical
loss ratio requirement, which will ensure a basic standard of
value for premiums; and reduced cost shifting, as more people
get health insurance and start paying into the system.
Based on the improvements we are already seeing, I believe
it is critical that we keep moving forward on implementing the
health law. You have an opportunity to build on the tax credit
to help more businesses benefit. This credit is a bridge to a
reformed insurance marketplace in 2014. If not enough
businesses are making it across the bridge, let's build the
bridge wider, not blow it up.
Helping small businesses get affordable health coverage is
one of the most important things you can do to help us succeed,
grow, and create jobs. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hisel follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you, Mr. Hisel. We have heard a
lot about the complexity of this tax credit this morning, both
with the first panel and, Ms. Thompson and Mr. McCracken, your
testimony both sort of corroborate that. And you know, we have
heard about Form 8941 and the instructions, 8 pages, complex
calculations that need to be done.
What kind of feedback have small businesses been giving you
on the value of this credit?
Ms. THOMPSON. For my clients that are able to take
advantage of the credit, they find that it is very helpful,
because it does reduce the health insurance costs. And so the
complexities that we are going through, to them it is worth it.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay. Mr. McCracken.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I would say it is a mixed bag. I mean there
certainly are companies that, as we just heard from the last
example, that fit the definitions nicely, and can take a rather
large share of the credit. My point is that there are very few
of those companies in the larger scheme of the American
economy. And so, you just have to factor that factor in.
So I do think there are some companies who have gone
through the exercise--and I have heard from some of these
folks--who went through the exercise of doing the calculation,
having their outside CPA firm do a lot of work for them to
figure out what the credit would be, and at the end of the day
claiming the credit, yes, because they had done the work, but
it being a relatively small credit. And there was a frustration
that they had gone through all the trouble. And if they had
known the outcome, they probably wouldn't have paid the CPA and
done all the hassle to figure out the credit, because they only
got a few hundred dollars or a thousand or two, which, in the
scheme of a company that might have 15, 20, 25 employees, would
be a relatively small percentage of the credit.
So, it is--it really depends very much on the specifics of
the individual business. They really run the gamut between
those two.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. McCracken, do you have any
information on the actual cost to a small business to get this
credit?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I don't. And again, that is going to also
vary greatly, depending upon the type of workforce that company
has, because it is going to be much more difficult for a small
company to have a highly seasonal, highly--lots of variations
in its work force over the course of the year, sort of week by
week and month by month.
I should also point out that the smaller those companies
are--which are the ones that stand to get the biggest credit,
potentially--are the ones that have least automation in those
processes, or the ones who are least likely--most of them don't
use a payroll service, just for example, in the below 10
market.
So, for them to then go back and collect that data often is
a time-consuming manual process than to go back and figure out
how many hours did each person work each week to figure out
what the FTEs--so--but if you are a company that has a stable,
5-person work force and they all work 35 hours a week every
week and that doesn't change, it would be relatively simple.
So----
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Thompson, do you have information on
cost, maybe average cost for a small business?
Ms. THOMPSON. We don't really have the information on the
cost of preparing the credit, because it depends on the size of
the firm that is preparing the credit. It could be a small CPA
firm, it could be a large, or it could be mid-sized. So you
can't really generalize on what the cost is going to be to
prepare the credit calculations.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ballpark?
Ms. THOMPSON. You can't really ballpark it.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Not even a ballpark figure?
Ms. THOMPSON. Uh-uh.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay. Well, the IRS has mentioned their
outreach efforts. And Inspector General George gave them a B on
it, not a bad mark. So it sounds as if they have really made
significant efforts to move forward, to get the information out
to tax preparers and--as well as to small businesses about
the--their awareness of this credit. Yet, with all of this,
participation still seems to be below what was predicted, and
seems to be low, by most standards, even at this early stage.
Ms. Thompson, is that because of insufficient outreach,
insufficient information being put out to small business? Or is
it because the credit is just complex, and small businesses
have not availed themselves of that because of the complexity
and cost?
Ms. THOMPSON. I think at this point it is really too early
to make a conclusion as to the effectiveness of the credit.
Because, as we had heard, the information is not in for all of
the tax returns that were on extension, which was as late as
October 15th. And for those that were located in disaster
areas, it could have even been October 31st. And as someone had
mentioned, the tax-exempt organizations are due today. So,
without having a full year of information, it is really too
early to answer that question.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Okay. Fair enough. Mr. McCracken.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I think a big issue, as I said before, is
that there is a relatively small population of these firms who
can maximize the credit. Most companies that offer health
insurance that are below 10 employees are not low-wage firms.
So they are limited on that end.
So, when you drill down to how many companies are truly
low-wage firms, have fewer than 10 employees, have been able to
offer health insurance nevertheless, and have an uptake rate
for their employees for the offer, you are just looking at a
very small slice of the small business community. And I think a
lot of the low uptake comes down from that fundamental point.
And a lot of the companies that do offer health insurance
in that market that might have been assumed to be taking the
credit, when you dig deeper you find out that they are often
employing family members who are specifically precluded from
using the credit.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And Ms. Thompson and Mr. McCracken, both
of you mentioned that small businesses are often
disproportionately hurt by the complexity of the Tax Code,
because they are unable to hire or they don't have the
resources to hire the number of tax preparers and accountants,
lawyers, and so forth, advisors to navigate through the Code.
And I am concerned about these different definitions of a
small business that are out there. I think it was your
testimony that highlighted some of that, your written
testimony. For example, the research credit defines ``small
business'' as one with 500 or fewer employees. But for the
purposes of an Archer Medical savings account, it could be a
business with fewer than 51 employees. And then there are all
these various definitions.
So, comment on how the Tax Code's complexity affects these
small employers, however they are defined, and hone in on the
impact of this particular tax credit and its complexity, and
the impact it is having.
Ms. THOMPSON. Well, the AICPA is definitely in favor of
simplifying the Tax Code. There is no such thing as a simple
code, because the world is just very complex. So you really
need to make it simpler than it is. And as you pointed out,
something as basic as the definition of a small business,
depending on which particular provision you are looking at, you
are going to get a different answer.
But we also understand that there may be reasons why they
are different, depending on what you are trying to accomplish
as your goal in passing legislation.
So we can understand why it is different. We would like to
see it a little bit more consistent, and for example, on this
one, when we are talking about having to use current
information, on all those other provisions that I had
identified they were all using prior years, which is very
helpful to that small business, because that is information
that is going to be readily available to them, and it may not
be as much of a stretch for them to go on the prior year,
rather than the current year.
So, it is more challenging for a small business. But I
would have to say that the small businesses do need a
professional to prepare their tax returns. And we do find that
if they do hire the professional, they are going to be done
correctly, and they may find that they are going to be saving
more in taxes than they would otherwise, because they are going
to be aware of these incentives.
And the tax professional is doing these calculations all
the time. So if it was a one-off, where one person was just
preparing it, yes, it is going to sound very complicated. But
if a CPA firm is doing it, they are doing it multiple times for
multiple employers, and it is going to become a lot less
complex for them.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. McCracken, briefly, would you like
to respond?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Yes. Your basic question was about the
definition of small companies. And there aren't very many other
instances for the tax law--usually there is other ways of
defining smaller entities, rather than necessarily employee
size.
But I also would warn against creating sort of a cliff
effect by, for all purposes, defining small business exactly
the same way. Because if you sort of define it at 25 employees,
or wherever you pick that number, whether it is for good things
below that or bad things above that, you are going to create a
significant disincentive. So there does need to be some
variation, to some degree, so that you don't wind up with one
place where people don't want to cross.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Thank you. Ranking Member Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank each of you for being here this morning.
I would like for each one of you to respond to this
question by saying yes or no. Do you support repeal of the
small business health care tax credit in the Affordable Care
Act?
Ms. THOMPSON. I know you said that was supposed to be a yes
or no answer.
Mr. LEWIS. Yes?
Ms. THOMPSON. Except the AICPA doesn't have a position
either for or against, so I can't really answer that question.
Mr. LEWIS. Yes, would you want to speak for yourself as
individual? You don't want to get in trouble?
Ms. THOMPSON. I am not going to get in trouble today.
[Laughter.]
Mr. LEWIS. Oh, just take a chance.
Ms. THOMPSON. No, I think I am going to pass.
[Laughter.]
Mr. LEWIS. Oh, you will pass?
Ms. THOMPSON. Yes, sorry.
Mr. LEWIS. That is all right.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I would say no.
Mr. HISEL. No.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you. Mr. Hisel, what role did the health
care credit play in your decision to provide health insurance
for your employees? Did it play any role?
Mr. HISEL. We were already providing health insurance. But
as I said, we were considering dropping it at the beginning of
this year, 2011. I spent a lot of time trying to balance my
budget for a year, looking a year in advance. And you know,
this year we were really struggling with a challenging economy
through the winter, and I was working very hard to get the
number at the end of the day to remain positive.
And it ultimately made a big difference to us, because I
really was looking at health insurance this year. And
ultimately, knowing that we would get the credit for 2010, and
then again in 2011, that tipped the balance. It was a deciding
factor, and we decided to keep our health insurance.
Mr. LEWIS. So you would be a strong supporter of the health
care tax credit?
Mr. HISEL. Absolutely.
Mr. LEWIS. So you are saying as for my house, for your
house, could you say to other small businesspeople, ``You
should take a look at it?''
Mr. HISEL. Absolutely. And I know a lot of people have. And
I do agree that it should be expanded to include more small
businesses. Those thresholds should be increased and perhaps
brought in line with other definitions, 50 FTEs and wages.
I would also like to say that we are a very seasonal
business. We fluctuate with the construction season quite a
bit. And I completed this qualifying worksheet myself. It is
six simple fill-in-the-blanks. I had all the information in
QuickBooks. It was not that challenging. I don't quite
understand what the problem was. And then, you know, to just
hand it over to our accounting service, they did not seem to
have a huge problem with it.
And I think it just needs to be expanded.
Mr. LEWIS. Well, you traveled a great distance to be here
today.
Mr. HISEL. Yes.
Mr. LEWIS. Further than anyone.
Mr. HISEL. I am sorry?
Mr. LEWIS. I said you traveled a great distance to come and
testify today. And I just want to thank you for coming.
Mr. HISEL. You are welcome, thank you for having me.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I thank the gentleman. Ms. Black.
Ms. BLACK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again, thank you,
panelists, for being here today. It is very helpful.
It has been suggested that what we see here was just a
political stunt. And yet I continue to hear that there is
complexity. And the complexity includes things like definitions
that are confusing, that it is also confusing with the other
parts of the tax code. And yet, there--has been suggested that
it could be done in three simple steps.
I would like to hear--and Mr. Hisel, I probably want to
come back to you, but I would like to hear, first of all, from
Ms. Thompson and Mr. McCracken about what they are hearing and
what their experience are with dealing with the small
businesses. If it is just three simple steps, then why is it
that there are folks that are saying that it is more complex
than that? So help me understand that.
Ms. THOMPSON. I think that the provision does require a lot
of questions to be answered. And the first one is starting off
with whether or not they do qualify as a small business. And it
is not as easy as just looking to the prior year's gross
receipts, or the prior year's employee count. It is really
based on the current year information.
And when you look at the definition of ``employee,'' as one
of the other panels had mentioned, it is not just your employee
count on the W-2s that were issued during the year, it needs a
little bit more analysis to look at those employees, to see
whether or not there is any family members that have to be
excluded. If you have seasonal workers, how many--whether those
seasonal workers can be included or not. And so, there is a lot
of definitions or analysis that goes into whether or not that
person is an employee that is going to be eligible for that
credit.
And then, if you talk about the hours, the hours are going
to be based on the payroll records, again. But you do have to
look at it, because if somebody went over 2,080 hours, you
don't include the excess over that level, so you would include
only that amount. If the people aren't being compensated on an
hourly basis, then they may have other methods of determining
what--the hours works.
So, it is those type of definitions and analysis each step
of the way that adds to the amount of work that is being done
for that credit. And so that is why we were suggesting that if
you change the definition away from the way it is right now,
and base it on something like the prior year, it does away with
a lot of the complexity that is there.
Ms. BLACK. Mr. McCracken.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Actually, I don't have a lot to add to that.
But I would also point out that, you know, for a lot of these
companies, they will see that and realize they need to go
through lots of steps, and they have to change their procedures
to simplify how they can gather that data in order to claim the
credit. And if the credit they are able to claim they think
will be at a relatively low level, and it is temporary, they
might not want to go through that trouble of change the way
they do it.
Again, that is more likely for the companies that have more
than 10 or 15 employees, that are sort of reaching the upper
size of the availability of the credit. But my sense is those
are the companies that are far more likely to be offering
health insurance to the employees. So it is going to affect a
greater variety of actual--of people.
Ms. BLACK. So I think what I hear you saying is that it is
all across the board. And maybe Mr. Hisel has a little bit more
stability there, where he is not having to figure quite as many
of these different categories that I am seeing to not be well
defined, or that there is a lot of variations in the employees,
the number of employees, the hours worked, and that kind of
thing.
Obviously, we all want to get to the same point, where we
can let small businesses take advantage of something that is
there to incentivize them to provide insurance for their
employees. So I appreciate your recommendations there.
The next question I wanted to ask is the piece on the
family members. Is there a reason why you believe that--and I
wasn't here when this was passed, so I don't know--why family
members would be excluded? Because it seems that that is very
typical in small businesses, that small businesses are very
family-oriented. And to exclude family members doesn't seem
like it is really going to be beneficial. Is there a reason,
Ms. Thompson or Mr. McCracken, that you could enlighten me on
that piece?
Ms. THOMPSON. I really didn't look into the committee
reports as to why the family members were excluded from the
definition of ``employee,'' so I can't really answer that
question.
Ms. BLACK. Okay. Okay. Mr. McCracken, any idea----
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I don't--wasn't privy to those
conversations, of course, but I have to believe it is because
the congress at the time was concerned about, you know,
potential abuse, that you might hire an employee--a family
member who is not really an employee, that kind of thing, and
so they sought to prevent that.
Ms. BLACK. Well----
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I should also point out, though, that it
does work both ways. Because in companies where you have family
members who are working in the company, more often than not
they are in a kind of a management position. So not only are
they not eligible for the tax credit, but they also aren't
counted in the calculation of whether you are low wage.
And so, if you added them back in to that calculation,
probably the average wage of the company would go up, but your
tax credit would go down for the employees you can claim it
for.
So, if you are going to think about a system that allows
the business owner who works as an employee and the family
members who work as employees to participate, you might need to
sort of think through the levels, because you will wind up
allowing some businesses to claim a credit for some of the
individuals' health insurance, but you might actually reduce
the credit available to other companies.
Ms. BLACK. Good point. And I just think that it is
something we need to take a look at, Mr. Chairman, in
particular. I don't know the reason for it initially, but my
experience with small businesses, of which our family is a
small business, and that many of those that we know do have a
lot of family members that are involved in the business. Thank
you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Dr. McDermott.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Hisel, I feel
an affinity for you. I worked for a gypo logger one summer. I
see that you have been to the University of Montana and got a
master's degree and then you took an entrepreneurship course in
the Montana Community Development Corporation. Did they have a
course in there to figure out how to fill out government forms,
in the master's degree program or in the entrepreneurship?
Mr. HISEL. I do not recall such a course, specifically.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So, the skills that you used were skills
that you learned in maybe common public schools and eighth
grade, where you learned to multiply fractions and add and
subtract?
Mr. HISEL. And divide, yes. That is correct. In fact, there
is an addition symbol right here, and a division symbol. It is
pretty basic.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And so, my feeling then is--why do you think
people are complaining about this form? I mean did you get that
card in the mail? Is that how you figured out about this?
Mr. HISEL. No. I was aware of it from following the health
care debate, that it would be coming. And I was quite anxious
to be aware of it. But my accountant did know about it from
receiving some type of communication from the IRS, I believe.
So----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And so why are we hearing all these
complaints? I mean you are just an ordinary guy who learned
eighth grade math and figured out this thing, and figured it
out, and handed it to your accountant and said, ``I think this
will work for us,'' and your accountant said, ``Yep, you're
right,'' and it cost you $195. Why are other people finding it
so complicated?
Mr. HISEL. I don't know.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. All your people work every day, 8 hours a
day, 50 weeks a year?
Mr. HISEL. No, we have--in fact, we have three full-time
employees--that is one of the blanks--and then the full-time
equivalent of part-time employees is simply a matter of finding
the total number of hours worked by part-time employees, which
is reporting QuickBooks, and you divide by 2,080, and you get
the number of full-time equivalents.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So, it is not that complicated.
Mr. HISEL. Doesn't seem to be, to me.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. And why, then, Ms. Thompson--I mean you got
these accountants. I mean I got an accountant. Everybody here
on the dais has an accountant, I will bet. Bet there is nobody
up here that doesn't use one. They fill out a million forms
every year. Months of February, March, and April are absolutely
crazy at Bader Martin in Seattle.
So, when they have done 100 of these, or 1,000 of them,
what is the complexity then?
Ms. THOMPSON. You made a very good point. It is the tax
professional that is preparing the form. And to them, it is not
complex. But it is to the individual small business owner that
is accumulating that information that it may not be as
straightforward for everybody as it is for my fellow panelist
here.
And so, that is where the complexity comes in. The
complexity is when the small business owner has to accumulate
the information that they don't readily have available. Yes,
they have it available, but it is not just picking up one
number from here and dropping it there. They have to analyze it
in a little bit more detail. But you are absolutely right----
Mr. MCDERMOTT. If you are running a business--if I could
interrupt you just a second--if you are running a business, how
can you run it without knowing how many people you are paying
how much per hour times hours to give them a paycheck at the
end of the week? How could you not know that information, to
just hand it to your accountant and say, ``Here is what I do''?
Ms. THOMPSON. You are absolutely right. There are payroll
records that have annual amounts on them. But it is not as easy
as just picking up that annual amount, because you have to know
if the person had more than 2,080 hours because that person--
you are not picking up the total hours. Maybe they worked 3,000
hours. But in your calculations you are not picking up 3,000,
you are picking up 2,080. And then you have to look at whether
or not you have part-time employees. And so those have to get
special attention. If you have seasonal workers that work less
than 120 days, they are handled one way. But if you have
seasonal workers that are more than--you handle them a
different way.
So, it is every situation for the small business owners
themself that is where the complexity is. But you are
absolutely right. For the tax professional that is preparing
that form, it is not complex for them at all.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So, if I want a deduction, I bring into my
tax preparer the information about my contributions, and about
my business expenses, and all that kind of stuff. If I don't
give it to him or her, I don't get the deduction, right? So it
is up to me?
Ms. THOMPSON. No, it would be up to the tax professional to
make sure you, as a small business owner, were aware of the
credit. And if you didn't provide it to the tax professional,
the tax professional should be asking you the questions to get
the information in.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. So in the second year we will have some
better data.
Ms. THOMPSON. Second year it is going to be a lot better
than the first year. And I think that is true of any tax law,
the first year is always a little bit more challenging than the
second year.
Mr. MCDERMOTT. Exactly. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Ms. Jenkins.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here.
Ms. Thompson, in your written testimony you explained how
small business--the small business tax credit did not provide
an incentive for small business to provide health insurance. If
the employer is even aware of the credit, you said they are not
likely to know whether their business is eligible for the
credit--and if so, the size of the credit--until after the end
of the year.
I would be curious for both you and Mr. McCracken to
comment or elaborate on the challenges that a small business
faces when planning its expenses, including health benefits for
employees, and perhaps elaborate specifically on the effects of
the temporary nature of this tax credit, which will expire
after 2015, and how this affects a business owner's
calculations when they are deciding whether to offer insurance,
given that the health insurance law has not reduced the cost to
provide the health insurance.
Ms. THOMPSON. I think I was answering the question from the
perspective that the small business owner didn't know at any
point during the year whether or not they were going to be
eligible for the credit. There are those situations that they
would absolutely be aware of it.
If there are less than 10 employees, and they know their
compensation is--average compensation is less than $25,000,
that is really very clear, very straightforward. They know they
are going to be eligible for the credit. And so they would be
able to calculate the credit, or the professional would be able
to calculate the credit, and let them know how much they would
be able to save, if they did have or purchase the insurance for
those employees.
So, that is the perspective I was coming from. It is that
they didn't--weren't able to plan for it during the current
year to know whether or not they were going to be eligible for
the credit. And that is why we say, okay, it would be so much
better for them to do that look-back to the prior year, because
then they can plan and make a really good business decision as
to whether or not to purchase that insurance.
When you talk about the temporary nature of it, I don't
think a small business owner is going to be that concerned with
something that is going to be happening 7 years from now. If it
is going to be very helpful for them in the short term to be
able to pick up this insurance and be able to take advantage of
the credit, that is probably what they are looking for.
As you know, tax laws change all the time. So maybe by the
time this credit is scheduled to be repealed, maybe it won't
be. And so there is a lot of things that go on when people are
talking about whether or not to take advantage of the credit.
But our answer was perspective from planning for the
current year, and whether or not to buy the insurance.
Ms. JENKINS. Okay. Mr. McCracken.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. I agree with part of that. I think that the
temporary nature of the tax credit doesn't have--play a
significant role in determining whether someone is going to use
the tax credit. But I do think it plays a significant role if
you are trying to incent a company that doesn't currently offer
health insurance to begin offering health insurance.
Because small business owners are very reluctant to start
doing something--an employee benefit--that they don't feel
confident that they are going to be able to sustain. That is
one of the biggest issues, I think, that played into health
care reform for small companies, is newer companies simply were
not starting to offer health insurance the way companies had in
the past. And as older companies have gone away, newer small
businesses are much less likely to offer health insurance,
because they have seen this cost trajectory, and they are very
concerned that they won't be able to keep offering it.
And it is a very different conversation with your employees
if they came into your company because you offered health
insurance, and now you have to get rid of it. That is a much
more difficult conversation than if they came into your company
knowing that you didn't provide health insurance, and being
able to deal with that.
So it is just a really different situation. So I do think
the temporary nature makes it very difficult to incent
different behavior on the part of the small business.
Ms. JENKINS. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Paulsen.
Mr. PAULSEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, you know, the
last panel, as well, talked about some of the complexity issues
that are obviously out there when you have less than an 8
percent compliance rate, or an 8 percent participation rate, I
should say, as a part of this tax credit. And it goes back to a
little bit of that definition perspective of what is a small
business, right? It is 25 employees, 15 employees.
I just remember in the health care debate and when that law
was being first debated, I talked to one small business owner.
I said, ``Well, how many small--employees do you have, as a
small business?'' He said, ``Under 50, and I am going to stay
that way.'' And to me, that really sort of struck home. And now
we are talking about a certain tax credit to help small
businesses like Mr. Hisel's and others, where you have a 25-
employee limit.
And Mr. McCracken, let me ask you this, because you
testified about the difficulties that a small business faces in
figuring out whether they are eligible for the credit, and if
so, then calculating the amount of what that credit is. But
moving beyond just those two hurdles, what effect do the
employee and average wage limitations have on hiring or wage
increases?
So you got seasonal employees, you got family members, you
have wage restrictions, you have FTE restrictions. I mean do
you believe that this complexity--this could actually prevent
small businesses from hiring additional employees, or
increasing wages?
Mr. MCCRACKEN. Do you mean the tax credit itself?
Mr. PAULSEN. Just in terms of the complexity component of
it, yes.
Mr. MCCRACKEN. It could. I mean that is one of our concerns
about having a long-term policy that provides incentives to
small companies directly to provide health insurance. Because
while the temporary doesn't have much effect on their behavior,
a long-term tax credit or incentive could have effects on their
behavior. But they might not be what you expect.
So, for instance, if you offer low-wage companies a
significant tax credit for offering health insurance, you are
essentially encouraging low wages. You are subsidizing low
wages for the long term. And I think you would have a very real
effect, in that regard.
If you are going to--and there are other ways you could
define. If you subsidize small companies exclusively and have a
cliff, you are giving them significant incentives to stay
small, and to think about that growth, as you point out.
I think on the--with this credit being a temporary credit,
those kind of effects are more muted than they would be if this
was a permanent policy, going forward.
Mr. PAULSEN. Yes. And, Ms. Thompson, want to expand at all?
Any comment?
Ms. THOMPSON. [No response.]
Mr. PAULSEN. I will just mention this, too, is I think that
is fairly accurate, from the perspective of Congress is always
thinking in short-term cycles. Is this certain tax credit going
to get renewed for another 6 months? I mean this is actually a
fairly unique credit. It is out there for a few years, and then
it is going to be set to expire.
And so at some point Congress is going to be asked to come
back and say, ``Well, do we want to keep it going? Do we want
to renew it? Do we want to extend it to other categories, for
instance?'' And it does create the uncertainty out there from
those in the business community that want to allocate capital
as a part of just the overall Tax Code. I mean that is a
factor.
And I hope that, Mr. Chairman, we are going to continue to
have these conversations. This is just one credit we are
talking about, but it is an issue across the board, large
companies and small. So I yield back.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And next we will go to Mr. Reed.
Mr. REED. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back. I am all
set today. Thank you.
Chairman BOUSTANY. Mr. Crowley.
Mr. CROWLEY. Thank you, Doctor. Thank you for letting me
participate today. I am pleased you are having this hearing
today. And, my colleagues, if the worst thing you can say today
about the health care law that we passed, also known as the
Affordable Care Act, is that it only provided 228,000 small
businesses with a tax cut, averaging $1,220, then it is clear
to me that we have much larger problems on our hands. Because,
in my book, tax cuts for 228,000 small businesses is a pretty
good start. Furthermore, even more small businesses will
receive this small business tax cut. That is clear from the
testimony that you have offered.
But I am happy to use this hearing as an opportunity to
spread the good word about this tax cut, and ensure we educate
even more small businesses about the range of benefits
available to them through health reform, so they can afford
health coverage for their employees.
So I am thrilled to have this hearing today to allow us to
trumpet the health care law, and reiterate that we are all in
agreement on two points today: the Democratic health care law
expands private health insurance coverage, and cuts taxes on
job creators, small business men and women.
So welcome, Mr. Hisel, to the Ways and Means Committee, and
please give my regards back to Montana when you go. My wife is
from Billings, Montana, and her brother lives just outside
Missoula in Clinton, Montana. So, maybe a neighbor of yours? So
welcome here today.
So, you are a small business man who employs 17 folks,
correct?
Mr. HISEL. We are at----
Mr. CROWLEY. Or less?
Mr. HISEL [continuing]. Nineteen right now.
Mr. CROWLEY. Nineteen? Good for you. Was this tax credit
for small businesses in the Democratic health care law helpful
to you? And I know you may have already answered this question,
but I don't think we can hear it enough. Was it helpful to you?
Mr. HISEL. Yes. It continues to be helpful to us.
Mr. CROWLEY. So how much did you see refunded from your
taxes because of the small business tax cut in the Affordable
Care Act?
Mr. HISEL. Over $2,000.
Mr. CROWLEY. Over $2,000. So is it safe to say that this
tax credit made it more affordable for you to provide health
insurance to your workers, and without it you might have had to
give it up, or give up on providing the private health coverage
you give your employees today?
Mr. HISEL. Yes. It was on the chopping block this year.
Mr. CROWLEY. So we are hearing from a few people that not
enough qualified small businesses are applying for this tax
credit, and that it may not be worth it as it may be too
complicated. What do you think, again? Is this tax credit worth
it or not?
Mr. HISEL. It is absolutely worth it. Not too complicated,
in our experience.
Mr. CROWLEY. There is a charge in the House of
Representatives to repeal the health care law as we know it,
known as the Affordable Care Act, to eliminate all future
benefits, such as this small business tax break, and to reclaim
all past benefits.
And I would allude to H.R. 2, which--I would think that Mr.
Cain would have no difficulty reading this bill--it is on the
second page where it says the act--``Such act is repealed, and
the revisions of law amended or repealed by such act are
restored or revived, as if such act had not been enacted.'' An
entire repeal to reclaim all past benefits provided, such as
the money you got to keep with this tax credit for job creators
like yourselves, small businesses.
How would you feel if Congress repealed the health care
law? And, once again, let me quote again--``as if it never was
enacted,''--which experts have said could be used to force
people to repay any benefits they have received like this tax
cut or the $250 check that the seniors in our country received
to close the doughnut hole in 2010. How would that make you
feel, if you had to pay back that $2,000?
Mr. HISEL. I would be absolutely livid. It would be----
Mr. CROWLEY. How would it affect your business and your
employees' well-being, having to write a much larger check to
the IRS to deal with the small business tax cut that my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle vehemently oppose?
Mr. HISEL. That would be absolutely infuriating. It is
going in absolutely the wrong direction. I believe that the ACA
is an actual stimulus to small businesses. It has helped me. It
has reduced my premiums. And I would be absolutely infuriated
if we went backward.
Mr. CROWLEY. I thank the witness for his testimony. I am
pleased we got the opportunity to hear from a hard-working
small business man like yourself.
Let me just for the record really point out other benefits.
No mandates on any employer with under 50 employees to comply
with this. No more health care decisions will be made by HMO
employees on the phone, but rather by patients and their
doctors. Children can no longer be denied coverage on their
parents' private health insurance because of a previously
existing condition, like asthma. Children can stay on their
parents' private health insurance until 26. And the list of
benefits goes on and on and on.
I thank you all for your testimony today.
Chairman BOUSTANY. I want to remind the gentleman that he
did raise prospective legislation, which has been under
consideration, and that is not the purview of the Oversight
Subcommittee. And at the same time, I would also remind the
gentleman that the--Mr. Hisel has a non-profit entity, so that
some of the tax considerations you proposed would not apply.
Mr. CROWLEY. If the chairman would just yield for a moment?
Chairman BOUSTANY. I will yield.
Mr. CROWLEY. I was just taking the opportunity to point out
the benefits of the law that we passed. So I thank the chairman
for yielding.
Chairman BOUSTANY. And we have better proposals going down
the line.
So I want to thank the witnesses for being here today, for
your testimony, and I want to remind you all that--please be
advised that Members may have written questions that they will
submit, and your answers to those would be made part of the
official hearing record.
Again, thank you. And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:45 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Questions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Submissions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


