- EXAMINING SYSTEMATIC MANAGEMENT, AND FISCAL CHALLENGES WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING SYSTEMATIC MANAGEMENT, AND FISCAL CHALLENGES WITHIN THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-10

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

28-576                   WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         JOHN CONYERS, JR., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR SMITH, Texas                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, JR.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                    Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 ERIC SWALWELL, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TED LIEU, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
MATT GAETZ, Florida
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MARCH 21, 2017

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, Virginia, Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., Michigan, Ranking Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................

WITNESSES

The Honorable Michael E. Horowitz, Inspector General, United
States Department of Justice...................................
Oral Statement...............................................
Diana Maurer, Director, Homeland Security and Justice Issues,
U.S. Government Accountability Office..........................
Oral Statement...............................................

OFFICIAL HEARING RECORD

Questions for the record submitted to the Honorable Michael E.
Horowitz.......................................................
Responses to questions for the record submitted to Diana Maurer..
Statement submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas,
Committee on the Judiciary. This material is available at the
Committee and can be accessed on the committee repository at:
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU00/20170321/105665/
HHRG-115-JU00-MState-J000032-20170321.pdf

ADDITIONAL MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

Material submitted by the Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas,
Committee on the Judiciary. This material is available at the
Committee and can be accessed on the committee repository at:
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU00/20170321/105665/
HHRG-115-JU00-20170321-SD002.pdf

EXAMINING SYSTEMIC MANAGEMENT AND FISCAL CHALLENGES WITHIN THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 21, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:00 p.m., in Room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Goodlatte
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Chabot, Issa, Gohmert,
Chaffetz, Marino, Collins, DeSantis, Buck, Roby, Johnson of
Louisiana, Biggs, Coiners, Nadler, Lofgren, Jackson Lee,
Johnson of Georgia, Jeffries, Cicilline, Jayapal, and
Schneider.
Staff Present: Shelley Husband, Staff Director; Branden
Ritchie, Deputy Staff Director; Zach Somers, Parliamentarian
and General Counsel; Stephanie Gadbois, Senior Counsel; Aaron
Hiller, Minority Chief Oversight Counsel; Susan Jensen,
Minority Senior Counsel; Veronica Eligan, Minority Professional
Staff Member; and Regina Milledge-Brown, Minority Crime
Detailee.
Chairman Goodlatte. Good afternoon. The Judiciary Committee
will come to order. Without objection, the chair is authorized
to declare recesses of the committee at any time. We welcome
everyone to this morning's hearing on Examining Systemic
Management and Fiscal Challenges within the Department of
Justice. I will begin by recognizing myself for an opening
statement.
The Department of Justice is comprised of approximately 40
components, which together encompass a broad array of national
security, law enforcement, and criminal justice
responsibilities. Its mission: to enforce the law and defend
the interests of the United States according to the law, to
ensure public safety against threats, foreign and domestic, to
provide Federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime,
to seek just punishment for those guilty of unlawful behavior,
and to ensure fair and impartial administration of justice for
all Americans. That confirms the sacred duties entrusted to it
by the American people.
The Department of Justice's growing workload presents
challenges for a Congress increasingly constrained by the
contraction of discretionary budget authority. With each
passing year, the rapid growth of mandatory outlays driven by
entitlement programs squeezes resources available for critical
Federal operations, many of which are anything but optional.
Under the current C.R., the DOJ's discretionary budget is
approximately $29 billion. It supports more than 117,000
positions. Eight percent of those are attorneys; 20 percent are
agents; 18 percent are correctional officers; 4 percent
intelligence analysts, and the remaining 50 percent includes
other analysts, technologies specialists, and security
professionals.
Operationally, law enforcement activities make up nearly
half of DOJ's efforts, with prisons and detention representing
30 percent of its work and litigation, 12 percent. Despite its
vital mission and the ever-evolving nature of threats to the
United States, the Department of Justice has not undergone a
reauthorization since 2005. As a result, nearly all of the
agency's authorizations for appropriations expired in 2009.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for the committee to conduct
initial review of DOJ to set the stage for more targeted
hearings that will be the basis of a DOJ reauthorization
project.
The Government Accountability Office and DOJ's Office of
the Inspector General are two very valuable resources for the
Judiciary Committee, which takes its oversight responsibilities
very seriously. The audits and evaluations these two
organizations undertake can be Congress' best and sometimes
only true measure of how well a Federal program or agency is
operating. In recent years, the OIG has exposed or
substantiated incidences of misconduct among Federal employees,
rooted out and overseen the recovery of millions of dollars in
improperly expended grant funding, and identified numerous
costly inefficiencies. Meanwhile, GAO investigations have
targeted the mismanagement of Federal resources, detected
agency failures toc comply with Federal laws, and identified
multiple opportunities for reducing duplication and overlap of
Federal programs.
It is for these reasons that I am pleased to welcome our
two witnesses to the Judiciary Committee today. The Honorable
Michael Horowitz is the Inspector General for the United States
Department of Justice. Since 2012, Mr. Horowitz has overseen a
nationwide workforce of more than 450 special agents, auditors,
inspectors, attorneys, and support staff, whose mission is to
detect and deter waste, fraud, and abuse and misconduct in DOJ
programs and personnel, and to promote economy and efficiency
in department operations. Since 2015, Director Horowitz has
simultaneously served as chair of the Council of the Inspectors
General on Integrity and Efficiency.
Diana Maurer has been a director in the U.S. Government
Accountability Office's Homeland Security and Justice Team
since 2009, and currently leads DAO's work-reviewing, justice,
and law enforcement issues. Director Maurer's recent work
includes reports and testimonies on the Federal Prison System,
the Secret Service, the Department of Justice's grant programs,
the FBI's use of facial recognition technology, and audio video
policies at the Supreme Court. Director Maurer has testified
several times before congressional committees on national drug
control policy, FBI whistleblower protection, DHS management,
and nuclear smuggling, among other issues. Director Maurer's
career began with the GAO back in 1990 at GAO's regional field
office in Detroit.
I look forward to hearing from both of you so that the
committee may learn how Congress can best respond to the
challenges you spotlight and work to achieve greater efficiency
and accountability at the Department of Justice. Your
meticulous efforts on behalf of all Americans, concern about
how are tax dollars are being spent, are greatly appreciated,
and I encourage you to keep up the fine work.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the ranking member of
the committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte. I join you in
welcoming Inspector General Horowitz and Detroiter Diana Maurer
as witnesses today.
I understand, Chairman Goodlatte, that you have framed this
hearing around management and fiscal challenges at the
Department of Justice. Like our witnesses from the Government
Accountability Office and the Office of Inspector General, I
believe that meaningful oversight of the Department of Justice
requires us all to be good stewards of taxpayer funds. There
are many areas we can pursue, including the disproportionate
amount of the department's budget that is consumed by prison
spending. In addition, the Inspector General has issued a
report specifying serious problems with privately-operated
prisons which do not maintain the same level of safety and
security as Bureau of Prisons facilities, and which do not
provide an adequate level of rehabilitative services.
These are troubling issues that many of my colleagues,
including the gentlewoman from Texas, Sheila Jackson Lee, and I
have focused on over the years. However, given the roles our
witnesses play in more pressing developments at the Department
of Justice, I would also like to focus my time today on a few
more discreet issues. First, on the topic of fiscal management,
I wonder if our witnesses can speak to the budget priorities of
the Trump administration. I hope that you will feel free and
able to do that. This committee has oversight of the United
States Secret Service, an agency that provides protection to
the President every time he travels to New York or Florida for
the weekend, and to his family, as they travel the world to
advance the interests of the Trump organization. It seems to me
that the GAO is the right organization to evaluate the cost of
that protection to the taxpayer, and to place that cost in the
context of a proposed budget that makes deep cuts to a number
of important programs.
Secondly, on February 17, 2017, my colleague Mr. Jeffries
and I wrote a letter which was joined by many of my colleagues,
to you, Mr. Inspector General, and in that letter we asked your
office to investigate two matters. One, whether the Trump
administration has engaged in any improper effort to intimidate
or threaten whistleblowers, and secondly, whether Attorney
General Sessions has a conflict of interest that requires his
recusal from any matter involving contact between Russian
officials and the Trump campaign. I hope that you will discuss
both those matters.
Let me be clear: I do not condone the leaks of classified
information to the press, but the President has gone out of his
way to intimidate virtually any individual hoping to expose
misconduct in the Trump administration, including, but not
limited to, random searches of personal cell phones and general
harassment via Twitter. I know that the Inspector General
agrees that whistleblowers are key to identifying waste, fraud,
and abuse, and I hope his office is looking into the matter.
And finally, on March 16, 2017, I again wrote to the
Inspector General, this time asking about improper contacts
between the White House and the Department of Justice. We know
that the White House Chief of Staff has called the Deputy
Director of the FBI, asking them to come and publicly knock
down reports he did not like. We also know that President Trump
placed a phone call to Preet Bharara, former U.S. Attorney for
the 7th District of New York, the day before the administration
summarily fired all 46 sitting U.S. Attorneys. And we know that
these calls are in direct violation of standing guidance at the
Department of Justice, prohibiting contact between its
investigators and the White House except in extraordinary
circumstances. To their credit, none of these officials
complied with pressure from the White House. Knowing the
department's rules about such contacts, Mr. Bharara did not
even take the call. Nevertheless, I feel that the White House
has ignored this important policy, and that further
investigation by the Inspector General is warranted.
And so, I look forward to our discussion on these matters
and others today, and I thank the chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. The chair thanks the gentleman, and
would advise the committee that we have about 7 minutes
remaining in this vote. There are three votes in this series,
and the hearing will resume immediately following the votes,
and I apologize to our witnesses for this delay, but it is
unavoidable. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Chairman Goodlatte. The committee will reconvene. When the
committee recessed, we were completing opening statements by
the chairman ranking member. Without objection, all other
members' opening statements will be made a part of the record.
Chairman Goodlatte. And we welcome our distinguished
witnesses and if you will please rise we will begin by swearing
you in. Do you and each of you solemnly swear that the
testimony that you are about to give shall be the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Thank
you very much. You may be seated.
Let the record show that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Your written statement will be entered into the record in
its entirety and we ask that you summarize your testimony in 5
minutes. And you see the timing light in front of you on the
table. When it switches from green to yellow, you will have 1
minute to conclude your testimony. And when the light turns
red, it signals your 5 minutes have expired. And Inspector
General Horowitz, we will start with you. Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF MICHAEL HOROWITZ, INSPECTOR GENERAL, UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; AND DIANA MAURER, DIRECTOR,
HOMELAND SECURITY AND JUSTICE ISSUES

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL HOROWITZ

Mr. Horowitz. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Cummings--Member Conyers, I am sorry--and members of the
committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify today, and
thank you for your steadfast support for our oversight work and
the strong bipartisan support last year for the IG Empowerment
Act, which passed in December. In our most recent top
management challenges report, we identified nine major
management and fiscal challenges for the department.
First, safeguarding national security, and ensuring privacy
and civil liberties protections. Next, enhancing cybersecurity
in an era of increasing threats. Three, managing an overcrowded
Federal Prison System in an era of limited budgets and
continuing security concerns. Next, strengthening the
relationships between law enforcement and local communities
through partnership and oversight. Next, helping to address
violent crime through effective management of department
antiviolence programs.
Next, ensuring effective management and oversight of law
enforcement and promoting public trust. Next, monitoring
department contracts and grants. Then, managing human capital
and promoting diversity with a workforce increasingly eligible
to retire. And finally, using performance-based management to
improve department programs.
In these tight budget times, it is particularly important
the department ensure it is using every dollar of taxpayer
funds in the most effective and efficient way possible. Each
year, our audits, reviews, and investigations result in our
identifying wasteful spending, questioning costs, and
recovering tens of millions of dollars. For example, this past
year we reported on the DEA's and the Defense Department's
wasteful spending of nearly $90 million on a plane that never
flew any of the missions for which it was intended. We also
identified over $100 million in health care spending the BOP
could save each year by reimbursing outside healthcare
providers at no more than the Medicare rate.
The recommendations we have made over the years have led to
significant improvements in department operations. The
department must take prompt action to implement our open
recommendations in a timely manner. The department also needs
to ensure its strong support for whistleblowers. I have seen
firsthand how whistleblowers have exposed waste and fraud and
brought to light wrongdoing. Unfortunately, I have also seen
instances of retaliation against whistleblowers.
Whistleblowers perform an invaluable public service when
they come forward with evidence of waste, fraud, abuse, and
mismanagement and they should never face reprisal for doing so.
My office will continue to do what we can to assist
whistleblowers, address claims of whistleblower retaliation,
and educate department employees on the importance of
whistleblowing and on whistleblower rights. The department must
do the same.
Finally, let me mention one other challenge facing the
department, and that is promoting public trust involving the
oversight of its prosecutors. Several commentators and judges,
including Judge Kozinski of the Ninth Circuit, have questioned
whether there is sufficient independent oversight of
prosecutors. While the OIG investigates alleged misconduct by
department law enforcement agents, under the Inspector General
Act, alleged misconduct by department attorneys when acting in
their capacity as lawyers is instead handled by the
department's Office of Professional Responsibility, an office
that lacks the OIG statutory independence and does not provide
the same level of transparency.
The OIG has long questioned this differing treatment of
lawyers. We continue to believe that public trust would be
enhanced by giving our office the same authority that every
other Federal Inspector General has to inspect allegations of
misconduct by any agency employee including lawyers. Thank you.
I look forward to working with this committee on these
challenges and I would be pleased to answer any questions the
committee may have.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, General Horowitz. Director
Maurer, welcome.

STATEMENT OF DIANA MAURER

Ms. Maurer. Thank you. Good afternoon Chairman Goodlatte,
Ranking Member Conyers, and other members and staff. I am
pleased to be here today to discuss the findings from our
recent work conducted at the Department of Justice. DOJ's law
enforcement, national security, and criminal justice missions
are vital to the Nation. And like other departments, DOJ faces
a challenging budget environment. Given this reality, it is
especially important for the department to run its programs and
activities in the most effective and efficient manner. My
statement for the record today summarizes the findings from 18
GAO reports that collectively provide 65 recommendations to
help DOJ better manage its resources and enhance its programs.
Our work highlights four themes for the committee to keep
in mind as you oversee the department. First, implementing
GAO's recommendations helps DOJ. In recent years, we have
experienced some resistance, particularly in our
recommendations related to law enforcement. Specifically, DOJ
disagreed with or failed to take action on 12 of our 28
recommendations related to law enforcement while only fully
implementing five. DOJ has been more responsive to our
recommendations on the care and custody of Federal prisoners
and inmates fully, implementing seven of seventeen while
actions are underway on eight of the others. DOJ has shown the
most progress in the grants area, fully implementing 15 of our
17 recommendations. Many of these were designed to help DOJ
assess results and reduce the risk of duplication across the
more than 200 grant programs it implements annually. DOJ
largely did what we asked them to do and they have seen the
benefits. For example, we recently reported good coordination
of DOJ and HHS grants to combat human trafficking.
A second theme is that DOJ often needs to develop a better
understanding of whether its efforts are succeeding. The Smart
on Crime Initiative has a series of measures to track progress,
but in many cases, we found they were confusing or lacked
measurable targets. The FBI's use of facial recognition
technology disregards a key measure of accuracy, potentially
limiting its ability to support investigations and
unnecessarily involving innocent people. The Bureau of Prisons
has increased its use of halfway houses and home confinement,
but does not track the information it needs to help measure the
outcomes of these alternatives to incarceration.
A third theme from our work is that DOJ can improve the
transparency of its programs and operations. Of course, the
department has valid reasons for protecting ongoing
investigations or prosecutorial strategy from disclosure, but
we have found instances where DOJ should have been more
transparent.
For example, we found that the ATF aggregated specific
kinds of information about the purchasers of firearms in
violation of an Appropriation Act restriction. DOJ still has
not issued a required report related to that finding to the
President, the Congress, and the GAO. DEA needs to do more to
address our recommendations to better inform distributors of
controlled substances about DEA guidance and resources.
DOJ can also do a better job more clearly explaining how it
collects and plans to use the proceeds from billions of dollars
in fines, fees, and penalties it collects annually. DOJ and the
FBI have also not responded to the recommendations we made 2
years ago to improve the handling of FBI whistleblower
complaints.
Finally, DOJ can do a better job bridging the gaps between
similar or related programs. For example, the department
currently finances two databases, which collect information on
missing persons, but continues to refuse to explore options for
sharing information between those systems.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, we want DOJ to work well. We
want the department to get the most from the $29 billion you
the Congress appropriated for its use this year. And I know
that is something the department is committed to as well. By
implementing our recommendations, having a better handle on
whether programs are working, being more transparent where it
can, and better bridging the gaps between related programs DOJ
can become more effective and efficient.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you very much. We will now
proceed under the 5-minute rule with questions. I will begin by
recognizing myself.
General Horowitz, the Executive Office for Immigration
Review will be playing a large role in the implementation of
new Presidential directives, especially as the Attorney General
has been directed to immediately assign immigration judges to
detention facilities and we have heard that the directive is to
ensure that no courtroom in a detained facility is ever closed.
So, my first question to you is does the Executive Office for
Immigration Review have a sufficient number of immigration
judges available to staff every detention facility?
Mr. Horowitz. Mr. Chairman, while we have not done recent
work on that figure, on that issue, when we did do work back in
2012 in our report we found a number of significant challenges
facing the Executive Office in how they handled cases, how long
it took, whether they, in fact, had enough judges. And that is
going to be a challenge, I think, for EOIR going forward.
Chairman Goodlatte. What implications would the shortage of
immigration judges have on the already growing backlog of non-
detained immigration cases pending nationwide?
Mr. Horowitz. It has several different impacts. One is
obviously it takes longer for a detainee whether they are in
custody or not in custody to get before a judge so their case
can be resolved. And in any instance, justice delayed is not
something we want to see happen. So, you have that delay.
You have increased costs if they are being detained by DHS,
which has to house detainees who are incarcerated. And you then
end up in a situation where the longer someone is in the
country, whether in jail or not, it becomes more challenging to
collect evidence, gather information, and reach a resolution.
Chairman Goodlatte. Director Maurer, each of the
President's Executive orders on border security immigration
enforcement mandate that the Attorney General devote
appropriate resources to ``establish prosecution guidelines to
ensure that Federal prosecutors accord a high priority to
prosecutions of offenses having a nexus to the southern
border.'' At present, does each U.S. Attorney's Office have the
necessary resources to prioritize criminal immigration
prosecutions?
Ms. Maurer. Certainly one of the primary challenges facing
any U.S. Attorney or any prosecutor from that perspective is
determining where to apply their scarce resources for
investigations and prosecutions. We have not done our own
independent work to assess the adequacy of the resources that
are available to U.S. Attorneys, but changing in priorities
like these does potentially present a challenge to them.
Although it is not one that they are very used to having to
handle.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you. Inspector Horowitz, the
House Judiciary Committee investigation found that the
Department of Justice engaged in a practice of structuring
settlements with financial institutions and others in a manner
that required the institutions to make donations to third party
non-victim groups. Can you contrast the level of DOJ oversight
that takes place with respect to DOJ grant awardees and the
recipients of mandatory donations from DOJ settlements?
Mr. Horowitz. Certainly. For grant oversight, that is
something that each grant-making agency within the department
does. They are responsible for direct oversight, and of course,
we are there to oversee their oversight efforts as well as how
the grant recipient handled the money.
For settlements, we generally do not have a role in
oversight, because those are settlements reached by private--by
the parties. The payments are made, oftentimes pursuant to a
monitorship. And so, the oversight is often outsourced to a
third-party monitor to watch over that. So, it is a completely
different regime in terms of oversight.
Chairman Goodlatte. And much less oversight with regard to
the settlements, is it not?
Mr. Horowitz. Well certainly it is not the kind of
oversight that the Congress has set up that we do. And so, I do
not know specifically what is done, but it is certainly not the
same kind of oversight that we are doing.
Chairman Goodlatte. One of the DOJ's mandatory donation
settlements explicitly provided that ``the parties understand
and agree that neither will monitor the use of the contribution
by the recipient.'' Does this concern you from an oversight
perspective?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not have direct knowledge of that, but
any time someone writes an agreement that there will not be
monitoring and oversight that concerns me.
Chairman Goodlatte. And would that be the case with an
ordinary government grant?
Mr. Horowitz. That would not be the case.
Chairman Goodlatte. That would not be something----
Mr. Horowitz. Absolutely not.
Chairman Goodlatte [continuing]. Government agencies would
do or you would condone?
Mr. Horowitz. I can assure you we would be all over that if
there was an effort to do it on the grant side.
Chairman Goodlatte. So are these payments really then
grants with no oversight?
Mr. Horowitz. Well, I am not sure whether you can even call
them grants frankly. But if they are being done with those kind
of provisions, there seems to be no oversight.
Chairman Goodlatte. And would it be appropriate for
Department of Justice lawyers to draft mandatory donation
provisions in a way that makes conservative leaning legal aid
groups ineligible or vice versa?
Mr. Horowitz. I would be concerned by a provision that did
either, that conditioned grants on political positions.
Chairman Goodlatte. What discipline would be appropriate if
DOJ lawyers purposely drafted mandatory donation terms to keep
conservative leaning legal aid groups from benefitting?
Mr. Horowitz. Well, I will focus on either way. But
obviously, you would want to look on what the provisions were
in place that regulated that kind of conduct. It goes back
somewhat to my opening statement, which is that would go
presumably to the Office of Professional Responsibility not to
the OIG for review. But certainly, if prosecutors were
conditioning dollars on political positions, that would seem to
be in violation of department policies and regulations.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you very much. My time has
expired. The chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Nadler, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Inspector General
Horowitz, I suppose, on February 17th, along with Mr. Jeffries
and several other members of this committee, along with the
ranking member, Mr. Conyers, I wrote to ask you to investigate
whether the Trump administration, this is a quote, ``Whether
the Trump administration has engaged in any improper effort to
intimidate or threaten whistleblowers under your jurisdiction
or others who are seeking to expose misconduct by Trump
administration officials.''
Does your office plan to look into this matter? Is the
conduct of the Trump administration so far with respect to
``disloyal'' staff give you cause for concern?
Mr. Horowitz. So, we are reviewing Congressman Cummings'
and Congressman Jeffries' letter and considering what if, any,
actions to take and we will be responding to that. What I can
do is assure you and all the members of the committee that, as
I said in my opening statement, we take whistleblowing
seriously. And if we get reports of efforts to silence or
intimidate whistleblowers, we will certainly consider how to
respond to that action. But we are looking at the request.
Mr. Nadler. Your answer is you are looking into it?
Mr. Horowitz. Yes.
Mr. Nadler. Okay, thank you. Last Friday, a number of us
wrote to you again and asked you to investigate reports of
several improper contacts between the White House and the
Department of Justice. Every Attorney General since the Carter
administration has had guidance in place to limit contact
between independent investigators and the political leadership
of the administration. It seems that both President Trump and
his Chief of Staff have ignored this guidance. Can I count on
your office to look into this matter?
Mr. Horowitz. So, we just got the letter as you indicated,
Congressman, on Friday and are looking at it. I obviously was
aware from news reports of the allegations and we will get back
to you on that and assess whether there is something for us to
do. Keep in mind, and this is important to the discussion, the
Inspector General's Office--my office--does not have oversight
authority over the Executive Office of the President or White
House entities. So, our oversight there would be as to any
contacts by the FBI or other organizations from that side of
the contact.
Mr. Nadler. Well, you have jurisdiction over contacts to
the FBI.
Mr. Horowitz. We would not have authority--and this has
played itself out in prior reviews of ours in administrations
of both parties--which is our ability to get information from
White House entities in reviews we have done, Fast and Furious,
other reviews, has been denied because our jurisdiction would
be over DOJ employees. That does not mean we cannot look at
what the contacts were from the point of view from the FBI. But
I just want to note that we do not have the authority on that
side.
Mr. Nadler. Does the fact that these conversations have
taken place give you cause for concern?
Mr. Horowitz. An allegation that there was communication
inconsistent with department policies would be a cause for
concern, Congressman.
Mr. Nadler. Well, these are not allegations. These are
undenied, are they not?
Mr. Horowitz. Well, I say that because I have not reviewed
them.
Mr. Nadler. Okay.
Mr. Horowitz. I have read the press reports about them.
Mr. Nadler. Okay. To change the subject, your office has
issued a number of reports about the department's use of
privately operated contract prisons to confine Federal inmates.
I note that in August of last year you found that, ``In most
key areas, contract prisons incurred more safety and security
incidents'' than comparable institutions run directly by the
Bureau of Prisons. I think it is also fair to say that contract
prisons have been rather lax, shall we say, in the medical
area.
I am concerned about indications from Attorney General
Sessions that the department will continue to rely on these
private facilities. Can you summarize your work in this are so
far and give us some reasons why the department might need to
take corrective action?
Mr. Horowitz. Certainly. So, we issued, as you noted, the
report last year about our oversight of how the BOP was
overseeing contract facilities, looked at various measures,
identified several, and concluded that when you looked at those
measures, contract prisons, the track record of contract
prisons was worse than the track record of the BOP. It compared
unfavorably in the measures we looked at using the data the
BOP----
Mr. Nadler. Did you look at medical outcomes and medical
treatment too?
Mr. Horowitz. And, in addition, specifically as to medical
issues, we identified concerns there as well including--and I
was going to mention--several of the audits and contract audits
we have done of specific private prisons where we have
identified concerns and cost overcharges. The Reeves County
review that we did 2 years ago comes to mind where we
identified about $4 million that the government collected in
charges that should not have occurred. We have an ongoing audit
of the use by the Marshals Service of the Leavenworth facility.
And in those, we have looked at staffing issues as well as
outcomes and have found areas, in the Reeves Report, for
example, in particular areas of concern.
Mr. Nadler. You found that in medical outcomes there was a
considerable difference?
Mr. Horowitz. Well, what we found was the staffing of
medical positions were not consistent with what the contracts
required and so I am thinking of the Adams County work that we
did last year, the contract audit that we issued, and the
Reeves County audit that we issued before that.
Mr. Nadler. My last question, very briefly, is you found
that they were not providing as many medical staff members as
the contract called for?
Mr. Horowitz. Correct.
Mr. Nadler. Have they, therefore, been required to disgorge
some of their money back to the Federal Government?
Mr. Horowitz. And that is part of the $4 million recovery
that BOP gathered as a result of our audit. And it is certainly
one of the recommendations that we have put forward is not just
to worry about collecting the back pay but fixing the problem.
Mr. Nadler. And have you noted differences in medical
outcomes because of this?
Mr. Horowitz. We did not go to that point, Congressman, as
part of the audit.
Mr. Nadler. Do you not think that that is a rather
important point to go to?
Mr. Horowitz. It is. Although I will say from our
standpoint as we considered it, it would be challenging for us
to look at a case file of an outcome. We would then have to get
a different medical opinion and consider whether you could
essentially determine the outcome might have been different had
there been different medical treatment. And that, from our
standpoint, would have been a challenge. I do not have doctors,
for example, on my staff.
Mr. Nadler. Okay. Thank you very much. My time is expired.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana [presiding]. Thank you. The chair
recognizes Congressman Biggs from Arizona for 5 minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director, in an audit
or an assessment that the GAO performed with regard to VOCA
grants in April 2015, it was determined that grantees were
spending less than 20 percent on average of each grant they
received during the original 12-month project period. And I am
wondering if you can tell us why that was, what steps are being
taken to make sure the grantees are distributing the money
appropriately.
Ms. Maurer. Sure, absolutely. As a general proposition, it
was taking the Department of Justice a long time to work
through its own processes of getting the money from the
Congress through its own system and out to the grantees. That
was a big part of the problem. We made recommendations in our
report that DOJ evaluate its administrative processes and
figure out ways to streamline them so the grantees had more
time to implement the grants. They are in the process of
implementing those recommendations, but have not done so fully.
Mr. Biggs. They have not done so yet?
Ms. Maurer. They have not, not fully. No.
Mr. Biggs. Are they in the process of doing them?
Ms. Maurer. They are in the process, yes.
Mr. Biggs. Okay. How much longer before they complete that
process?
Ms. Maurer. Hopefully as soon as possible, but that is
really on them.
Mr. Biggs. Okay. Thank you. And Inspector General, a 2015
OIG report concluded that an Assistant U.S. Attorney mishandled
sensitive but unclassified information by transmitting it to a
personal email account. Was that attorney disciplined?
Mr. Horowitz. It is my understanding that that attorney was
disciplined. Although I note we do not handle the discipline.
We send it to the component for them to decide the discipline.
Mr. Biggs. Right. What is the appropriate discipline for a
person----
Mr. Horowitz. Well, frankly, one of the issues we have
found over the years is that the department handles discipline
differently depending on the components. And it is a
recommendation we have made in the past about trying to get
more consistent tables in place or other policies in place. And
so, I think, obviously in every circumstance it would depend on
a variety of factors. But it is obviously an area of concern
that that attorney or any attorney would act in that manner.
Mr. Biggs. And back to you, director. Drug court programs
are one of the central elements to address opioid addiction.
The DOJ through the Bureau of Justice Assistance maintains a
drug court grant program. And HHS through the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration maintains another.
Can you comment on the existence of any overlap between those
two programs, their respective differences, and their
respective success rates or who is measuring those rates?
Ms. Maurer. Sure. Several years ago, we issued a report on
the DOJ's side of the drug court's program and we found that,
generally speaking, they seemed to have a positive impact in
terms of reducing the amount of drug use as well as having
positive impacts on recidivism. We have not looked specifically
at the coordination between HHS and DOJ in their respective
programs. I would note that the way it is laid out, it should
be happening. They say that they have a common coordination
structure, but we have not looked at that independently.
Mr. Biggs. Have you thought about looking at that? I mean I
would just like to know what is going on with it.
Ms. Maurer. I think it is a valid issue for oversight, but
we would need a request from Congress to conduct that work.
Mr. Biggs. Okay, thank you. The Burn JAG, I guess, is a
grant program that provides States, tribes, and local
governments with funding for law enforcement prosecution, et
cetera. To what degree--and this is for each of you if you
would each take a moment to respond to this--to what degree can
efficiencies be achieved by reducing the number of programs
that duplicate the allowable uses under Burn JAG?
Ms. Maurer. There is that potential. Obviously, that is a
political decision because grant programs by and large stem
from laws that Congress has enacted and the President signed.
We have found examples where it may help eliminate some of
those administrative barriers. It definitely places an
additional challenge on the Department of Justice when there
are allowable uses under JAG as well as in a parallel program.
For example, we issued a report on the Bulletproof Vest
Partnership Act Program a few years ago. They had requirements
for how State and local--or how local law enforcement received
that grant money that was different for the requirements under
burn JAG. It required some additional steps for DOJ to put some
commonality across those requirements. So, it is not
necessarily a bad thing to have parallel programs. It just puts
additional burden on DOJ to administer them appropriately.
Mr. Biggs. So, I guess, director, any advice on how we
can--if you are running parallel programs and they sometimes
complement, sometimes perhaps conflict just a little bit, any
suggestions on how we streamline that? Make it easier to use?
Ms. Maurer. I think the real challenge falls back on the
department itself. It is incumbent upon them to manage the
array of grant programs that the Congress has established for
the department to use. Certainly, transparency is part of that.
Certainly, enhanced coordination and collaboration within DOJ
is part of that. And that is backed by oversight from the
Congress, the IG, and the GAO.
Mr. Biggs. Inspector General?
Mr. Horowitz. I would echo what the director said. I think
one of the challenges we face--I know we regularly discuss with
GAO some of the challenges they face in looking at grant
programs, which is are they overlapping? Are they duplicative?
Or are they filling different gaps? And that is a challenge
because there is not as great a transparency as there should
be. Our hope is the data act allows greater transparency over
time. I think it will to some extent. The IG Impairment Act
includes exemption from the Computer Matching Act. We are
hoping that within the IG community we can have some of the
tools that the GAO has had for several years to try to look at
data more broadly.
But frankly, our hope is that the agency and the grant
making components we oversee collect more data and make it more
transparent because that allows not only for our oversight, but
for better congressional oversight, better oversight by all the
stakeholders out there who want to see the money going in the
right place and not in duplicative ways.
Mr. Biggs. And the Congress might need to act to facilitate
that?
Mr. Horowitz. Correct. That is right.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you. The chair recognizes
Ms. Lofgren from California for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Hello. Thank you and I think this is a
worthwhile hearing. I am interested, Director Maurer, in your
written testimony you state that the Department of Justice and
the FBI had failed to do proper testing of the FBI's new facial
recognition technology, particularly as it related to error
rates.
And the Department of Justice disagreed with that finding.
Basically, as I understood it, their answer was that basically
the false positives were not possible because there was a
ranking only. And that did not make any sense to me. And in
fact, as we looked at it, NIST, which is the gold standard of
technology actually looked at this very issue in 2014 and did a
report studying commercial facial recognition including the
technology Morpho, which is the vendor used by the FBI.
And NIST, their report said that the false positive is
absolutely a necessary part of determining the system accuracy.
They found that in a database of 1.6 million photos Morpho's
system failed to rank the correct individual as the best match
9.1 percent of the time. I mean, that is pretty significant.
But even more serious, they failed to place the correct
individual within even the top 50 7.1 percent of the time. So,
this is a system that you rely on to your detriment.
NIST also found that the error rate increases as the
database size increases. And so, if we add all the photos the
FBI has access to--that does not mean they are using all of
them at this point--that is 440 million photos and the error
rate would be, I would guess, I mean, extrapolating
unacceptably high.
So, I have several concerns about this. First, that the FBI
apparently has no idea that the people it is being pointed to
may not, in fact, be the people that should be identified. They
apparently do not have the technological know-how to understand
this error rate issue. And I guess the other question I have is
why the FBI--they do some things very well--technology is not
one of the things they are known to be the very best at. Why
would they not reach out to the group that is the best when it
comes to standard setting and technology like NIST to get some
help on this. Can you answer those questions?
Ms. Maurer. Sure. First off, as a general proposition, we
absolutely agree with your overall concern about the FBI's
approach to accuracy and its use of facial recognition
technology, which is a reason why we highlighted it in our
report. And you are also correct that we agree that it is
important for the FBI to consider the false positive rate in
assessing the accuracy of its systems.
One, because NIST, as you also correctly pointed out, says
it is a best practice for the use of facial recognition
technology. We think that would enhance the FBI's ability to
take advantage of what is a potentially very useful tool for
carrying out its law enforcement mission. In addition to that,
by not adequately testing for false positives, the FBI makes it
more likely that they are going to unintentionally bring
innocent people into investigative leads. That has very real-
world implications for people who may be approached by the FBI
at home or at their place of work.
We were, frankly, quite concerned about the FBI and the
DOJ's response to our report, and we hope that they reconsider
their position on accuracy and the FBI's use of facial
recognition technology.
Ms. Lofgren. Just to follow up on that, thank you for that
answer. I understand that a couple of years ago the FBI also
ran a pilot program using photographs from the Department of
State passport photos of Americans, which is a huge number. And
if you extrapolate the false positives on that, you are right.
Innocent people will be fingered, but people who are of concern
are going to be missed. So, I guess the question is are you
intending to do further work with the DOJ and FBI? Or is that
really up to the Congress to push them a little bit on this?
Ms. Maurer. Absolutely at a minimum we will continue to
follow up on the status of our recommendations. We made six in
that report. They only agreed fully with one. We are going to
keep hounding them on the other five until they take action.
But if we want to do additional detailed work on this, we would
require a new request from Congress.
Ms. Lofgren. All right. Well, that is something I think
maybe the committee ought to look at. I do not think there
would be a division along partisan lines on that topic. Just a
further question, which I did not see in the report. Maybe I
missed it. There are alternative methods for identifying
technological in addition to fingerprints and facial
recognition in terms of iris scans and the like that are now
being used at entry points and the like. Is the FBI really,
number one, set up to use that data? And have we looked at the
reliability of that data as compared to facial recognition?
Ms. Maurer. We know that, generally speaking, the FBI is
pursuing other uses of personally identifiable information to
help support their mission. We have not looked in specifically
at those kinds of technologies. That could be something that
could be part of future work.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you. The chair recognizes
Mr. Collins from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I do not have a lot
here, but I do want to explore something that is concerning.
There has been an investigation going on that is looking into
examinations regarding asset seizures and forfeiture--civil
asset forfeiture from 2007-2014. Mainly it revolved around gun
stores of the like dealing with IRS and others. I have a
constituent, this Clyde Armory--this has been something that
has been discussed a great deal in the Ways and Means
Committee. We have been looking into this.
But there was something that I wanted, Mr. Horowitz. I
wanted to discuss a little bit with you about this because it
was initiated by the IRS, but it was litigated by the U.S.
Attorney's Office. And I know there is this situation going on.
And when Mr. Koskinen testified before Ways and Means last
Congress about the IRS basically extorting the small business
owner, they stated this. They said, ``The IRS did not do that.
The negotiations on settlement once it goes to court are in the
realm of Justice Department and U.S. Attorney.'' Just some
quick questions here. Can you provide me an update on this
investigation and its scope? And when are you anticipating
completing it?
Mr. Horowitz. If I understand which one it is, Congressman,
and I am not sure----
Mr. Collins. This is the exemption regarding asset seizure
and forfeiture activities from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year
2014.
Mr. Horowitz. We have an asset seizure review going on, but
it is not focused specifically on firearms. It is focused more
on DEA action.
Mr. Collins. Well, in general. Okay, but would it catch
firearms? Would it catch other assets and forfeitures or just
simply drugs?
Mr. Horowitz. Mostly, what we found was most of the
seizures that are going on in the department are on the DEA
side and we were mostly looking at dollars.
Mr. Collins. Well, this is dollars as well. I mean, we had
a gentleman who owned a store. IRS along with the background
came in, seized assets. He ended up getting--basically got
extorted for half the money on something that was--at the end
of the day was not there. So, if it is not there, I think it is
something we need to look into.
Mr. Horowitz. Right. And I anticipate us getting that
report out in the next couple of weeks by the way.
Mr. Collins. Okay. Let me jump to the other. When DOJ, in
your investigation maybe the DEA or others--when DOJ litigates
on behalf of other agencies, who is ultimately responsible for
the decisions made at litigation?
Mr. Horowitz. I will speak generally from my experience
having been a prosecutor many years ago, which is ultimately it
is the litigating authority at DOJ that makes the final
decisions on what happens in the courtroom including resolution
of the matters in the courtroom. That was my experience.
Mr. Collins. How much do you think DOJ actually--I mean,
getting these--one of the concerns it seems like also they get
to DOJ--before it actually gets to DOJ for prosecution, there
is a lot of concern concerning IRS agents in particular and
others in their discretion and how they are using that
discretion with seizure authority and others. Is there ever a
ceding of discretion to another agency by DOJ to say, ``Look,
we are not going to do this except when it gets to the court
phase.'' Or, is there a collaboration beforehand?
Mr. Horowitz. Frankly, it often depends on the
relationships and how close the working relationships are. You
will find occasions where cross agency work between civil or
criminal prosecutors and components outside the department is
close and other times you will find they are not having a
history of a close----
Mr. Collins. Well, I would love to see this. And civil
asset forfeiture is something that actually that bridges both
Republican and Democrat, this is a bipartisan, you know, very
much of a concern. And it seems to me that there has been way
too much latitude especially in the IRS around, on business it
seemed to be politically motivated. Gun shops, other things,
you know, and not even getting into the choke point issues on
some other things that they were doing. But this is an issue
that is concerning because here was a legitimate business that
does a lot of cash influx. But it was--the assumption is you
are guilty, prove you are innocent. And it is the IRS using
authority that is tenuous at best and then having DOJ back it
up into the arena of judgments and other things.
So, I mean, I think I am interested to see what this report
is, but if it really does not hit on some of the others besides
DEA activities, if we are not getting into IRS, then I would
almost say that we need to look into both sides. I mean, there
is legislation already moving on this. So, I just wanted to get
some clarification. Because from Mr. Clyde and my position,
here is a man who is basically extorted by the Federal
Government for money, which he did, nothing wrong, at the end
of the day had to go back and get. So, I think these are the
issues that we need to continue to follow up on.
Mr. Horowitz. And completely understand the concern and as
DOJ IG I have authority over the four DOJ law enforcement
components. IRS obviously not being one of them. So, it----
Mr. Collins. Well, when it comes to DOJ that is the concern
I have. There seems to be a ceding of authority from DOJ. We
will take whatever you give us. We are not really concerned.
And we just sort of enforce whatever you are asking us to
enforce. That is at least the perception that you are the
strong arm of the extortion sting that is going on. With that,
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Collins. The chair
will now recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank both of you for your service.
I think, Mr. Horowitz, you have been before this committee
before and I want to reintroduce myself to Ms. Maurer. And
thank you for the work. You are often before our committees and
we appreciate it very much.
I have a series of questions and I want to lay the
groundwork by indicating my interest in oversight over a series
of executive orders that have been rendered since the
administration of the 45th president. This has come about
because of the implementation part of those orders. So, let me
first start, Mr. Horowitz. We have been discussing and there
will be a letter coming, but let me just ask the question. As
you know, there have been newspaper reports that there was
undue influence on a memo both constructed by the Homeland
Security Department and the Department of Justice as a basis of
the Muslim ban. Are you aware of those reports?
Mr. Horowitz. I have certainly seen news reports in that
regard.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And so, would the Inspector General be
investigating that undue influence? Or what would legitimately
provoke you to do so?
Mr. Horowitz. So, with regard to any actions by DHS or
discussion in DHS----
Ms. Jackson Lee. No, this is Department of Justice.
Department of Justice.
Mr. Horowitz. In terms of the Department of Justice----
Ms. Jackson Lee. The memo was constructed by both the DOJ
and Homeland Security.
Mr. Horowitz. I just want to make clear on the DHS side----
Ms. Jackson Lee. No, I am very clear on that.
Mr. Horowitz. Right. With regard to any actions by
attorneys, one of the things we have talked about for years is
the fact that we do not have authority over decision making by
attorneys acting in their capacity as attorneys. That would be
in the province of the Office of Professional Responsibility.
So, I do not know of whether anything is under review there
or not and whether they have even gotten a referral or an
allegation before them. But, anything that would come our way
that would regard conduct by an attorney acting as an attorney
in that capacity, we would have to look, whether under the IG
Act, we even have jurisdiction to consider it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So the idea would be what was the undue
influence to construct the document in the way that was
constructed. Whether there was sufficient evidence or
information that would warrant that kind--so that is sort of a
technical aspect. So, I would then commend you to look at it
and determine your jurisdiction, but to determine whether in
the implementation something went awry with undue influence
that generated that memo that generated that particular order.
Let me quickly go to Ms. Maurer. It has been reported that
Eric Trump's recent business trip to Uruguay cost taxpayers
nearly $100,000 in hotel bills alone. It has also been reported
that providing security for the First Lady to maintain a
residence in New York City costs nearly double the amount it
takes to fund the entire National Endowment for the Arts, a
program that the President has proposed we eliminate in the
name of budget priorities. Ms. Maurer, does the GAO plan any
work in this area? What do you plan to study and when will you
release your results?
Ms. Maurer. Yes, we have received some requests from
different parts of the Congress to look at different aspects of
that issue. For example, the House Homeland Security Committee
has asked us to look at Secret Service's travel costs during
the Presidential campaign. We also have a request that we
recently received from Senate Judiciary and Senate Homeland
Security to look at the issue of the cost incurred for Secret
Service protection of the President's children when they are
traveling overseas to directly address that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So will you look at those issues?
Ms. Maurer. We will definitely look at the cost incurred by
the Secret Service and report on those sometime later. We have
not yet started that work, so we cannot really give you
timeframes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Mr. Horowitz, let me give you
two questions if you would answer. Under the immigration
Executive order, ICE officers have been given undue
responsibilities or authority. They have sort of enhanced their
authority and on occasion ICE officers have found themselves on
church grounds and in courthouses, all is technically against
the law, and have made decisions on issues that have, in
essence, violated due process or ignored various petitions.
Number one question is whether or not you will be looking
at that implementation from ICE officers' perspective. Then
second, you may know the case of Daniel Chung who was forced to
drink his own urine after he was left in a cell for 5 days
without food or water.
He lost 15 pounds. College student. This was done at a DEA
raid of a house in 2012. We know that you have released a
report. My question is, has the DEA followed these
recommendations? Has the DEA implemented a record keeping
method to track detainee movement? Because they forgot he was
in the cell.
Have they increased video monitoring of cell areas? Have
they implemented training regarding the operation of the
holding cell area? What has the DEA done to ensure its agents
do not initiate improper investigations and instead report
incidents to the Office of Professional Responsibility? So, if
you can answer the new ICE, seemingly, expanse of their
responsibilities and the question about the DEA.
Mr. Horowitz. So, on the ICE issue, unless they interacted
with any of the DOJ components, I would have to contact and
refer that to my colleague at DHS OIG because of his authority
over ICE. So, I can follow up and ask him what he is----
Ms. Jackson Lee. We have authority over internal
enforcement, which is part of ICE's work.
Mr. Horowitz. Right, but that, ICE being part of the
Department of Homeland Security at this point, I would have no
jurisdictional authority to look at that under the IG Act. So,
the DHS IG has authority over ICE and I will----
Ms. Jackson Lee. You would not have dual authority?
Mr. Horowitz. No, we do not, actually.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. Then go to the other, with the
DEA too.
Mr. Horowitz. With the second one, I appreciate your
following up on that. Let me get the current status to you.
These changes have occurred because I know you followed up on
these issues since they occurred in 2012. Other members have
followed up and let me get right back to you on that.
That, I agree with you, was a terrible situation, should
not have happened. There needs to be a reform and I know that
you have taken a lead on that. So, I appreciate it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. I yield back. Thank
you for your service.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you and the chair
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chair, appreciate the witnesses
being here. I want to ask the Inspector General: with regard to
the activity of the Civil Rights Division of the Justice
Department, it has been considered rather historic, and I was
noting the one Texas Federal judge was so shocked by the
Federal Civil Rights Division attorney's repeated lies that he
ordered a blistering five part remedy that would supervise
ethics training for hundreds of Justice lawyers, but he noted
in his opinion the 132 ethical violations DOJ has admitted just
in the past 4 years.
Pretty staggering, and when that is taken into
consideration with the allegations that DOJ used settlements to
wrench funds from defendants that it pursued to go to friends.
In fact, one indication was the American taxpayer had been
robbed in this article of, at least, $3 billion dollars where
DOJ directed settlement funds to go to reported nonprofits.
Have you looked at that at all? How much money DOJ has spent
pursuing litigation that resulted in money going to
nongovernment nonprofits?
Mr. Horowitz. We have not taken a review of the costs
involved, and the settlements that resulted, and how it was
spent. I know that has been an area of concern for members of
this committee, as well as the Appropriations Committee, and
something we can take under advisement.
Mr. Gohmert. You know, because in Texas, I looked at Texas
law before that indicates that in Texas, if someone uses their
official capacity as an attorney for the State of Texas to get
someone to pay money to a third party, to anyone, in return for
official action, like dismissing a lawsuit, then that would be
a felony, a crime, and yet it appears to be something that
happened with great regularity at the United States Department
of Justice in the last 8 years.
Where, routinely, defendants were pursued and were
ultimately coerced. If you will give millions to this, our
favorite nonprofit, here, there, yon, then we will dismiss the
case and we will have a settlement. So, that is why I was
curious. I had never seen if there had been such an Inspector
General Report or investigation into this area because,
clearly, if something is worth pursuing by the U.S. Department
of Justice, you would think it would be on behalf of the
taxpayers and would result in at least acquiring enough money
to pay their own attorney's fees, rather than using taxpayer
funds to pursue defendants so that they could fund their
favorite nonprofits. Has anyone made such a request for an
investigation?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not recall us receiving a request or one
of the private litigants sending us specific facts laying out
the concerns. I will say, if we did get such a request, if it
focused on the conduct of the lawyers and reaching a settlement
at the department, that will take me back to what I mentioned
earlier, which is the first thing we would have to do is look
to see if we had jurisdiction even over those actions. We
might, depending upon the facts, but we might not, depending
upon the facts because of the limitation on our authority in
the IG Act and whether we have to refer that allegation to the
Office of Professional Responsibility.
Mr. Gohmert. And if you did not have jurisdiction, then who
would?
Mr. Horowitz. It would then go to the Office of
Professional Responsibility, which is a component of the
department, created by the department. Its director is
appointed by the Attorney General and removed by the Attorney
General.
Mr. Gohmert. Right, do you know if anybody with that office
has looked into the 132 ethical violations that DOJ admitted in
a 4 year period?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not know.
Mr. Gohmert. All right, I see my time is expired, thank you
very much.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you and the chair would
recognize Mr. Johnson of Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Horowitz, May 11th will mark the fourth anniversary of a deadly
joint drug interdiction operation by DEA agents and Honduran
security forces, in which four innocent indigenous people were
killed and three others were wounded and it has been at least 3
years since the DOJ and the State Department began conducting a
joint review of this incident.
What I would like to ask you is you have been investigating
these three incidents, actually, where DEA agents were supposed
to be only acting as advisors but, yet, people were shot and
killed. Innocent people shot and killed. Can you give us a
status report on your initial findings on this investigation
and when can the public expect to see the results of this
investigation?
Mr. Horowitz. I would not get into yet what we found
because the report is about to be released. We have been
waiting for many, many weeks now to get final classification
and other markings from the department and its components so
that we know what we can release publicly, because we want to
make sure we can let the public see what has occurred, in
addition to the members who, obviously, can get all of the
information. So, I am hoping that that can be released in the
very near term.
I will say, the other thing is, as I think you may know,
that held us up for a little bit of time is this review got
caught up in the DEA several years ago refusing to provide us
with timely access to information and so, for about a year, we
were trying to get certain records that we were not being
given. That has moved on, and so we were able to finally
complete the review towards the end of last year.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. You were able to get those records?
Mr. Horowitz. We finally were able to get those records.
That is where the IG Impairment Act was so important to have
our component understand what Congress expected. I think you
will see a very full report about what occurred there and
information that, I think, will answer a number of very
important questions you and other members have raised.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Has the legal framework regarding
access to information by the Inspector General's Offices
impacted the ability for your agencies to conduct reviews?
Mr. Horowitz. It has until about a year or so ago. When,
finally, we got complete and full cooperation starting from FBI
and DEA, but it delayed the Honduras review, or it impacted the
Honduras review. It impacted our review of sexual misconduct
and harassment by the four law enforcement components, DEA and
FBI held up records. It affected our materials witness warrant
review. It impacted our mass security letters review. I could
go on and on the reviews it impacted, but I am pleased to
report that with the IG Empowerment Act going through, I think
in my instance, I am hoping those days are behind us.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you. Last year, the New
Orleans Advocate reported on the Federal case against two DEA
agents. The investigation of the DEA's New Orleans office
revealed improper conduct within a multiagency drug task force.
A member of that task force faces nine counts, including drug
trafficking, falsifying seizure reports, and robbery.
Another member operated as a DEA task force officer despite
not having the required security clearance. He was allowed to
access DEA workspace and transport seized drugs. Does the
Inspector General or the Government Accountability office plan
to investigate misconduct within multiagency drug task forces?
Mr. Horowitz. So, on that issue, as you noted, we were
involved in that case, or are involved in that case, that is
public given the public filings to date, and I can assure you,
we are investigating that aggressively. We are working that
with the FBI, and the DEA, and we will pursue all of the
information we have gathered in that matter, but I cannot go
into, obviously, the details of any investigation, but it is
public that we are investigating.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Any idea when that investigation
will conclude?
Mr. Horowitz. I would not even begin to suggest, having
been a prosecutor myself in my earlier career, it really
depends what the information shows and where the evidence takes
us, and we will, obviously, want to pursue every lead because,
as you noted, these are serious allegations and some of them
are now public through the charging documents that have been
filed.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you and the chair now
recognizes Mr. Chaffetz of Utah for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you both for being here. Mr.
Horowitz, I want to talk to you about the Bureau of Prisons and
the reentry program that is brought up here. You were going to,
I think at our request, conduct a review of halfway houses. Is
there any sense of update as to the timing of that, something
you can share with us?
Mr. Horowitz. So, we released a review towards the end of
last year, as you know. BOP spends over $300 million a year on
halfway houses, and we looked at that issue, and we were
concerned with how it is managing its halfway houses. These are
an opportunity, given the wide variety of halfway houses out
there across the country, for BOP to look at which ones are
operating in the most effective way, whether they have got
strong reentry programs, and what we basically found was that
there was not meaningful, in our view, efforts to analyze which
ones were doing well and which ones were not.
And, in addition, I know GAO has done work on this as well,
we found that the people in the greatest need of halfway houses
were not necessarily getting there because people who were low
risk recidivists, like some white-collar defenders, were
actually being placed in halfway houses rather than in home
confinement. Thereby using up important bed space and some
studies have suggested that that is actually more harmful than
helpful because those individuals then get put in place where
violent criminals, and so you have this odd use of limited bed
space by the BOP, and something we were very concerned about.
Mr. Chaffetz. Now, so, when we talk about the $400 million
for its re-entry programs, is the halfway houses part of that
400 million? Do either of you know?
Mr. Horowitz. I am sorry. So, the halfway house program is
considered one of the re-entry programs and I think it is fair
to say, and the director can tell me otherwise, but I think it
is by far the biggest amount of dollars involved.
Mr. Chaffetz. Do you have anything you want to, director,
add to that?
Ms. Maurer. Absolutely, the work that we did looking at
alternatives to incarceration echoes the findings that the
Inspector General mentioned about alternatives, such as halfway
houses and home confinement.
Mr. Chaffetz. There is no real metrics that they have put
into place.
Ms. Maurer. No.
Mr. Chaffetz. Selfishly, I did introduce a bill that deals
with re-entry. That we have a choice in this country, can make
them better criminals or we can actually look at the key
metrics that will reduce the rates of recidivism, but if the
Bureau of Prisons is not implementing some key findings, things
that have been done at the States about work programs, and
religious services, and not getting in fights. You know, all
these things that States have learned, but you do not see them
doing much of anything in that, do you?
Ms. Maurer. Well, to give them some credit, they have
established a re-entry division that is focused on better
outcomes for their inmate populations, so they are better
prepared for entering back into society. If they do not have
measures of how well some of those key programs work, hard to
know whether they are succeeding.
Mr. Chaffetz. I want to jump to the GAO report here, I have
got just a minute. The ATF, it says, ``to carry out its
enforcement responsibility, ATF maintains 25 firearm related
databases, 16 of which contained firearm purchaser information
from the FFLs.'' Why do we have so many databases?
Ms. Maurer. That is a great question.
Mr. Chaffetz. It scares me if you do not know the answer to
that, not because you are not good at what you are doing, but
just because they probably do not know why they have 25 either,
right? Why did they get there and are they doing anything to
address it?
Ms. Maurer. They have explanations for all 16, we did not
do an independent assessment of whether they needed 16, or 12,
or 35. Generally speaking, the ATF has to balance the need to
conduct criminal investigations that involve firearms, with the
legal requirement that they not have a consolidated, single
database for firearm purchaser information. So, another way of
framing that is, they are required by law not to have a single
database where all this information is stored.
If they did, it would be in violation of Appropriation Act
restrictions that Congress has passed over the years. That was
one of the findings of our report, was that in some specific
instances they were inappropriately consolidating information
on purchases of firearms and violating the act.
Mr. Chaffetz. All right, that is interesting. Well, we will
have to go back and explore what the history of that is.
Lastly, I just wanted to talk about the FBI whistleblowers. We
did pass it. I think it was, in fact, the last bill that we
passed in the last congress, this was a bill of mine, FBI
whistleblower retaliation, but you conclude by saying,
``Department of Justice concurred with these recommendations
but, as of March 2017, has not provided documentation of
actions taken to address them.'' So, are they on a trajectory
to actually do what the law now requires them to do, or is this
the natural time progression that it takes, or are they kind of
ignoring this whistleblower protection that is supposed to be
in place?
Ms. Maurer. Well, certainly the Congress passing the law
and have the President sign it into law was a major step in
bringing the FBI's whistleblower protections on par with the
rest of the government. So, that was a tremendous
accomplishment. I honestly do not know why the Department of
Justice has not responded to our recommendations. It is of
concern to us, we issued our report 2 years ago. From our
perspective, the implementation of those recommendations are
not dependent on that piece of legislation. So, we are waiting
to hear back from them on that.
Mr. Chaffetz. Inspector General, do you have any?
Mr. Horowitz. No, Congressman. It is very concerning that
there is not swifter action to address these issues for the
reasons that you sponsored, and others supported, and got
through that whistleblower bill. There was an order issued by
President Obama on PBT-19, as you know, that required the
department and all the agencies in there to take action within
180 days and the department missed that deadline by many, many,
many months, and it is something that the department needs to
do a better job of.
Whistleblower issues, as we both have talked about, and I
know as you have you have talked about, and the work you have
done, they are the lifeblood of the oversight work that we do.
They are good, ordinary people who are coming forth and
reporting on waste, fraud, abuse, misconduct. They are our eyes
and ears and they need to be seen and heard and never be afraid
that they are going to be retaliated against.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you and the chair now
recognizes Mr. Jeffries of New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and I want to thank
the distinguished witnesses for your presence here today, and
also for your service to this county. Inspector General
Horowitz, you are familiar, of course, with the Second Chance
Reauthorization Act, is that right?
Mr. Horowitz. I am.
Mr. Jeffries. And I believe this act says that the Bureau
of Prisons, under the direction of the Attorney General,
establish a prerelease planning set of procedures to help
prisoners apply for Federal and State benefits upon release.
Including Social Security cards, subject to any limitations in
the law, is that right?
Mr. Horowitz. That is right.
Mr. Jeffries. And the act also says that the BOP director
shall assist prisoners in obtaining identification. Which could
include, beyond a Social Security card, a driver's license, or
some other form of official photo identification, birth
certificate, prior to release. Is that right?
Mr. Horowitz. Yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And, in connection with this statute, the
Social Security Administration and the BOP, I think, are
operating under a memorandum of understanding. Is that right?
Mr. Horowitz. That is my understanding, yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And have you had an opportunity to review how
that memorandum of understanding is functioning in practice, in
terms of implementation of the statutory mandates?
Mr. Horowitz. We looked broadly at how the BOP was working
with other agencies, Social Security, where we found they did
have the agreement and it was, as we understood it, a working
relationship, but we looked at others where areas, like for
veterans, they did not have a similar with the VA and other
similar types of government agencies that could help
reintegrate individuals with the support they need to get into
the communities, that they had not taken those basic steps. It
was something we were concerned about. We were concerned, more
broadly, also about how they were preparing inmates for
release.
Mr. Jeffries. You make a set of recommendations in terms of
how the BOP could more successfully work with other Federal
Government agencies, in terms of facilitating re-entry.
Mr. Horowitz. We did and I would have to follow-up and find
out precisely where they are now, but that was, in fact, one of
them.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay. Now, do you recall how many inmates on
an annualized basis have requested help securing a Social
Security card?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not recall as I sit here. I can
certainly get that number for you.
Mr. Jeffries. And do you have a sense of what the success
rate may be, in terms of a percentage?
Mr. Horowitz. Our understanding was that the MOU was
working well. I do not have a number here that I could tell you
what it was, but it informed our decision on looking at why
there was not similar agreements with VA and others.
Mr. Jeffries. So, from the standpoint of securing
additional forms of identification beyond the Social Security
card, your concern is that in the absence of an MOU or in
absence of any evidence that there are similar working
relationships that the BOP is not doing as much as they could
potentially be doing in these other identification areas.
Mr. Horowitz. Correct, and there is a support network out
there where the basics that people could get, whether it is
Medicare, Medicaid, veteran's benefits, if you are a veteran
coming out of the facility, others, that we found the BOP was
not doing a good job informing inmates of and then helping them
gather the benefits they were entitled to. Which also would
help protect the communities, because you want inmates to
successfully reintegrate into society. That should reduce
recidivism rates and so that is a benefit all around.
Mr. Jeffries. Am I correct that this past November the DOJ
announced that it will begin paying for every Federal inmate to
obtain a birth certificate and or a State issued identification
card before they arrive at a residential re-entry center?
Mr. Horowitz. I recall reading that, I do not know that
specifically, Congressman, as I sit here.
Mr. Jeffries. Okay, Director Maurer, are you familiar at
all with this program?
Ms. Maurer. I am not familiar with the specifics of that
program. That goes for broad brush that while BOP has made some
great strides on the reentry front, there is a lot more that
they still need to do.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you and last, but not
least, the chair recognizes my learned colleague, Ms. Jayapal
from Washington, 5 minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair. Thank you both
so much Inspector General and director for your service and for
your work.
I want to go back, Inspector General Horowitz, to the
medical care issues and say that I am just deeply concerned
about the reports that have been coming out around the issues
of medical care within the private prisons and the BOP system.
And, last year, The Nation magazine obtained records for 103
out of 137 people who have died in BOP private prisons. Only 77
of them provided enough information to actually look at the
individual cases, but the conclusions even from those reports
were damning: 38 deaths that involved inadequate medical care
and inadequate medical care likely contributed to the 25
premature deaths.
And there are a number of cases along these lines, but one
was a 41-year-old named Nester Garrai who was at a private BOP
facility operated by the Geo Group in Texas, and I mention his
case, in particular, because his cellmates yelled for help for
30 minutes after he suffered a massive stroke. And because the
doctor was not on site, he lived 45 minutes away and,
ultimately, it was almost 6 hours before he went to a hospital
and died.
So, your office has conducted several audits on this. You
have mentioned it in your statement. My question to you is what
specific improvements have you actually seen and required from
BOP around medical care?
Mr. Horowitz. So, what we have seen are the reports back on
whether the steps they have taken are sufficient to meet out
recommendations and to close them. I would have to go back and
get specifics on what is, if any, still remains open on them. I
believe there are some that are still open in some of those
audits.
We have not, though, gone back, at this point everything is
fairly recent in terms of our work, to do any follow-up work on
site because, obviously, that would be a further way to assess
it. But the first step is seeing if they actually implemented.
I would add that the burden is also on the BOP because, as you
know from our oversight report of what the BOP is doing, in any
of the work we do, really the first line oversight is by the
component who is spending the money. They are primarily
responsible; I have got 450 people to oversee 112,000
department employees. I have got a $93 million budget to
oversee a $28 billion budget.
So, we cannot be the BOP's only oversight on these, but we
do make sure through our follow-up, throughout follow-up
questions, through their interactions and seeing their
interactions with Congress and members, whether they are in
fact making the reforms that we think are critical.
Ms. Jayapal. One of the issues is around--and your report
mentions many times that, you know, the management of costs for
the prisons--but one of my concerns is that one of the ways to
cut costs is by cutting services and, so, do your
recommendations include things like having onsite medical
professionals and not cutting costs in specific areas that
would actually cause death and better outcomes for our people
that are in there?
Mr. Horowitz. Yeah, in both our contract prison report, but
also actually as to our BOP oversight for its own institutions,
we have consistently expressed concern as to whether there is
sufficient medical care in the contract prison situation based
on the contracts the BOP has written at the BOP institutions
based on their own policies and the staffing challenges they
have faced that we heard from when we were on the ground at
facilities and making sure that that appropriate care is being
given to inmates.
That is a constitutional requirement, if you are
responsible for an inmate, you have got to give them
appropriate medical care, making sure that is present. What our
cost-related concerns have been is, interestingly enough, we
found that BOP alone among the Federal Government is actually
paying, in many instances, multiples of the Medicare
reimbursement rates to care for at site prisoners. So, doctors
who are treating inmates are actually getting reimbursed
potentially at rates higher than the Medicare rate and
therefore higher than the rates for treatment of veterans,
military families, detainees, Native Americans through the
Indian Health Service, all of whom are limited to Medicare.
Ms. Jayapal. That was one of my questions, I noticed in
your report that there was a work group that was supposed to be
established around that. Has there been any progress made on
that?
Mr. Horowitz. We have not received a report yet of the
further progress. I can assure you we are going to follow that.
That is a $100 million-plus costs saving potentially for the
Justice Department and, in our view, there is no reason that
the same reimbursement rate laws that apply to the Veterans
Administration, the Defense Department, Homeland Security, the
FBI, and the Marshals Service, by the way, within the Justice
Department.
Ms. Jayapal. I urge that follow-up and I know my time is
over. I will just say that having an MD on site, the penalties
for this are actually lower than the cost of paying the
doctor's salary. So, it is a huge issue and I hope that you
will stay as vigilant as possible. Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you and the chair
recognizes Mr. Cicilline for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; I thank you to our
witnesses. Mr. Horowitz, after the President of the United
States repeatedly made and refused to withdraw unsubstantiated
claims that President Obama ordered a wiretap of his phones,
the Department of Justice and the FBI were pulled into an
investigation of these baseless claims.
That investigation started on, at least, March 10th of 2017
when the House Intelligence Committee asked DOJ for any
documents to support the President's false allegations and then
continued through March 17, 2017 when the Department of Justice
submitted a report to the House and Senate Intelligence
Committees in compliance with this request.
This DOJ inquiry happened, despite the fact, that during
this time period the White House put forward zero evidence to
support this claim that Trump Tower had been wiretapped, and
both the House and the Senate Intelligence Committees publicly
stated that no such evidence existed.
And so, my question is, is it the Inspector General's
responsibility to investigate if department resources are
wasted, you particularly spoke about tight budget times, would
you consider an investigation into allegations that are
demonstrably false to be wasted resources and are you intending
to investigate, or have you begun to investigate, whether
taxpayer resources were wasted to support the agency's
investigation into President Trump's false allegation that
President Obama wiretapped Trump Tower?
Mr. Horowitz. First of all, in the substance, I only know
what I have read in the paper. I am not privy to the classified
requests or information back.
Mr. Cicilline. But, I mean, you are privy to the fact that
these are claims that are unsupported by the evidence. There
was an investigation that was required by the Department of
Justice, which I take it you would agree is a waste of
resources in a time of constrained and limited resources, is
not normally something you would look into?
Mr. Horowitz. Depending upon the issue we, obviously, could
look at what the costs would be like of how long it took to
gather the information or otherwise. Obviously, heard about and
saw parts of yesterday's hearing, but we have not initiated any
work in that regard and I would have to consider, frankly, what
our role, if any, should ever be in something like that, given
our limited resources.
Mr. Cicilline. I would encourage you, in the discharge of
your responsibilities, to do that. I think we are being asked
to make serious reductions in a number of different areas
because of cost constraints and wasting time by one of the
departments as a result of a patently false statement from the
President seems to me should be something we understand and try
to prevent in the future.
The second question I want to turn your attention to is,
after a 27-year career with the Justice Department, acting
Attorney General Sally Yates was fired just 10 days into the
new Trump administration, reportedly for refusing to defend the
President's now unconstitutional Muslim Ban.
However, it subsequently came out that Sally Yates warned
the incoming Trump administration that Michael Flynn had
discussed sanctions during a conversation with the Russian
Ambassador and then lied about it to the Vice President of the
United States and, as a consequence, may be compromised or the
subject of some extortion. Subsequently, U.S. Attorney Preet
Bharara was one of the 46 Federal prosecutors instructed to
resign by the Trump administration.
Two days before he was fired, the ethics watchdog group
CREW sent him a letter asking him to investigate whether
President Trump's business interests violate the Emoluments
Clause and it is also been reported that at the time he was
fired Mr. Bharara had been investigating HHS Secretary Tom
Price for questionable stock trades.
And so, my question is, does it violate Department of
Justice protocol if an employee is fired due to the nature of
an investigation in which they are engaged? Can the President
or the Attorney General fire a DOJ official because they do not
like the target of an investigation that that official is
undertaking? And if you believed a DOJ employee were fired
because of political considerations, would that be something
that your office would investigate?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not know enough facts to opine on the
first two issues. Clearly, as to the last, if there was
evidence presented that an employee was fired to try and shut
down an investigation or otherwise interfere with it, that
would be, obviously, something serious and we would look at the
predicating facts and consider what had occurred.
Mr. Cicilline. Well, but based on what you already know, do
you intend to review this to determine if, in fact, that is the
case?
Mr. Horowitz. We would, just generally speaking, require
before we open an investigation some predicating facts on it
beyond--and I am confident if Mr. Bharara or former DAG Yates
thought that was an issue here they would not be hesitant to
reach out and report that kind of information to me. I mean, it
would depend on what we got, what information we got, and what
we were told, and what witnesses were reporting to us and
claiming to us.
Mr. Cicilline. And finally, Mr. Horowitz, last Friday,
House Democrats wrote to you and asked you to investigate
reports of several improper contacts between the White House
and the Department of Justice. Every Attorney General since the
Carter administration has had guidance in place to limit
contact between independent investigators and the political
leadership of the administration. It seems that both President
Trump and his Chief of Staff have ignored this guidance, and
can we count on your office to look into this matter, and does
the fact that these kinds of conversations have taken place
give you cause and raise some concern with you?
Mr. Horowitz. So, I did get the letter Friday late in the
day and we are looking at and considering it. I have not made
any decisions yet on how to proceed. That is normally something
we would consider before making any decisions on but,
obviously, if, you know, any instance where there is department
policies that have been challenged, put at risk, or action
taken that is something we would certainly consider. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank you and thank you for the indulgence
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you, we are almost done.
Thank you both for being here. The chair recognizes myself for
5 minutes. In 2016 DOJ OIG issued a report on the DOJ's
National Security Division's enforcement and administration of
the Foreign Agents Registration Act, and the report concluded
that there was much needed improvements to NSD's enforcement
and administration of FARA, the Foreign Agents Registration
Act.
Additionally, the report highlights that a number of
recommendations have been repeatedly made, this is a quote,
``over the years in reports by the Government Accountability
Office and its predecessor, the General Accounting Office, and
by the public interest organizations and that these
recommendations should be seriously considered if the purposes
of FARA are to be fully realized.''
So, I have begun working to draft some legislation that
will try to seek some common-sense methods to improve
transparency in oversight in foreign donations influencing U.S.
policymaking. So, the question I had today, I guess for both of
you, is whether you would be willing to commit to working with
my office to determine what some of those commonsense efforts
might be?
Mr. Horowitz. Absolutely, this is an important area. I
agree with you that there needs to be some reform in this area.
Ms. Maurer. Absolutely, I would be happy to work with you
as well and we would coordinate with our colleagues at the IG
that our work is complimentary with each other.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Thank you very much for that. In
the 2016 report, you also state that the number of FARA
registrants has fallen in recent years and I was just curious
what you would say the decline is attributable to. If it is due
less to active involvement by foreign governments or issues due
to a lack of comprehensive FARA enforcement strategy. What do
you think about that?
Mr. Horowitz. I do not think we saw evidence that would
allow us to include the former. I think part of it was
enforcement questions, part of it was what appeared to be
confusion over the scope of FARA versus the Lobbying Disclosure
Act and which applied and where should the registration occur,
and the importance of the department making it clear to the
public and potential registrants when they needed to come
forward and register.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. Another line of questioning, the
role of inspectors, General, involves keeping Congress fully
and currently informed about fraud and abuse within Federal
agencies and programs, and we have discussed a lot of that
today. Certainly, includes complete and thorough
investigations. But we are aware during the last administration
efforts were taken to deny substantial access to requested
information to review DOJ and agency corruption, waste, fraud,
and abuse, and it was based upon an Office of Legal Counsel
legal opinion. So, the question is, where does that stand today
and has there been necessary actions taken to try and remedy
that problem?
Mr. Horowitz. So, with regards to access, I think and it
should be the case, that the IG Empowerment Act resolved that.
That Congress made it clear what I think all of us thought was
already clear, but maybe if you have got to say it twice people
listen, and that we have access to records. I think GAO still
has issues, frankly, on some of these. I know we compare notes
on these questions but we have not had an issue since that
passed. Hopefully, that resolves it.
We still think there are steps that could be taken to
advance our ability to do oversight like testimonial subpoena
authority. Something that was in the bill originally and was
taken out, and the bill passed by the House, taken out at the
last minute by the Senate bill, which was, ultimately, the bill
passed by the House.
We have been discussing with the chair of this committee
and other committees that possibility and I would say, just
generally speaking in terms of oversight, perhaps one of my
biggest concerns is the budget issues. Not having a budget into
this fiscal year, not knowing where we are going next fiscal
year, we do have a very strong return on investment.
The total amount of money invested in our office, for
example, is 0.33 percent of our department's budget. So, we are
an extraordinarily small part of the department's budget and
that is, frankly, where our concern is on oversight going
forward.
Ms. Maurer. Just real quickly, in terms of GAO's access,
two quick points. First, I want to thank the Congress, one of
the very first bills this Congress enacted was a bill that
underscored GAO's statutory right to access, to conduct our
works. That was much appreciated.
Secondly, we are dogged and persistent in pursuit of our
oversight responsibilities. We, by and large, get what we need
to do the work that we do for the Congress. And so, sometimes
there are delays at the Department of Justice, but we have been
able to work through them.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. So, there is no current cases
where this is negatively impacted your ability to conduct
oversight of funds then?
Ms. Maurer. Nothing materially, no.
Mr. Johnson of Louisiana. That is it. We are grateful for
your time today. This will conclude today's hearing and thanks
to both of our witnesses for attending.
Chairman Goodlatte. Without objection, all members will
have five legislative days to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses, or additional materials for the
record, and this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:32 p.m., the committee adjourned subject
to the call of the chair.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
