- DATA STORED ABROAD: ENSURING LAWFUL ACCESS AND PRIVACY PROTECTION IN THE DIGITAL ERA

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DATA STORED ABROAD: ENSURING LAWFUL
ACCESS AND PRIVACY PROTECTION
IN THE DIGITAL ERA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 15, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

31-564                  WASHINGTON : 2018

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        JERROLD NADLER, New York
LAMAR SMITH, Texas                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                    Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 ERIC SWALWELL, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              TED LIEU, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
MATT GAETZ, Florida
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona
Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

JUNE 15, 2017
OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, Virginia, Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., Michigan, Ranking Member,
Committee on the Judiciary.....................................     3

WITNESSES

Mr. Richard Downing, Acting Deputy Assistant Attorney General,
Criminal Division, U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Mr. Paddy McGuinness, UK Deputy National Security Advisor,
Oxford, UK
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Mr. Richard Salgado, Director, Law Enforcement and Information
Security, Google
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Mr. Richard Littlehale, Special Agent in Charge, Technical
Services Unit, Tennessee Bureau of Investigation
Oral Statement...............................................    49
Mr. Chris Calabrese, Vice President, Policy Center for Democracy
and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Professor Andrew Keane Woods, Assistant Professor of Law,
University of Kentucky College of Law
Oral Statement...............................................    53

OFFICIAL HEARING RECORD

Questions for the record submitted to Mr. Paddy McGuinness.......    62
Questions for the record submitted to Mr. Richard Downing........    64

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Material submitted by the Honorable Tom Marino, Pennsylvania,
Committee on the Judiciary. This material is available at the
Committee and can be accessed on the committee repository at:

https://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU00/20170615/106117/HHRG-
115-JU00-20170615-SD002.pdf

DATA STORED ABROAD: ENSURING LAWFUL ACCESS AND PRIVACY PROTECTION IN
THE DIGITAL ERA

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 15, 2017

House of Representatives

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:12 a.m., in Room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Goodlatte
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Chabot, Issa, King,
Gohmert, Jordan, Chaffetz, Marino, Farenthold, Collins, Buck,
Ratcliffe, Roby, Gaetz, Biggs, Rutherford, Conyers, Nadler,
Lofgren, Jackson Lee, Johnson of Georgia, Deutch, Cicilline,
Lieu, Raskin, Jayapal, and Schneider.
Staff Present: Shelley Husband, Staff Director; Branden
Ritchie, Deputy Staff Director; Zach Somers, Parliamentarian
and General Counsel; Ryan Breitenbach, Counsel, Subcommittee on
Crime, Terrorism, Homeland Security, and Investigations; Aaron
Hiller, Minority Chief Oversight Counsel; Joe Graupensperger,
Minority Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,
Homeland Security, and Investigations; Veronica Eligan,
Minority Professional Staff Member; Sandy Alkoutami, Minority
Intern, Judiciary Committee; and Monalisa Dugue, Minority
Deputy Chief Council, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,
Homeland Security, and Investigations.
Chairman Goodlatte. Good morning. The Judiciary Committee
will come to order, and without objection, the chair is
authorized to declare recesses of the committee at any time. We
welcome everyone to this morning's hearing on data stored
abroad: ensuring lawful access and privacy protection in the
digital era. I will recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today's hearing will examine various issues related to
digital data, including international conflicts of law; storage
and transmission practices; governmental acquisition
challenges; and protection of consumer information.
This hearing brings together a diverse array of interests,
including law enforcement, technology companies, the economy,
and the importance of individual privacy and civil liberties
throughout the world. In the digital age, U.S. technology
companies have flourished and provide services to customers
across the globe. However, the rapid growth of international
communications infrastructure has presented challenges as well
as opportunities.
For example, there is a growing tension between U.S. law
and foreign law, often with U.S. technology companies at the
center. U.S. law restricts access to data by foreign countries
making it difficult, if not impossible, in some instances, for
foreign governments to obtain evidence of crimes or terror
plots carried out by their own citizens. This has resulted in
foreign governments enacting their own legislation to address
the problem, including laws requiring U.S. companies, as a
prerequisite for doing business, to comply with foreign
government requests for data.
Others are considering legislation that would require U.S.
providers to locate servers in the foreign country to ensure
foreign jurisdiction over the U.S. provider. This is sometimes
referred to as data localization. Moreover, certain foreign
countries prohibit the removal of data from their boundaries.
U.S. law, by contrast, makes no distinction between data
stored domestically and data stored abroad, nor with regard to
the nationality or location of the customer. The result of
these conflicts is that U.S. technology companies find
themselves having to comply with either U.S. law or foreign
law, as it is often impossible to comply with both.
This is an untenable situation. The last time this
committee considered these important issues was prior to the
Second Circuit's 2016 decision in Microsoft v. United States,
where the court ruled that the Stored Communications Act does
not authorize courts to issue and enforce against U.S.-based
service providers warrants for the seizure of customer email
content that is stored exclusively on foreign servers.
Microsoft had refused to comply with a search warrant for
email content on the basis that Microsoft stored the email data
on a server in Ireland, rather than in the United States. In
the wake of the Microsoft decision, other providers have
refused to comply with warrants on the basis that some or all
of the data pertaining to the subject of an investigation is
stored on servers located outside of the United States.
In the courts, however, five recently-issued opinions
diverged from the Second Circuit's ruling concluding that data
must be disclosed pursuant to lawful process, regardless of the
location of the data being sought.
It is clear that Congress must find a contemporary solution
that embraces the modern manner in which data is stored and
acquired internationally. A legislative fix to the Stored
Communications Act is necessary to remedy the problem made
clear by the Microsoft decision.
Furthermore, Congress should take additional steps to
resolve the conflict of laws issues. Various options exist on
this score. A formal, multilateral treaty could result in
broadly raising international privacy standards to more closely
match the United States' rigorous probable cause standard and
would comport, to the Founder's insistence, that broad,
international agreements affecting many parties require Senate
consent and ratification.
Another option is bilateral agreements. The United States
and the United Kingdom are currently engaged in negotiations on
a bilateral agreement that would authorize the U.K. Government
to request data directly from U.S. companies in criminal and
national security investigations not involving U.S. persons.
To ensure clarity on this point, any international
agreement that provides access by a foreign government to
communications stored or flowing through the United States will
not authorize that foreign government to wiretap or target U.S.
persons or those located in the United States. This restriction
applies even to our closest ally in the United Kingdom. Such an
agreement could only be used to obtain evidence on non-U.S.
persons located abroad.
The potential U.S.-U.K. bilateral agreement may serve as a
model for future agreements, relieve some of the international
pressure on U.S. tech companies, and help to alleviate any
conflicts of law related to requests by the U.S. for data
stored abroad by U.S. companies. In order for an international
agreement of this kind to take effect, Congress must first
change U.S. law to grant specific authority for U.S. companies
to respond to direct requests by foreign authorities and
prescribe the criteria that must be met by the foreign
government.
These are not the only options available to Congress. In
addition, there are legislative proposals that would attempt to
resolve conflicts by basing the authority to obtain information
on the nationality of the targeted individual. The committee
will continue to explore all of these aforementioned options.
Once again, House Judiciary Committee finds itself at the
forefront of a pressing issue that impacts personal privacy,
national security, and public safety, economic viability, and
the rule of law. Members of this committee will continue to
examine all options for a thoughtful and balanced resolution to
this problem.
I appreciate our distinguished witnesses testifying today.
I want to particularly thank one of our first witnesses, Mr.
Paddy McGuinness, for agreeing to travel to our country during
such a difficult period in the United Kingdom, which has
suffered multiple terrorist attacks in recent weeks. We greatly
appreciate your presence and your vital perspective on the
challenges with new forms of digital data storage and
transmission.
I want to thank all of our witnesses and I look forward to
their testimony. And I now turn to the ranking member of the
committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers, for his
opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. I thank you, Chairman Goodlatte. To our
colleagues and to our distinguished witnesses in the first
panel, it seems we keep returning to the same theme; the
statutes that protect our privacy and regulate government
access to our communications were written decades ago before
the invention of the internet and are in urgent need of an
overhaul. Under your leadership, Chairman Goodlatte, we have
already worked together to address one aspect of this problem.
The Email Privacy Act has passed unanimously in the House
twice. That measure allows us to move to a clear, uniform
domestic standard for law enforcement agencies to access the
content of communications namely, a warrant based on probable
cause. There is no reason that the Senate should not pass the
same bill that the House has approved in the past, so that we
can turn to the important work before us on additional related
issues without delay.
In this hearing, we will examine a framework that seems
inadequate to the 21st century: our existing system of mutual
legal assistance treaties, and the overseas application of the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act. The mutual legal
assistance treaty system was written for a different era, quite
frankly. I agree with the long-held view of the British
Government that it is absurd for a police officer investigating
routine crime in London to have to wait months, sometimes
years, to access digital evidence stored in the United States,
evidence that relates entirely to their citizens and not to
ours.
I also agree with the Department of Justice that we are now
facing a reciprocal problem. The recent decision of the Second
Circuit appears to limit the application of the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act to the United States, which means
that, while investigating crimes in the United States, even
with a warrant, our government may not be able to access
communications that are now stored around the globe.
These are both real problems, and I believe that Congress
should act quickly to update our statutes accordingly. But I
also believe that we must carefully evaluate the
administration's legislative proposal. For example, I am not
convinced that simply reversing the Second Circuit solves the
problem presented to us by the Microsoft decision. We should
address law enforcement's need to access the content of
communications with proper legal process. But a straight
reversal does little to address the challenges that face
companies operating internationally or to accommodate the
interests that foreign governments may have in protecting the
privacy of their own citizens. We can achieve a better balance
here.
Similarly, the proposed bilateral agreement framework is
full of promise, but only if we get the details right.
Implemented correctly, these agreements could counter the trend
towards data localization, incentivize our partners to set
better standards for data protection, and help our closest
allies investigate serious crimes.
I am not yet convinced, however, that we have landed on the
right criteria for determining which countries we should
partner with under such a framework and under what criteria. I
understand the need to be flexible in order to accommodate
different legal regimes. But too much flexibility renders the
criteria meaningless.
I am also not yet convinced that it is necessary to give
foreign government access to live wiretap information as part
of a package that focuses largely on stored communications. It
is imperative that both the Congress and the public have a
meaningful opportunity to comment on these agreements before
they take effect.
Under the administration's proposal, the Attorney General
is to give Congress notice 60 days before he or she intends to
give a foreign government access to communications stored in
the United States.
The proposal includes no mechanism for Congress to respond
or for the public to weigh in before the new agreement takes
effect. I am certain that we can do better to ensure confidence
in the decisions of the Department of Justice. I appreciate
that time is of the essence and that this committee, the
Judiciary Committee, must begin grappling with these issues
without delay. I am confident that, working together, we are
prepared to do so. And I thank the chairman for convening this
important hearing, and we are ready to go. Thank you.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. Without
objection, all other members opening statements will be made a
part of the record.
Chairman Goodlatte. Now, we welcome our distinguished
witnesses, and if you would both please rise, I will begin by
swearing you in.
Do you and each of you solemnly swear that the testimony
that you are about to give shall be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Thank you. Let the record show that the witnesses answered
in the affirmative.
Mr. Richard Downing is the Acting Deputy Assistant Attorney
General in the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice.
Previously, Mr. Downing served as Deputy Chief of the Computer
Crime and Intellectual Property Section of the DOJ. During his
tenure there, he supervised the prosecution of hacking,
identity theft, and intellectual property crimes; oversaw
policy and litigation governing the constitutional and
statutory rules for the collection of electronic evidence; and
supervised the development of international law enforcement
cooperation related to cybercrime and intellectual property
crime.
Before joining the Department of Justice in 1999, Mr.
Downing served as an assistant district attorney in
Philadelphia. He is a graduate of Stanford Law School and
received his bachelor of arts from Yale University.
Mr. Paddy McGuinness is the United Kingdom's Deputy
National Security Adviser for Intelligence, Security, and
Resilience at the Cabinet Office. In this role, he supports the
Prime Minister and National Security Adviser on all aspects of
counterterrorism, cybersecurity, national resilience, and
crisis management and security policy; as well as the
governance, resourcing, and policies surrounding the U.K.'s
intelligence agencies.
Mr. McGuinness has had an expansive career in Foreign
Service since joining the Foreign & Commonwealth Office in
1985. He has served in Yemen, United Arab Emirates, Egypt, and
Italy, holding leadership positions covering the Middle East,
counterterrorism, and all aspects of cybercrime. Mr. McGuinness
attended Ampleforth College and the University of Oxford.
I want to, again, thank the witnesses. Your written
statements will be made a part of the record in their entirety.
We ask that you summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help
you stay within that time, there is a timing light on your
table. When the light switches from green to yellow, you have 1
minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it
signals your 5 minutes have expired. And Mr. Downing, you may
begin. Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF RICHARD DOWNING, ACTING DEPUTY ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL, CRIMINAL DIVISION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; AND
PADDY MCGUINNESS, U.K. DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER,
OXFORD, U.K.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD DOWNING

Mr. Downing. Good morning, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Conyers, and members of the committee. Thank you very
much for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Department
of Justice concerning a significant impact on public safety and
national security.
We are, unfortunately, living in a world where criminals,
both in the U.S. and abroad, prey on Americans. Cybercriminals
steal our intellectual property and empty our bank accounts;
terrorists threaten us with brutal attacks; and pedophiles seek
to sexually exploit our young children. Never before have we
had as a great a need for access to electronic evidence in
order to solve crimes, bring criminals to justice, and to
project public safety.
Today, U.S. communication service providers often store
customers' data, including the data of American customers in
data centers in foreign countries. Some providers constantly
move that data in and out of the United States and around the
world, sometimes minute by minute, for business efficiency and
other purposes.
It is against this backdrop that I want to deliver two
important messages. The first is this: the rule announced in
last year's Second Circuit decision in Microsoft v. United
States is undermining the public safety of the American people.
We believe the case was wrongly decided. That decision and the
choice by major U.S. providers to provide its ruling across the
country is preventing effective and efficient access to
critical evidence where the provider has chosen to store that
data overseas.
And the remarkable thing is that it sometimes prevents us
from using a warrant, even when the crime, the victim, the
offender, the account holder are all inside the United States.
These developments are affecting law enforcement efforts in
just about every kind of case that we investigate.
Let me give you a couple of examples. In one case, a U.S.
defendant was arrested for sexually assaulting children, and a
search warrant was issued and served on Google for the content
of that offender's account. Google did not produce photo
attachments in that account, and investigators need those
photos in order to identify and locate other child victims.
In a drug trafficking investigation involving targets in
the United States, Canada, and China, a search warrant was
issued to Microsoft. Microsoft did not produce any email
content. Investigators need that content to identify the
members of the drug trafficking organization.
We need swift action by Congress to correct this problem.
The Department recommends a clarifying amendment that would
explicitly require providers subject to the jurisdiction of the
United States to disclose data, pursuant to legal process, no
matter where the provider has chosen to store the data.
This brings me to the second message. The amendment should
be passed as part of a package that would also improve cross-
border access by foreign law enforcement to data stored within
the United States, a so-called U.S.-U.K. framework. We are, of
course, not alone in facing challenges in protecting our
citizens due to the globalization of the U.S. service
providers.
Our foreign law enforcement partners also face obstacles in
obtaining electronic evidence stored outside their territory.
Increasingly, those countries have issued their own legal
process for evidence from U.S. providers. And, at times, the
providers have to decide whether to follow the foreign laws and
obligations or the restrictions on the disclosure found in the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act.
That is why a group of large U.S. providers came to the
Department of Justice and asked us to help develop a new
bilateral framework for cross-border data access. These U.S.
providers want to be able to comply with foreign court orders,
without violating U.S. law, in situations where the U.S.
interest in protecting the information from such disclosure is
at a minimum.
Consider the investigation of a homicide in the U.K.:
Scotland Yard opens an investigation, questions witnesses,
searches houses, seizes phones. Everything to do with the case,
the victim, the crime, the suspects, is in the U.K. except,
that is, for the victim's email and social media accounts,
which are stored in the United States. It is pure happenstance
that the data is stored here, and there is no meaningful U.S.
nexus to the case.
This is a prime example of where it makes sense for U.K.
law to control. Congress should enact legislation to lift the
restrictions in U.S. law where a bilateral agreement exists
between the two countries. We have explored how such an
agreement would work with the U.K., and if the approach proves
successful, we would consider it for other like-minded
governments who respect the rule of law and have robust privacy
safeguards.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on this
important issue, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Downing follows:]

********** INSERT 1 **********

Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Downing.
Mr. McGuinness, welcome. We are especially pleased that you
have made a long trip to be with us today to testify about the
importance of this issue. So, welcome.

STATEMENT OF PADDY McGUINNESS

Mr. McGuinness. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Conyers,
members of the committee, it is an honor to appear before you
on behalf of Her Majesty's government. Before I turn to the
substance of my remarks, I would like to express my sympathy
for yesterday's shocking attack against this Congress, its
staff, friends, and your police service.
We wish Congressman Scalise and all those injured a speedy
recovery; they and their families are in our thoughts and
prayers. It is a symbol of the resilience of this House that
you are pressing ahead with business and tonight's baseball
game as well.
I had the honor of appearing before the Senate Judiciary
Committee on the 24th of May, 2 days after the cowardly attack
in Manchester, which killed 22 people and injured many more. I
now return to Congress in the wake of the attack on London
Bridge on 3rd of June, during which eight innocents were killed
and 48 were wounded. Five other attack plots have been filed
since our parliament at Westminster was attached on the 22nd of
March.
Put simply, the scale of the threat against the United
Kingdom, its citizens, and the foreign citizens who live there
is unprecedented. It is a matter of pride to us that we are
resilient. We reacted fast to the attacks and have quickly
returned to normality. Manchester and London are safe and open
for business.
But our returned Prime Minister has also caught our mood
when she said, ``Enough is enough.'' That is why she sent me to
appear before you today to explain why Congress should, in our
view, amend U.S. law to permit a bilateral agreement on data
access.
As Deputy National Security Adviser, my responsibilities
are made more complex by a world connected by the internet.
Serious crimes like human trafficking, child sexual
exploitation, drug traffic, and money laundering do not respect
borders. A British citizen who has joined Islamic state can
cause untold havoc through a cellular phone, a laptop, and a
Wi-Fi connection.
I am not a lawyer, but I know that we share an
extraordinary legal heritage derived from the common law with
respect for freedom of speech, privacy, and the rule of law.
Law is the bedrock of our mutual prosperity. It has enabled
America's ingenuity and entrepreneurial spirit to flourish,
and, thus, all to benefit. Nowhere is this more evident than in
the success of American technology companies. And the people of
the United Kingdom are amongst the most enthusiastic users of
the services of those companies. Unfortunately, through no
fault of the companies, that includes criminals and terrorists.
Today, a British police officer investigating serious
crimes taking place in London can get a warrant for the
communications between criminals. If those criminals
communicate using the services of the U.K. company that warrant
can be executed, the crime investigated, and citizens kept
safe. When those same criminals communicate, as 90 percent do,
through an American tech company, the current law of the United
States can prevent that company from providing the content of
those communications to the U.K. police officer.
Crimes go on with the criminals unpunished as a result.
This cannot be right. It is arbitrary. It places U.S. companies
in an impossible position, stuck between the laws of two close
partner countries. It constrains law enforcement, and it makes
us all less safe. The need to resolve this is urgent. That is
why I have come before you today to ask that you make a
technical adjustment to U.S. law to remove the restriction on
U.S. companies providing date in tightly defined circumstances.
This will enable a U.K.-U.S. bilateral agreement to be signed.
You will rightly be concerned, as our lawmakers have been,
that privacy, freedom of speech, and other freedoms be
protected. Let me, therefore, make clear what this proposal is
not an expansion of U.K. investigatory powers. It does not
impact the privacy rights of U.S. citizens and residents, any
agreement would not permit the U.K. to target U.S. persons or
anyone in the U.S.
It is not about encryption; it is entirely encryption
neutral. It is not about obtaining communications in bulk. The
orders under our agreement would be for individual targets. It
is not compulsory; it simply removes the current legal bar to
U.S. companies responding to U.K. orders. It is not one-sided;
it is reciprocal. The U.K. law permits the U.S. use of the
agreement's provisions in the U.K.
This present conflict of laws is unsustainable. Some
countries are requiring data to be stored in their territories.
Others are arresting or threatening company employees. This is
not good for our mutual prosperity or security. Now, Congress
has the opportunity to create a solution to set the standard
for transparency, privacy, and legality for the rest of the
world to follow. Thank you for the opportunity to appear here
before you today. I look forward to answering your questions.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. McGuinness. And I will
begin the questioning under the 5-minute rule. Mr. Downing, the
Department of Justice is engaged in talks with the U.K.
Government about a bilateral agreement that would allow the
U.K. Government to go directly to U.S. technology providers to
obtain stored data, such as emails or to serve wiretap orders
for real-time intercepts of communications in criminal and
national security investigations not involving U.S. persons.
Why is this necessary?
Mr. Downing. This sort of agreement has a number of
benefits. We have already touched on several of them in a
variety of different ways. It is very important for us to help
our colleagues and allies to solve the domestic security
problems that they have, and it also helps the U.S. companies
to make sure that they are avoiding any conflicts of law. It
reduces incentives for data localization and creates incentives
for countries to raise their own standards of protecting
privacy and civil liberties. And as it has been mentioned, it
is very important that we have the ability to get access to
data in foreign countries for our needs when that data happens
to be stored there in appropriate cases.
Chairman Goodlatte. Is a formal treaty instead a better
mechanism that would raise international standards more broadly
while accomplishing the stated goal with multiple signatories
at once?
Mr. Downing. It is an interesting question about what the
correct or the best mechanism would be for accomplishing this
kind of a goal. Let me begin by saying though, that we very
much expect that we would have close collaboration with
Congress as we begin to think through these questions, to work
with the U.K. and potentially with further countries down the
road.
We also have to think about how it would be most efficient
in order to be able to build out this idea to further countries
as well. We think that the proposal that we put forward really
does accomplish a good balance there. It has a very strong role
for Congress at the beginning, of course, by setting up the
rules, the baseline, the requirements.
And then, of course, as was mentioned, there is a
traditional role in the back end where Congress would be
notified before anything was entered into. And, of course, that
would give an opportunity for Congress to weigh in at that
point if it chose to do so. So, we think that a bilateral
executive agreement rather than a treaty is probably a more
efficient and effective way to get the job done and to help all
the benefits that I have just mentioned.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you. Mr. McGuinness, under the
bilateral proposal there would be absolutely no bulk collection
of data and no investigations of Americans. Is that correct?
Mr. McGuinness. Absolutely.
Chairman Goodlatte. And what mechanisms would be in place
to ensure that American's privacy is protected while also
allowing for lawful access by British authorities to British
citizens' email content that resides in the United States?
Mr. McGuinness. So, in order to protect U.S. citizens and
U.S. persons, we should be clear at the outset that this
agreement specifically excludes U.S. citizens and anybody in
the United States. That is not the purpose of the access to
data. So, that is excluded. We have equivalent high standards
to the United States in the way in which we oversee and manage
inception of communications.
We monitor closely what is being done, train, study, and
have oversight regimes, which means that we have a degree of
confidence in what we are able to do. Having said, we will not,
even inadvertently, intercept the communications of Americans.
We are confident that we can put in place systems and processes
that will protect their rights.
Chairman Goodlatte. What is the standard that British
authorities must meet in order to obtain the email content of
British citizens in the United Kingdom when the content resides
in the U.K.?
Mr. McGuinness. So, we have a concept that we use, which is
established and proven and tested in judicial process in the
United Kingdom, which is necessity and proportionality. This is
a high bar for gaining access. Necessity relates to statutes.
So, there are only certain statutory reasons where you might be
able to gain access. That would be national security, serious
and organized crime, threats to economic well-being.
So, those would be covered. Certain restricted set of
organizations can apply for warrants to intercept
communications. Necessity means, also, that the individual or
entity being targeted; there must be a basis for targeting to
them. So, they must have been in dialog with Islamic state.
They must have come up in searches relating to child sexual
exploitation or whatever it might be.
And then we have proportionality and proportionality tells
us that we must use the least intrusive means to enable the
investigation. And if a less intrusive means is available we
should use that. So, it is possible that you will have a
necessity justification, but proportionality will mean that a
warrant is not agreed. Proportionality is a critical concept
when we have judicial review of these warrants.
Chairman Goodlatte. And how often do British authorities
face obstacles to obtaining lawful access to information held
by U.S. companies when conducting investigations?
Mr. McGuinness. So, as I said in my opening statement.
Happily, there is an enormous penetration of the British market
by U.S. tech companies. Everybody, myself included, makes
extensive use of multiple apps when they wish to go about their
daily life. What that means is in almost every case that we
look at there is extensive use by the target of investigation
of U.S. applications provided by U.S. companies. And that means
that in almost every case there is a basis to potentially to
ask for data if that particular communication use is relevant.
Chairman Goodlatte. And, finally, could you explain the new
judicial system in the U.K. under the investigatory powers
regime? In which ways did passage of the Investigatory Powers
Act strengthen and bring more accountability to the U.K.'s
judicial system?
Mr. McGuinness. Certainly. So, in everything I say today I
am going to be talking about the system that will operate under
the Investigatory Powers Act, which you mentioned, which was
passed in November 2016. They are being introduced through this
year progressively and that is what I will be talking about.
We are having a double lock. So, an intercepting agency,
the police service or security service, will write a warrant.
They will submit it to a certain defined set of senior
Ministers who will either agree or disagree with the warrant.
If it is agreed, it then goes to a Judicial Commissioner.
And that Judicial Commissioner will review the warrant in
particular on these issues of necessity and proportionality,
but also the public interest and privacy and the need to
maintain the security of telecommunication systems. And, if
satisfied, will also sign the warrant. So, what you get is a
double lock. The Minister signs it, and then the judge signs
it. If the Minister refuses, it does not go to the judge; and
if the judge refuses, it does not go through.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you. The gentleman from Michigan
is recognized.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you do not mind,
Mr. Downing, I am going to ask one question of our visitor and
guest here. Welcome to the Congress, to the House Judiciary
Committee. We are honored that you would travel as long as you
did to join us. And I wanted to just ask you one: criticism of
the administration's proposal is that it does not reflect one
of our legal traditions that warrants should issue only with
probable cause. I understand that the British system works
differently, but would there be a problem with tightening the
reasonable justification standard reflected in the current
proposal, in your judgment?
Mr. McGuinness. So, thank you for the question, and,
indeed, thank you for hearing me today. The British Parliament
passed the Investigatory Powers Act in November 2016 with a
very large majority. It is more than bipartisan, and it is very
much the will of the British Parliament that this is the way in
which we should manage intrusive powers of this kind. It is
founded on established British legal mechanisms, whether that
be judicial review or necessity and proportionality.
It was considered on the floor of the House of Commons
whether or not we should introduce a new and different
standard, a new and different standard. And it was concluded
that a new and different standard would contain risk because we
could not be sure how it would be implemented, and it would not
have been tested as necessity and proportionality have been
tested.
So, I think my answer to you is we have very high standards
in the United Kingdom. We come from the same legal rootstock
that you do. And we have established protections for freedoms,
for privacy, for freedom of speech. And that is at the very
heart of British life. And we have legal mechanisms that are
proven to deal with that and those are the ones that should
apply to any application for data.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you. Turning now to the Department of
Justice representative, Mr. Downing, and thank you for your
cooperation. Let's compare two different proposals to solve the
problem presented by the Microsoft decision.
The International Communications Privacy Act, as introduced
by Mr. Marino, which allows the government access to
communications stored overseas, but also requires the court to
consider the nationality of the targeted user, as well as any
concerns our allies might register about the privacy of their
own citizens. It recommends a simple reversal of the Second
Circuit. Why should we simply reverse Microsoft? Does it matter
that litigation is ongoing? And should we not make some
accommodation for our foreign partners?
Mr. Downing. Thank you very much for the question. We
believe that a clean reversal of the Microsoft decision makes
the most sense because of the very real and significant harms
that are being caused by that decision along the lines that I
have outlined already. Litigation is ongoing. That is actually
a symptom of the fact that we feel very strongly about this and
the significance of the problem. We are seeking every means
that we have available to try to get that situation solved,
including in the courts where we have that right to bring those
cases. And, of course, that is why we proposed to Congress a
way of fixing it.
To your last question: what is the issue with respect to
notifying foreign governments? There is a number of aspects to
that situation that I would highlight for you. First of all, it
is extremely unusual that we would notify a foreign government
when we take investigative steps against one of their citizens.
We might search the home of a Russian organized crime figure or
a Mexican drug dealer inside the U.S., and we would not give
those governments notice. And we would not do it even when we
did use a mutual legal assistance treaty request.
So, if we sought information from France about a Spanish
citizen, we would not turn around and tell Spain that we had
done that.
But more practically speaking, there are a number of
concerns that we have about a system of notice to foreign
governments. We are concerned about notifying a foreign
government, which might tip off the target of the
investigation. It does not make much sense to notify the
Chinese about a Chinese hacking investigation that we are doing
or a Syrian terrorist about a terrorist investigation. We are
concerned about the reciprocity. Are they granting the same
rights to Americans?
It does not make much sense to give rights to foreign
citizens that they are not willing to give to us. We often do
not know the nationality of the target. So, how do we deal with
the situation where somebody is distributing child pornography
but using the anonymity of the internet to prevent it? And,
perhaps, most importantly, we need a system that is going to
work swiftly and efficiently in order to get us the evidence
that we need in order to protect Americans.
So, a lot of steps and confusion and notification and
delay. It is not what we would favor in our position.
Mr. Conyers. I thank the witnesses, and I thank the
chairman.
Mr. Issa [presiding]. Thank you, sir. I will now recognize
myself for a round. I picked up on your statement you did not
think we should have a treaty. We have an extradition treaty
with the United Kingdom, right, Mr. McGuinness?
Mr. McGuinness. Yes, you do.
Mr. Issa. And why is this not an extradition of an asset of
an entity? Why is it so different, particularly when our laws
are not harmonized and not likely to be harmonized as to
privacy?
Mr. McGuinness. So, the reason why we have come to this is
because of an important dialogue.
Mr. Issa. No, no, no. That was not the question. I
apologize. The question is, why not a treaty? The bar is
higher. The standard is higher. It has to be ratified. But, you
know, there are about 214 ambassadors. But let's call it 194
countries that the United Nations more or less deals with, 80
or so of which we have no extradition treaties with.
So, slightly more than half the world, at least relative to
the United States, has agreed to a procedure for extradition.
And I will just briefly go through Mexico. In Mexico, we waive
the death penalty when we want somebody who has fled who is
accused of a capital crime. We waive it in order to get them
back. It is part of our treaty process.
So, when we look at the likelihood that European Union and
Britain collectively and now separately will have different
standards sooner or later, always almost, in some way for the
nuances of how you have to treat data both of U.S. persons and
British persons. Are not we in a situation in which a treaty is
a better binding and more appropriate bilateral agreement? And
I do not want to belabor it. It is the Senate's job. But, you
know, is there any particular justification other than not
doing a treaty is quicker and easier?
Mr. McGuinness. So, I do not believe this is analogous with
extradition. It is absolutely not that.
Mr. Issa. OK, well, let's go through that. The data that is
being sought can put somebody in the gas chamber in this
country. The data being sought can cause people to be asked for
extradition. Often, the information that is being looked for
will lead to extradition. Let's put it this way: the Fourth
Amendment looks to unreasonable search and seizure. It is
specific and it has the same power as the other nine in our
country.
So, when I look at these inherent protections, and I will
get past treaty for a moment, but when we look at a bilateral
agreement of any sort between our two Nations you are going to
want to protect British persons at a level that you
specifically protect British persons. And we are going to want
to protect U.S. persons at a level that we want to protect
them. And then, we are going to agree based on disparate
standards in all likelihood that we are going to exchange data
under certain circumstances, correct?
Mr. McGuinness. It sounds right.
Mr. Issa. And you did a great job of explaining in detail
how you would come to produce this subpoena or warrant and send
it to us. But I can tell you from this committee, that there
are processes in this country that are virtually invisible that
are done administratively that could lead to a request for data
that currently we are not comfortable with sometimes in the
U.S.
So, let me ask you a real question. Britain and the United
States could not be closer, probably than any other two
countries when it comes to our general view of what is right
and wrong in the world. But are we not held to whatever we do
between our two countries, to be, if you will, the form. The
block on which we are supposed to build other bilateral
agreements.
And so, when I look at nations like Cuba, North Korea,
Afghanistan, the list is long that we do not have extradition
with. What am I going to do when they want data for their
persons? How am I going to look at countries who do not
necessarily have the same standards and the same rule of law
and yet will insist that they have gone through a process, and
I need to give them the information they want?
Mr. McGuinness. If I may, you are going to hold them to the
very high standards that are proposed in this proposal that
have come to you here in Congress. And I long to see the day,
when in North Korea, or Cuba, or any of the States you mention,
they have the kind of protections you have in the United
Kingdom.
So, there absolutely is a mechanism for leading States
along the road. And I would observe that one of the drivers for
the revision of the judicial oversight of our warranty where we
had a different system prior to the November 2016 Act, was the
fact that we knew that it would satisfy the companies who are
advocates of this agreement and the United States.
Mr. Issa. By the way, the Vatican is on that list that we
do not have extradition with.
So, I will close by saying I am deeply concerned that we do
have to be cognizant that, with 80 countries that we cannot
agree to extradition with, the question of whether those 80
countries, if we fail to reach a more common standard, one that
we could reciprocate with everyone on, they are going to tend
to say, ``Gee, it is a wonderful world. We want our data
located in our country.'' And it will be an excuse for China,
Libya, the Vatican to each have their own servers. And,
although I trust the Vatican's business model is such that the
server data will be limited, I cannot say so of China. Thank
you.
And we now go to the ranking member of the Intellectual
Property Subcommittee, Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Downing,
before I get to the specifics here, I want to have a couple of
preparatory questions. It has been reported recently that it is
now the policy of the executive branch not to answer questions
from minority party members of Congress on any subject
whatsoever and to routinely ignore them. So, my question is, is
it the policy of your Department, the Department of Justice,
not to respond to congressional inquiries from Democratic
members?
Mr. Downing. I am afraid I do not have an answer for you
either way on that. I do not know whether that would be binding
on us or where our position is on that.
Mr. Issa. If the gentleman would yield?
Mr. Nadler. Sure.
Mr. Issa. I would be pleased to say that, in fact, in
parliamentary systems, including Great Britain, the minority
right is extensive.
Mr. Nadler. I am glad to hear that, but I am concerned
right now with the congressional system designed by Mr.
Madison. Mr. Downing, if I ask you a question today, which I
will do in a moment, you will presumably answer it.
Mr. Downing. I will.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. But if I put the same question in
writing and send it to you, will you answer it?
Mr. Downing. I will do my best to answer all the questions
for the record that come forward from the committee.
Mr. Nadler. Despite what we hear is the new policy of the
administration?
Mr. Downing. I, as I said, do not have a strict answer for
you on that particular question.
Mr. Nadler. OK. Let the record reflect that that was not
answered, and that is very disturbing that you cannot answer
the question in the negative, to put it mildly.
Let me ask Mr. McGuinness, you described the system in
Britain of proportionality and necessity. We have the system of
probable cause. Could you tell us how they would differ in a
given case, I mean how you would look at proportionality and
necessity in a different way than we might look at probable
cause? I mean, what is the practical impact of this?
Mr. McGuinness. So, as I said in my opening statement, I am
not a lawyer, and I am certainly not an academic lawyer. And my
ability, frankly, to compare between different legal systems
and the standard within them is somewhat limited.
So, I am going to just reflect that necessity and
proportionality are a very high standard analogous, I believe,
to much that is in probable cause, and, certainly, established
in the British legal system and a basis for testing and
sometimes refusing proposals for warranty and for action by the
State.
Mr. Nadler. Well, since you are not a lawyer, I cannot ask
you the next question, which I will simply state for the record
as a matter of curiosity. And that is, what happened to
probably cause in British legal history since I thought it was
there in the 1760s? But we will worry about that at a different
time. I am concerned the proposed legislation would allow
foreign governments to request assistance from the U.S.
providers to intercept communications in real time without
requiring compliance with Wiretap Act standards. Mr. Downing,
could you comment on that and the implications of that?
Mr. Downing. Absolutely. I think it is important to start
with a baseline that has been discussed, these kinds of orders
would not be targeting U.S. persons. So, you have got to
picture the paradigm case here as a----
Mr. Nadler. Excuse me. It would not be targeting, but if
information was collected on U.S. persons, that could be given
back as a section 702 problem?
Mr. Downing. It is possible that U.S. person information
could be intercepted. But if you think about the paradigm case
of an organized crime boss who is setting up a hit and is
talking to people, and the U.K. needs that information, it is
pure fortuity that the data happens to be stored in the U.S.
And so, the U.S. interest in the application of our law is at a
minimum.
Nevertheless, the agreement that we have proposed would
create strong baseline rules. There would have to be
articulable and credible facts and particularity, which are
ideas, which are another way in some ways of saying probable
cause. There have to be the exhaustion of alternatives. The
necessity idea. There has to be for a limited duration. So, all
these things are in play and I think it is important that we
understand that there are real restrictions as well. And I
think, if I may, one final point. The U.K., like the U.S.,
believes that wiretapping is a critical part of being able to
protect our public safety. If we do not address this problem as
part of this----
Mr. Nadler. Yeah, we have clearly got to address the
problem just looking at these standards. In my little time
left, might you be better qualified to answer the question I
asked Mr. McGuinness about the difference between the British
concepts of proportionality and what did he say?
Proportionality and----
Mr. Downing. Probable cause?
Mr. Nadler. Proportionality and necessity on the one hand
versus probable cause on the other.
Mr. Downing. I am afraid I am, of course, steeped in the
U.S. legal system and not so much on the U.K. side. However, I
would agree with Mr. McGuinness that I think those ideas
achieve the same kinds of goals. They need to be real problems,
real faced with proportional consequences. They are analogous,
if not identical. But I do think it is important to recognize
that we cannot have a system where every country has to have
exactly the U.S. rules, or we are never going to get anywhere
with this. It is important that we have baseline rules;
everybody is respecting of privacy and we have rules.
Mr. Nadler. In other words, we can be imperialistic, but
not that imperialistic.
Mr. Downing. That is right. We would not like it very much
if they imposed their rules on us. I think we need to be at
least a little bit balanced about it.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, my time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. We now go to the chairman of the
Oversight Committee, Mr. Chaffetz.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. I do appreciate it, former
chairman, but----
Mr. Issa. You will always be a chairman to me, Jason.
Mr. Chaffetz. All right, thank you. Mr. McGuinness, we
cherish our relationship with the U.K., and we thank you,
personally, for what you do and for the relationship between
the two countries.
Mr. Downing, I think it is important for us to understand
sort of the baseline, because if we are going to be trying to
do things in other countries, I am still concerned about what
we do and do not do in this country. So, first, help me
understand geolocation. What does the Department of Justice's
position on geolocation? My concern is and question for you is
does the Department of Justice consider that metadata, or is
that content? How do you view geolocation?
Mr. Downing. Thank you for the question. Geolocation is a
difficult and complex topic, as I am sure we understand. And we
have had discussions about this in the past as well. There are
different kinds of geolocation that could be content or could
be non-content. It could be content if it is, say, the location
data that is embedded inside of a picture file and is being
passed as part of an attachment to an email.
It could be non-content if it is simply information that
the provider is gathering about its customers' use of cell
towers. It does not actually have any content-full value in
that situation. It is simply an observation of the company
about which tower a particular phone is pinging off of when it
is being used. So, I think----
Mr. Chaffetz. There are times when geolocation is content,
correct?
Mr. Downing. There can be times, yes.
Mr. Chaffetz. I mean, have you written this out? Is there
some sort of definition that the Department of Justice is
taking on the nuances of what geolocation is and is not?
Because I would argue that, by and large, geolocation is
content. It is the content of my life. If you can tell where I
am going with this phone all of the time, you can pretty much
tell the content of my life. And yet I worry about what you are
gathering and not gathering, and I do not understand the
definition.
Mr. Downing. So, our view of the rules that apply when we
are gathering geolocation information vary depending on what
type of geolocation it is. Our position has been that, if we
are merely talking about what cell tower your phone is pinging
off of, that that is covered by the Stored Communications Act
and would require a court order before we are able to obtain
it. This is an issue, actually, that the Supreme Court has just
recently decided to serve petition on. And so, it will be very
interesting to see how they resolve that question.
There are other kinds of geolocation information such as
GPS, which is very specific and generally gathered
prospectively. In those situations, I think as you know, we use
a warrant for that. So, I think we use a nuanced approach. We
look at the law that applies and try to do our best to comply
with that law. It varies.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, I do not know that every department and
agency, even within the Department of Justice, uses that same
standards. And, certainly, when you start to look at Homeland
Security and others, they do not necessarily follow those same
standards. And so, I guess what I am looking for in writing the
definition of what that is.
Let me ask you very quickly: on social media, is it the
position of the Department of Justice, particularly in the
hiring and the monitoring of existing security clearances, to
look at social media? Is that fair game or not fair game?
Mr. Downing. You know, I am afraid I do not know the answer
to that question, but I would be happy to take it back to get
you an answer.
Mr. Chaffetz. I think it is important. It has been a
struggle, particularly in the realms of security clearances,
even to get our own Federal employees to be able to look at,
you know, when they are assessing security clearances, to look
at their social media and what not. And the last thing I want
ask you about is facial recognition. We know the Department of
Justice, specifically the FBI, is building a database of facial
recognition. What direction is this going? Where are the
standards? What is happening or not happening in the building
of the facial recognition database?
Mr. Downing. So, I am not intimately familiar with what the
FBI is doing in that regard. My general impression is that they
are developing a database similar as they would with
fingerprints and other things of people who were of interest in
an investigation, who were arrested in order to be able to
better----
Mr. Chaffetz. OK, but please do look at this because that
is not what they are doing. If they were looking at criminals,
people who were incarcerated, people who committed crimes, that
would be one thing. But what they are doing is now more than
one out of every two members of our society are in the database
or they have access to that database, I should say, because
their proactively going and gathering all the pictures that are
on driver's licenses.
A lot of States have MOUs with these States. And the FBI
was supposed to provide some notification. They did not do
that. I have a fundamental problem and challenge in taking
innocent, suspicion-less Americans and building a database
because we have shown we cannot protect our databases. So, I
think we need to ferret that out as a committee. I will not be
here much longer, but I do think that is something the
committee should take a much closer look at. With that, I yield
back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. And, Mr. Chaffetz, in case
we do not get another public opportunity on this committee to
thank you for your service for so many years and for your
championing peoples' privacy rights including geolocation. It
is something that on this side of the day is center and left.
We are all noting that someone is going to have to pick up that
chalice on your behalf.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, thank you. I am honored to serve. So,
thank you. I appreciate it.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. And with that, we go to the gentlelady
from San Jose, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the two
witnesses, especially our friend from Great Britain for his
long travel to be here this morning. And it is a pleasure to
hear your viewpoint.
Obviously, our country and yours are close partners in the
fight against crime as well as the fight against terrorism. So,
your words mean a lot to us, and we weigh them carefully as
well as, of course, our own Department of Justice. You come
here at a time, however, when we are very much reviewing our
own due process rules, and also some of the other issues that
are post challenges, not only to our government but to our
people.
One of the things I wanted to raise, I understand that you
are here for the best of motives, but we have a new General
Data Protection Regulation that the European Union passed in
April of last year, not of last year; it was 2016. It goes into
effect in May 2018. And here is my understanding of it, and
correct me if you think I am wrong.
The GDPR requirement will be the data stored in the EU can
only be transmitted to a non-EU country, for example the United
States, in response to a law enforcement request through a
process that is ratified in a treaty. In fact, we would not use
an MLAT, which we all agree is inadequate, due to it is
complexity and the time.
But I think we are going to have to have a situation next
year where American companies are going to violate the law no
matter what they do. And I am concerned about that, that you
are here for this matter, but this is going to hit the fan next
spring. And I do not think it is fair to set up a situation
that great American companies are going to be in violation of
the law no matter what they do, and we just ignore that.
So, could either one of you comment on that?
Mr. Downing. Do you want to go first?
Mr. McGuinness. So, I should say that that is not our
understanding of the GDPR, the General Data Protection
Regulation. And the implementation of it is being worked
through, at the moments at European Union level and in
individual member States. So, we are working on that at the
moment. And when we look at Article 48, which would appear to
have that effect, we see that it has been nuanced.
And it is our belief, both that the provisions we have,
and, I think it is clause 53 of our Investigative Panels Act,
which allows for the reciprocity, which I described. Both that,
and the GD pair itself would allow for transfer under the kind
of agreement that we are working on here. That is our belief.
Mr. Downing. If I could just add, I concur with that. We
have been having some discussions with your national data
privacy experts and with the European Commission, and as a
result of those discussions, the Department believes that the
concerns that have been raised are inaccurate and over stated.
We do not believe that the GDPR will pose significant conflicts
for U.S. companies to comply with U.S. demands.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, you know what I would really like from
both of you following this hearing? I would like a statement
that is definitive on that, that companies could take to the
bank and that they could give to a court and as a shield, that
they have relied on in good faith, the representations.
I, personally, think we ought to do a treaty that clarifies
this, but I do not think there is much activity on that more
that there should be. I am, actually, I will be honest, a
little bit reluctant to take action until this other matter is
addressed. And I do not think the administration, from what I
have heard, is actively pursuing it which I think is a mistake.
I will just lay that out. And I think I am not the only member
who has that concern.
But if you could provide those definite statements from the
highest levels of your government, that would be very helpful I
think to all of us. And certainly, to American companies that
feel really kind of stuck at this point. Mr. Chairman, I see my
time has expired.
Mr. Issa. If the gentlelady would let me have her 14
seconds. Mr. Downing, I am going to ask you the follow-up
question to hers. If I were the Attorney General and I asked
you to make the case based on the European Union order, that
you did have that authority, would you not be able to make that
case or at least in good conscience you would plead it? Because
the ordinary reading, certainly, would allow you to make that
case.
Mr. Downing. Make the case? I am sorry, I am not following
you.
Mr. Issa. Make the case that you could not transfer to the
U.S. that data as a non-U.S. entity based on the simple reading
that the gentlelady from San Jose alluded to.
Mr. Downing. Well, I cannot say that I know the intimate
details of the different articles of the GDPR. But in speaking
with people it seems fairly clear that there are a number of
exceptions and loopholes, and changes, and whatnot, that apply
in this kind of situation----
Mr. Issa. There is always fertile ground for attorneys to
make a case in a court.
Mr. Downing. Well, I certainly agree that having a clear
and definitive from the European Union about this would be
helpful. But I just want to be clear, we have to be careful
about basing our legislation on concerns which may be
completely empty.
Mr. Issa. Well, I join with the gentlelady in making the
belief that, until it is clear, crystal clear, it would be a
fool's errand to create a situation in which companies would be
damned if they do and damned if they do not.
Ms. Lofgren. If I reclaim my 14 seconds, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Issa. Of course. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Lofgren. I just think that we ought to have some
further discussion on this point. And perhaps we could
stimulate some useful activity on the part of the
administration to get something positive done here.
Mr. Issa. I would be happy to join with the gentlelady in
that. We now go to the gentleman from Ohio, who has been
patiently waiting, Mr. Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Downing, how
long have you been at the Department of Justice?
Mr. Downing. Coming up on 18 years.
Mr. Jordan. OK, 18 years. We appreciate your service. A
week ago, former FBI Director, Mr. Comey, testified that then
Attorney General Loretta Lynch told him when he discussed the
Clinton investigation to call it a matter not an investigation.
Do you recall that testimony from Mr. Comey?
Mr. Downing. I have heard news reports of that.
Mr. Jordan. OK, were you a part of the discussion and
decision at the Justice Department to instruct the FBI Director
not to call an investigation an investigation?
Mr. Downing. No, sir. I am a career employee of the Justice
Department, and I was not involved in any of that level.
Mr. Jordan. Do you agree with that decision that was made
and, frankly, implemented by the FBI Director?
Mr. Downing. I am afraid, sir, I do not have an opinion one
way or the other on that.
Mr. Jordan. Do you know if that has ever happened before,
where the Attorney General tells the FBI Director to portray
something differently than what is actually happening, i.e. not
to call an investigation an investigation?
Mr. Downing. I am afraid I have no information for you on
that.
Mr. Jordan. Were you part of any decision by the Justice
Department to allow the perception to continue that President
Trump was under investigation, when, in fact, he was not and
was told three times by the FBI Director that he was not?
Mr. Downing. I am trying to make clear, I am not involved
in decisions of that level, and I have no information about it.
Mr. Jordan. Do you think it is wise for the Justice
Department to mislead the American people?
Mr. Downing. Of course, the Justice Department should do
its best not to mislead anyone.
Mr. Jordan. And you would agree that, in both situations,
the American people were misled?
Mr. Downing. I have no basis to answer that question.
Mr. Jordan. Well, think about it. In one situation, it was
an investigation and the FBI Director was instructed to call it
something different, to call it a matter. And the other
situation, the President of the United States was not under
investigation and yet that would not be confirmed, not be
stated. And the perception was allowed to exist that he was.
Twice the American people were misled by the head of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. That is probably not a good
thing, is it?
Mr. Downing. I have no opinion for you on that.
Mr. Jordan. I mean, but, you know, you have served 18 years
at the Justice Department. You went to Stanford Law School; you
are a smart guy, a good lawyer. Is that normally how it
operates at the Department of Justice? Well, let me ask you
this, do you know of any other occasion where the Attorney
General has instructed someone with an important job, like
running the FBI, to mislead the American people?
Mr. Downing. I have no basis to believe that, no.
Mr. Jordan. You do not think it has ever happened before?
You do not know of any other time it has happened?
Mr. Downing. I do not have any opinion on that, no.
Mr. Jordan. What about the leak? What about the idea that
the head of the FBI decides to give information to a friend who
is then going to pass it to The New York Times? Should that be
something that actually takes place, even though, at the time,
he was a former FBI Director? Is that appropriate for someone
who has held that position to engage in that kind of activity?
Mr. Downing. I am afraid I also do not have an opinion on
that.
Mr. Jordan. But, again, as someone who has worked at the
Department of Justice for 18 years, Stanford Law degree, you
think that is the appropriate kind of conduct for someone who
has served in the Justice Department? Not even as high level as
you, but someone who has been head of the FBI?
Mr. Downing. I think I could say that the FBI Director is a
higher level than me. No, I am sorry, sir, I do not have an
opinion about these kinds of questions. I understand the
motivation and the need to try to get to answers on these
questions, but I am not the right person to be in a position to
answer them for you, sir.
Mr. Jordan. I appreciate you trying to respond, Mr.
Downing. But what I also think the American people would
appreciate is the highest officials at the Department of
Justice should be straight with the American people. And that
did not happen. No, if, and, buts about it. It did not happen.
And they were misled at the direction of the Attorney General.
Mr. Comey's testimony was real clear. He even questioned,
he said, do we really want to do that? Do we not want to tell
the American people the truth? And yet he carried out the order
from the Attorney General to mislead the American people and
say it was a matter, not an investigation. And, of course, as I
have said a couple of times, he allowed the perception to
continue that our current President of the United States was
under investigation when, in fact, he was not. And with that,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Jordan. I would be happy to yield to the chairman.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Downing, I understand you cannot always speak
about things that are your main wheelhouse, if you will. Have
you ever spoken to the press off the record? Provided any
information about an ongoing case to a press person?
Mr. Downing. I have certainly spoken to the press off the
record, sir. Of course, we are very careful about what we
disclose, and we try to do our best to stay within the lines,
certainly at my level.
Mr. Issa. OK. So, I will take that as a yes. Thank you. We
now go to the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We welcome both Mr. Downing and Mr.
McGuinness and add my appreciation for coming across the pond
to visit with us. Let me just take a moment to applaud my two
colleagues from California and from Ohio. We have just seen,
and I will not take long on this moment, but we have just seen
an opening to begin an investigation into the President of the
United States and the questions of the Russian collusion,
obstruction of justice by the Judiciary Committee.
And I think we have been speaking about that for a very
long period of time. And so, I would ask Mr. Jordan to convey
to the leadership chairman and ranking member of this
committee, so that we can begin to open these investigations
that the gentleman from California seems to want to answer
about leaks and individuals speaking off the record. Mr.
Downing, you answered appropriately; you are here for a
particular topic. And thank you for your courtesies in
responding to my colleague.
But I think now that we have now put on record that
Republicans are interested in getting to the truth of what has
happened and restoring the integrity of our government. And
certainly, the number of witnesses are beyond even our
imagination that could come before the Judiciary Committee to
ensure that all of us have that chance to have questions asked
and answered.
I would hope that that we can begin that post haste, and
also I hope that we can secure from the Justice Department the
many documents that we have asked for. And I hope that we can
do that.
Let me indicate my interest in this topic and ask unanimous
consent to put into the record, to the chairman, a letter from
EPIC, Electronic Privacy Information Center, which is an
organization that routinely files Amicus briefs in Federal
courts regarding government cases, defends consumer privacy,
organizes conferences for NGOs, but generally just understands
the burdens of our providers and the whole question of
releasing data.
Even though this does not have anything to do particularly
with the PATRIOT Act, I remember that discussion after 9/11.
And the bill was rejected initially because we did not secure
the privacy rights of Americans sufficiently. I maintain that
this is my position continuously, even as we move into enormous
levels of data seemingly everywhere. And so, I ask consent to
put this letter into the record.
Mr. King [presiding]. Hearing no objections, so ordered.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. So, I have two questions. One
deals with the negotiations between the U.S. and U.K. The rules
are different; I just came back from a Malta meeting with the
European Union, Parliamentarians, and we always discuss issues
addressing cybersecurity data. And we know that, collectively,
obviously Great Britain is in the middle of Brexit. But, the
point is that the rules were different, and that means that our
companies here in the United States, in this agreement between
the U.S. and U.K., may have some difficult obligations to meet
with.
So, my first question is, why the secrecy and when will the
U.S.-U.K. surveillance agreement be made public or aspects of
it? And the second part is, what role of oversight do you
believe the Congress of the United States, particularly, that
is, in fact, the peoples' representatives, should engage with
this agreement? Obviously, there are oversight and approvals
that will come through, but ongoing responsibilities. So,
first, when is this agreement going to be made public?
Mr. Downing. So, I do not have a particular deadline or
timeline for you for when it would be made public. Frankly, we
are in a bit of a hiatus in any discussions around it because
we are waiting to see what action Congress may take on the
legislation that would enable and authorize this kind of
agreement. We expect close collaboration though with Congress.
That is our goal.
We view this as an important piece of this. We have been
working, of course, with the committee staff on both the Senate
and the House and on the Foreign Relations Committee, and the
Judiciary Committee, to try to make clear what we are doing.
And we want to make sure that congressional role is strong.
Indeed, in passing of legislation, would set all of the
guidelines and the floor for what could be done under these
agreements. And, as I mentioned before, also, an additional
role at the end of the process if we were to conclude with an
agreement with the U.K., there would be a waiting period at the
end where Congress would have an opportunity to consider it and
to weigh in if it chose to.
So, I think you have my commitment that we are very
interested in working carefully with Congress and that we are
not going to be out doing crazy things by ourselves. This is
very much a collaborative effort.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. McGuinness, though you come from
across the pond you understand the vital role of Congress and
the protection of the privacy rights of the American people.
Mr. McGuinness. Yeah, I have the upmost respect for the
U.S. Constitution and its protection of U.S. citizens. And of
the role of the Congress in that. I have observed, in this
case, we have something which the companies have come to us and
said, this is a potential solution to a problem we face. And on
that basis, we have gone forward. This is not going to work if
it is just done between governments. Tech companies, which have
brought us such wonders are critical partners in this and they
have been good partners in preparing it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. That is my very point. Mr. Chairman, I
want to conclude. That is my very point the burden that the
tech companies will have to face. But, Mr. Chairman, I would
think that it might be appropriate that we have, as we move
forward, a classified briefing or opportunity to have the
Justice Department back and begin to hear about just the levels
of data that might be subject to the treaty as they are going
forward.
I would like to ask more pointed questions, and probably,
it would be necessary in a classified setting. I would like to
put that on the record. With that, I yield back. Thank you for
your answers. Thank you.
Mr. King. The gentlelady's observation or request is duly
noted. And since she has yielded back the balance of her time,
the chair will now recognize the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Marino.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, welcome. As
a former district attorney and a United States attorney, I
personally understand the complexities of modern day
investigation and criminal prosecutions. I understand the need
for law enforcement to be able to get timely access to
important information, particularly in the abduction of
children.
For the past several years, I have introduced legislation
addressing the issue of law enforcement being able to legally
access information that is stored overseas. This year, I have
been working with my colleague, Mr. Jeffries, to continue
improving this legislation framework.
Current legal framework, the Electronic Communications
Privacy Act, more commonly known as ECPA, is insufficient for
addressing the need of the technology and society of the 21st
century. ECPA is over 30 years old, and the original drafters
on ECPA could not have envisioned the interconnected lives we
live in today's digital world. And the Second Circuit said as
much in its ruling in Microsoft, you know.
Deputy Attorney General, and I do not mean to put you on
the spot here because I just happen to glance at some of the
opinions also, could you expand on the DOJ's opposition to the
Second Circuit's decision in Microsoft, the Second Circuit
Appellate Court, and your legal basis of, I think it has been,
two and maybe three Federal Magistrates Courts' opinions that
appear to me to be disagreeing with the Second Circuit's
decision in Microsoft v. U.S.?
Mr. Downing. Certainly, sir. There are actually five, now,
lower court decisions in different circuits that disagree with
that opinion. Our position is a fairly simple one: we believe
that the execution of a warrant by a U.S. provider, inside the
U.S. is a domestic application of the Stored Communication Act.
That is, the order is issued by a U.S. court; it is served
on the U.S. provider; and a person inside the United States
maintains that data, even it is stored outside. And the moment
of disclosure, which is where the privacy issue may be
involved, is inside the United States. It is then reviewed by
officers inside the United States.
So, our position is that this is not an extra territorial,
under the rules of the legal doctrine of extraterritoriality.
And, therefore, it is perfectly proper for the companies to do
it, to disclose that information to us. And, of course, as I
have mentioned, it is so critical that we get this information
in order to solve very real crimes, as you yourself pointed
out.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Deputy McGuinness, welcome. I have
had the opportunity to be a guest in England, in London, of
Scotland Yard. And I was out on the street with the agents, and
it was quite exciting, very similar to our legal system here of
prosecution. But it is good to see you here. We have about 196
countries in the world, and many of them will not cooperate
with a democracy like yours and ours. Would you agree with me
that it would be virtually impossible to have one universal
treaty and are bilaterals more realistic and less complex to
achieve however cumbersome because of the numbers that would be
required? Do you understand my question?
Mr. McGuinness. I would strongly agree with that.
Mr. Marino. What approach would you, specifically, if you
would not mind expanding on it, because I know we have been
working on one together? Do you see a large portion of that
bilateral agreement that would fit concerning other countries?
And do you see many objections coming forward from those other
countries, based on what we have been working on? The Justice
Department, I might add, Justice has been working on us on
this.
Mr. McGuinness. So, the work we have been doing, building
on advice from the tech companies about what they felt would be
workable and would provide a root to solve this problem of
conflict of laws. The work we have been doing has both the
effect of resolving the immediate issue with States that have
shared standards, shall we say. But also roots to improve the
behavior of other States. Now, that, clearly, is a matter
ultimately for the United States, which is to use agreements to
do that. But the United Kingdom is strongly supportive of it.
And we are also most wary of data localization which we see as
a really pernicious effect. So, we do see a way through this.
It is hard to say, it is hard to exaggerate just how
significant this data is for keeping citizens safe. And that
provides a very powerful driver in any jurisdiction for a
changing behavior and a compliance with the terms that should
be laid in something like this bilateral agreement. It is
striking to me that in the exchanges that newly elected
President Macron and newly elected Prime Minister May had in
Paris only 2 nights ago.
That in the very front of their mind was this question of
what is to be done about securing data in order to secure
citizens. So, there is an enormous urgency to resolve this
issue and to get onto a proper footing. And I think I put that
urgency before you as being one of the reasons to choose one
vehicle over another for seeing through this business.
Mr. Marino. And I am glad to see that we all agree that the
tech industry has to be a part of this. You know, they have a
dog in this hunt just as well as we do. But I do want to add,
in conclusion, I see I have run over the time now, that many of
the most serious cases that I prosecuted and where we reached
convictions were based on using the 21st century technology
that we have today. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. King. The gentleman returns his time. The chair will
now recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Downing, Mr. McGuinness, welcome. Mr. McGuinness, welcome from
across the pond, as has been stated. And we do value the
historic relationship that we have maintained with Great
Britain and want that relationship to remain as strong as it
has always been and actually strengthen it in this time of
mutual threat, or threats that affect us mutually. As well as
the rest of the world, but these two countries have led the
world, and we need to continue to do that.
I want to ask a question Mr. Downing, in the event of a
bilateral agreement between the U.K. and the U.S. that would
permit U.S. companies to provide electronic data in response to
U.K. orders targeting non-U.S. persons located outside of the
United States, while affording the United States reciprocal
rights regarding electronic data of companies storing data in
the United Kingdom, what role do you foresee that Congress
would have in approving, rejecting, or amending such an
agreement?
Mr. Downing. As I mentioned before, I see a close
collaboration between the Department and Congress as being an
important part of this process. And, in particular, Congress'
role at the very beginning in passing the enabling legislation
is a particularly strong rule since it sets the framework and
the guidelines, the requirements, of any sort of agreement that
comes forward. There is also an important role under our
proposal for Congress on the back end.
That is, that once an agreement has been worked out it
would be provided to Congress for notice and, of course, at
that point, Congress could take steps if it chose to. But it is
very much our expectation that we would be in close
collaboration with Congress as these kinds of agreements begin
to be worked out, assuming that we move beyond the first one
with the United Kingdom.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. So, under the framework submitted
by the Department to Congress for this proposed bilateral
agreement to be negotiated: do you see a role of Congress in
terms of vetoing the agreement once it is reached possibly?
Would Congress have that authority under the terms of the
legislation that you have submitted to us?
Mr. Downing. So, I may not be the best expert on
congressional vetoes, but it is my understanding that we cannot
write into the legislation an explicit veto. That that has been
found to be not constitutional. However, Congress would have
the ability at the conclusion of such an agreement to pass a
law, if it chose to. That could obviate that agreement. So,
Congress has an option, a decision that could be made, you
could think of it a little bit like the way the Rules Enabling
Act works where there is a period of time when Congress can
choose to negate what has happened. But it is not an explicit
veto you know written into the agreement. Because I believe
that is not a permissible use of a statute.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All right. With that Mr. Chairman,
I will yield back. Thank you.
Mr. King. The gentleman from Georgia yields or returns his
time. The chair will now recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Rutherford for 5 minutes. And welcome to the committee, Mr.
Rutherford.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Downing, if I could go back just a moment to something you
said earlier. You talked about U.K. law should control when the
elements are in the U.K. and only the data is stored in the
U.S. And then, you talked about some standards that the U.K.
has. Mr. McGuinness talked about necessity proportionality, the
double lock process.
If we are going to use a bilateral agreement as kind of a
template for other agreements down the road, could you talk
about some of the other standards that you think should be met
before the U.S. should consider entering into a bilateral
agreement with other countries? Particularly, surrounding
privacy rights.
Mr. Downing. Certainly, sir. The legislation that we have
proposed would create a number of these kinds of restrictions
that I think set a very robust standard for privacy
protections. They include things like orders have to be for
specific persons; you cannot do bulk collection under the
agreement. It would require that any order be based on
particularity and legality and credible evidence, for example.
It has to be approved or supervised by a judge.
There are a number of different types of rules like that we
tried to make sure that this would only apply to those kinds of
countries that have a really robust system that respects
privacy, civil liberties, and rule of law. And, frankly, would
not be available probably to every country in the world by any
stretch. It is going to be a strong system that only countries
that have similar, not identical, but similar kinds of
procedures and processes in their legal systems as we do.
Mr. Rutherford. So, would you envision that through these
negotiations we would, you know, meet the standard of probable
cause for a warrant by agreeing that you know maybe a necessity
and proportionality do qualify as probable cause? Is that kind
of how you see this going forward?
Mr. Downing. Well, I guess I would not characterize it as
that there is a requirement that other countries use the words
``probable cause'' or to have that exact concept. Frankly, I do
not know of any other country in the world that uses that exact
wording.
Mr. Rutherford. No, but I mean within the body of the
bilateral agreement, we would have some firm that would be
necessity and proportionality and probable cause and we would
all agree that meets the law of both parties in the bilateral
agreement. Is that your intention?
Mr. Downing. Yeah. No, in the enabling legislation it
actually set out those kinds of rules. And one of the
requirements, for example, is that the orders be based on
articulable and credible facts or evidence. So, it is not
exactly the wording of probable cause, nor is it exactly the
wording in that. But it is the idea that you have to have a
justification that is based on objective evidence.
Mr. Rutherford. I want to get back also to the issue that
was brought up earlier. Would you make clear the difference
between the requested data that requires a court order versus
the type of data that requires a warrant and probable cause?
Mr. Downing. For, I am sorry, under U.S. law?
Mr. Rutherford. Yes.
Mr. Downing. So, under the Stored Communications Act, there
is a range of different kinds of data that can be obtained. For
the more sensitive information, like the content of
communications, the Department of Justice generally uses a
warrant when obtaining that kind of information.
On the other end of the spectrum, there might be just the
name and the address of the person who registered the account.
That kind of information generally does not require a warrant,
instead you could use a subpoena or perhaps a lesser court
order to obtain it. So, there is actually a range under U.S.
law, but it is loosely based on the idea that more sensitive
information gets better protection.
Mr. Rutherford. And law enforcement has been using that
difference for a long time.
Mr. Downing. Since 1986, yes.
Mr. Rutherford. Mr. McGuinness, we have talked about it a
little bit, but the incidentally collected communications that
involve foreign persons. Can you talk a little bit more about
that? You have not said really specifically, for example, if a
U.K. subject communicates via e-mail with a U.S. person, what
is done to safeguard the privacy concerns of the U.S. person's
communications?
Mr. McGuinness. So, under the proposals that you have here,
you can see the stub, the beginning of what will be negotiated
between us should Congress agree that there should be such an
agreement. And what is clear there is that there will be
protections for U.S. persons, whether than be a U.S. citizen or
a person in the United States, physically in the United States.
A U.S. citizen wherever they maybe and any person within
the United States and there shall not be collection of them.
And if we come across incidental collection, we will stop
collections and delete the data. So, that is the conception.
That this is not aimed, in any way, at U.S. citizens, wherever
they may be and U.S. persons in the sense of anybody in the
United States.
Mr. Rutherford. Mr. Downing, I assume the retention laws
all still apply?
Mr. Downing. I am sorry, the retention laws?
Mr. King. The allotted time has expired. The gentleman will
be allowed to answer the question.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Downing. So, yes, as Mr. McGuinness pointed out the
data would be minimized and not used. And I would also point
out that we as part of the agreement would have the ability to
audit the U.K.'s practices as they would have the ability to
audit ours. And we expect that to be a robust process to make
sure that both parties are complying with their obligations
under the agreement.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you.
Mr. King. The gentleman yields back. The chair will now
recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutch for 5 minutes.
Mr. Deutch. And I thank the chairman. Mr. Chairman, I would
start just by reflecting upon the comments of my friend from
Ohio a little earlier. Where he asked Mr. Downing some
questions that were not appropriately to be asked of you and
were not appropriately to be asked in this particular hearing.
But I hope that my friend from Ohio and my other friends on
the other side of the aisle in this committee, will seize upon
the questioning that Mr. Jordan started this morning, and will
recognize that it is, in fact, the House Judiciary Committee
that provides oversight of the Department of Justice. It is the
House Judiciary Committee that provides oversight of the
administration of justice in this country. It is the House
Judiciary Committee that, in fact, historically has waded into
important matters where obstruction of justice claims have
arisen with respect to the President of the United States.
And so, I hope while this is a terribly important issue and
I hope I get to my questions, I wanted to follow up on my
friend from Ohio to simply suggest, that it is appropriate for
him to ask those questions.
I know we have a lot of questions that we would like to ask
as well and, in fact, should be asking. As members of the
Judiciary Committee, of former Director Comey, of Attorney
General Sessions, of the Deputy Attorney General, Deputy
Attorney General Rosenstein, of the Acting FBI Director. All of
the sorts of questions that arise following just yesterday's
headlines, last evening headlines that the Special Council is
now looking at obstruction of justice claims.
This committee, Mr. Chairman, has a responsibility to the
American people to hold hearings. Yes, it is important for the
investigation being conducted by the Intelligence Committee and
the House and Senate to continue, vitally important. Yes, it is
important for the Special Council to pursue his investigation.
But when it comes to the administration of justice in the
United States, that falls squarely within the purview of the
United States House Judiciary Committee. And my hope, Mr.
Chairman, is that we will be able to come together to hold that
hearing that the American people so desperately want us to
hold.
With that said, I thank you for your participation here
today, to our witnesses. And while a lot has happened between
today and last February Congress still has not sorted out what
is a nationally complex issue, and I appreciate the chance that
we have here to restart that work today.
As I said before, we have a long overdue and hugely
important set of questions that we have to resolve as a country
about how continuing evolving technology and privacy interact
with the needs of law enforcement. And when we expand out these
issues for our interconnected world, it only serves to
highlight how many more questions we have than answers, that is
what we are getting at today. And I think that really needs to
change, and we have to do it fast.
In my mind, there are two distinct problems here. First,
how do we increase efficiency in cross-border data flow where
the laws of the relevant countries are in agreement? That looks
like either a patchwork of bilateral agreements to shortcut the
MLAT process or comprehensive reform of MLAT's or doing both.
We have been talking about some of that this morning.
Second is what do we do where the laws are in direct
conflict or where it is not clear which countries are the
relevant ones in a given case? It is all too easy to envision a
scenario where data stored in one country is requested by law
enforcement in another regarding the information of a national
of a third country. And while there is much more that I would
like to say, let me start with that and ask our witnesses to
respond. What would you do in that situation?
Mr. Downing. I am sorry, in the situation where there is
data of a third party?
Mr. Deutch. It is one country, the law enforcement in a
second country, and the national in a third county.
Mr. Downing. So, that is unfortunately quite common. In the
case of Ireland, Microsoft stores data in Ireland, but much of
the data there is not going to be about Irish citizens it is
going to be about many people, including Americans who might
have their data stored there. Our view is that we need to have
robust authority to get that data. It is critical for solving
terrorism cases, solving child exploitation cases. Having quick
and efficient means of getting it is particularly critical
after the Microsoft decision. And we are seeking quick
congressional action to try to deal with that problem.
Mr. Deutch. And before I wrap up: I just asked the
question, so, department decisions that the government should
be able to obtain data stored abroad by applying ECPA to
companies based in the United States. What would the position
be if another country made the argument? How would the
Department react if the Chinese government required a Chinese
company, like Ali Baba for example, which maintains a data
center in the United States, to produce account information
that belongs to U.S. citizens?
Mr. Downing. So, I think it is important to understand,
sir, that it is in some sense the norm that countries claim the
authority to gather data even it is stored outside of the
country. If there is a person within the country who has access
to it.
So I have read a report, for example, that showed that
countries as diverse as Canada and Mexico, Ireland, and France,
Australia, and Norway, they all, like the United States, claim
the right to obtain information if it is stored outside of the
borders as long as there is a person, like, the company is
based inside the country. So, it is not the case that the
Chinese are going crazy. This is actually kind of the norm. And
how to deal with it is an important problem.
Of course, ECPA, our rules, would prevent China in many
cases from getting that. And it is that conflict which is,
unfortunately, causing problems for our providers. That is why
we look to situations like an agreement under the U.S.-U.K.
framework, which would ease that burden. And to make sure that
we are doing it with appropriate countries we have safeguards
in place to make sure that that is the case.
Mr. Deutch. That is an important discussion. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. King. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired. The
chair will now recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Biggs,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, gentlemen. I
was reading, Mr. Downing, your statement and listening to your
comments today. And I want to take you to one particular
paragraph that you wrote in here, it says, ``in particular we
recommend enacting and implementing legislation for this
framework.'' And you talk about as long as there is an adequate
protection of privacy and civil liberties, right. And so, and
you alluded to a term in kind of the framework that you have
proposed, and I believe you used the term articulable suspicion
or something.
Mr. Downing. Articulable and creditable facts, I think is
the word.
Mr. Biggs. Yes, articulable, and creditable facts. OK, so,
it led me back to this idea: that seems distinctive from the
apparently American notion of probable cause. And it seems like
a lesser standard. Tell me about that. And I think of the
interesting term reasonable articulable suspicion which is used
in law enforcement in terms of probable cause. And in this kind
of unique term that you have couched here, tell me about that
and how that protects rights and how that would adequately
protect privacy and civil liberties.
Mr. Downing. So, I think as I mentioned before, we are
seeking to figure out what an appropriate baseline level is,
not to exactly mirror the way U.S. law works. To start with the
premise here that we are not targeting Americans, that is, that
this is an event, for example, of a murder investigation in the
U.K.
So, having some deference to the other countries laws, I
think, is appropriate here where it is really only the fortuity
of where the data is located that cause us to have any interest
at all in the case. If it were not stored here, U.K. law would
straight apply.
So, I think it is important that we have appropriate
safeguards, but they should not be so stringent or frankly so
requiring that they mimic ours. That we end up with a situation
where no other country can seem to qualify. I think we should
find an appropriate level. I think we have created a really
robust level of protections.
I notice one of the statements for the record of the second
panel here, says, we should not have any rules there should
just be any countries involved. I think we have come to the
conclusion that it is valuable to have a robust level of
standards. Not identical to ours, but ones that I think would
be appropriate and that we would have faith in as well.
Mr. Biggs. A U.S.-U.K. bilateral agreement has been
described as allowing wiretaps; I do not know if we have
covered this today by, the U.K. Government. And traditionally
we think of that as listening into telephone calls and whatnot.
But here, we are talking about updating to you know live I
suppose emails, chats, and texting, et cetera; is that a fair
understanding?
Mr. Downing. That is right. Well, it would cover any range
of communications, yes.
Mr. Biggs. So, Mr. McGuinness, I guess my question for you
is why is that important in this relationship, in this
agreement, and yeah?
Mr. McGuinness. So, thank you, that is a really helpful
question, and this is a vital area. We are not only talking
here about crimes that have occurred, investigating them, and
bringing people to justice. We are also taking about preventing
crimes, including terrorism, child abuse, and other things. And
in that context, live interception is a vital part of the
toolkit.
I have specific examples. An example would be from our
National Crime Agency, they cite a gang of people who were
selling live feed child abuse online. And in order to identify
both the people doing it and the children and the location
where it was being done, you needed to be able to cover the
actual event happening live, because it was not going to be
stored data. So, in that case live intercept was a vital tool
to get coverage there.
The same can be said of terrorism incidents. If one is
tracking people as they build towards an attack. And one of the
things that I would say to the committee--very loudly, as an
experience we have had in the United Kingdom in the last 3
months--is that speed is an issue. It is about the speed with
which the internet is exploited by terrorists and that is the
speed with which people can move from the thought of an attack
to an attack if they are using knives and a heavy vehicle that
they hire for cash. And we have seen that in France. We have
seen that in the United Kingdom.
So, there is a question about speed and what tool you need
to deal with speed. I would note that, like the United States,
we see live intercept as a particularly intrusive power.
As I take you back to the point I made earlier about
proportionality. So, if it is possible to gain the
investigative advantage, if it is necessary, to gain the
necessary investigative advantage by a less intrusive means, we
will do so. But live intercept sometimes is vital if we are to
prevent people being killed or abused.
Mr. Biggs. And, Mr. Downing, back to you. We are using
this, effectively, as a template for bilateral arrangements
with other Nations. And you have discussed it a little bit, but
as Mr. McGuinness said, we are from the same root ball of civil
liberties going forward. Can you tell me you know what is going
to look like, what is Congresses role in your mind going
forward as we receive perhaps in other bilateral arrangements
and negotiations?
Mr. Downing. So, I perceive that we would seek to be in
close coordination with Congress as we move forward. If it
works out with the U.K., and we look to do it with other
countries we would do that. Congress of course has a critical
role at the beginning of setting up the rules. What are the
rules? And, in the case of wiretaps, the rules that we are
proposing Congress pass would include things like an exhaustion
of alternatives, that you cannot do it if a lesser thing would
be possible. And to have a bunch of rules in there that would
set an important floor for that.
And then, as I mentioned, there is a waiting period at the
end. If we were to include an agreement with the U.K. or any
other country, then there would be notification back to
Congress and a delay before that agreement would go into
effect. And Congress could act at that time if they chose to.
So, we see this as an important partnership in getting these
kinds of frameworks in place. And I think that is sort of an
appropriate way for us to precede.
Mr. Biggs. Thank you, my time has expired. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. King. The gentleman's time has expired or he has
returned his time. The chair will now recognize the gentleman
from Louisiana, Mr. Jeffries for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jeffries. From New York, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
distinguished witnesses for their presence here today. And let
me thank Mr. McGuinness, first of all, for your thoughtful and
heartfelt words at the beginning of your testimony in terms of
the calamity that we experienced here in Congress, yesterday.
And, obviously, those thoughts are felt mutually in terms of
what you are going through right now throughout Great Britain
in terms of your citizens.
In terms of Mr. Downing, I wanted to get your perspective
on one, this Second Circuit decision: is the Department of
Justice's position that Congress should take steps to reverse
the holding in the Second Circuit? It that correct?
Mr. Downing. That is what we have proposed.
Mr. Jeffries. And can you explain why you believe that is a
proper course of action?
Mr. Downing. You mean, as compared to having the Supreme
Court settle the matter?
Mr. Jeffries. Sure.
Mr. Downing. Yes, we are, as I have mentioned, experiencing
a very serious problem in gathering critical evidence in a
whole range of our cases. And so, we have been trying to seek
whatever course is available to correct this problem, and our
efforts to litigate it and to get the law changed through
interpretation in the court continue. Unfortunately, it is a
slow process. And even in the best of circumstances, the
Supreme Court would probably take a whole other year before it
resolved it.
Therefore, we are also seeking action in Congress. I do not
see those as mutually exclusive from our perspective this is a
critical problem that we need solved, and so having Congress
act would be a perfectly proper solution to the problem.
Mr. Jeffries. ECPA was first passed in 1986 is that right?
Mr. Downing. ECPA was first passed, correct.
Mr. Jeffries. That was 31 years ago. Since that moment the
United States has sort of emerged as a cradle of innovation
throughout the world, is that fair to say?
Mr. Downing. I think that is fair yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And in the 21st century, we live in a global
economy, correct?
Mr. Downing. We do.
Mr. Jeffries. And there are U.S.-based tech companies that
operate throughout the world, is that right?
Mr. Downing. They do, yes.
Mr. Jeffries. Would you say that is a good thing for the
American people and our economy?
Mr. Downing. There have been many benefits for the United
States as a result of that, yes.
Mr. Jeffries. So, it is fair to say that these companies,
in terms of our own national economic interest, can remain
viable and competitive internationally in the current digital
landscape that we operate, true?
Mr. Downing. Yes, that is true. And that is absolutely the
case.
Mr. Jeffries. Now, placing United States companies in a
position where they could be forced to violate the privacy laws
of another country would also be problematic, correct?
Mr. Downing. Yes, I have sympathy for the situation that
companies are in when faced with competing legal demands. It is
true, actually, of many different kinds of U.S. industry and
has been true, frankly, for many years outside of the context
of telecommunications providers. There are, of course, rules to
try to resolve those questions. But it is a fact of life for
big multinational companies in any of our industries that they
may have to deal with conflicting legal demands.
Mr. Jeffries. And I just want to drill down on this point
in terms of competitive disadvantage and conflicting legal
demands. If we place our own companies in an adverse position
in terms of these competing legal demands and the possibility
of conflicts of laws and violating privacy laws of other
countries, are those countries being skeptical of our ability
to match their privacy standards? Does that not ultimately
implicate the United States economic interest?
Mr. Downing. Yes, I think that is true. It ultimately does
have that impact. But, of course, economic interests are not
the only ones here. I do not mean to be combative with you,
but, of course, we also have to take into account our public
safety interest. And if we are doing things that benefit our
industry, but that have the impact, like the Microsoft decision
on the protection of children and the American public, I think
we have to make sure we are taking both of those things into
account.
Mr. Jeffries. Right, no, I just want to establish that
there is a range of interests that are important in terms of
what we as Congress should consider moving forward. National
security interest, privacy interest, abroad and foreign, as
well as our own competitive economic interests, is that
correct?
Mr. Downing. Absolutely, I think looking for a solution
that meets all of these needs would be the best path forward.
Mr. Jeffries. And, in fact, I think Article I, Section 8,
Clause 3 of the Constitution states that it is Congress that
shall have the power to regulate commerce with foreign
countries; is that right?
Mr. Downing. That is true, yes.
Mr. Jeffries. And so, when you take all of this into
account, is it not fair to say Congress should be intimately
involved in whatever framework is developed from a bilateral
standpoint or multilateral standpoint in terms of dealing with
data sharing?
Mr. Downing. Absolutely. As I mentioned before, we see
close coordination with Congress as important. And, of course,
setting up the whole framework is a role that we are asking
Congress to take on in terms of U.S.-U.K., to be able to set up
the rules that we would have to follow in passing any kinds of
future agreements with other countries.
Mr. Jeffries. My time has expired. One, I want to thank
Congressman Marino for his leadership in this area. And also
point out that, you know, close coordination is a vague phrase.
I think we are going to have to drill down on specifics as it
relates to the power to accept, reject, or amend, and what form
that takes either in the treaty context or in, you know, the
administrative review context as it has been used in other
incidences is going to be important for us to move forward;
would you agree?
Mr. Downing. Yeah, no, it certainly----
Mr. King. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
will be allowed to answer the question.
Mr. Downing [continuing]. I will simply say, yes. It is an
important question that we are going to have to resolve.
Mr. Jeffries. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. King. Thank you. The gentleman from New York has
returned his time with apologizes to the chairman. Now, I
recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Ratcliffe, for his 5
minutes.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses being here today. I have been bouncing between
meetings and other hearings, and so I apologize in advance if I
am going to ask you something that may seem repetitive to you.
Mr. Downing, if I understand correctly, certain proposals
for addressing the issues that we are examining today would be
to focus less on the location of the data itself and more on
the citizenship and physical location of the individual about
whom the information is being sought. Does it concern you, from
a law enforcement perspective, about a scenario where a U.S.
company does not know the citizenship or physical location of
the individual and so declines to turn over the evidence? Or, I
guess, related to that, feels that the government has not
sufficiently established the citizenship and still declines?
Mr. Downing. That is absolutely a concern of ours. If we
have a rule which is based solely on the citizenship of the
person, and it does not take into account the very common
situation where we do not know that person's citizenship, and
that blocks us from getting evidence, that is a very serious
problem. We often are in a situation where we have, let's say,
a hacker or a child sexual exploiter who is hidden from us by
the anonymity that is provided by the internet. It cannot be we
do not get to access that information simply because we do not
know the person is yet.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK. I was out walking and someone was asking
you about wiretaps as a former prosecutor, you know, my
perspective on wiretaps is they are traditionally thought of as
listening in to phone calls in real time. The request from the
U.K. here, with respect to the U.S.-U.K. bilateral agreement,
would not be to do that, correct?
Mr. Downing. I am sorry. The rules that we are proposing
would be that if there is a targeting of an investigation which
is not a U.S. person, if it is a U.K. person, for example, and
they need to get a wiretap for that person, but the only place
that the wiretap could be effectuated is in the United States,
then it would be part of the agreement that they could use
their own wiretap law, their own wiretap order, with their own
restrictions. And then, the U.S. company would comply with that
foreign legal process.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK. And so, would it also apply in the
context of text messaging and other features like that?
Mr. Downing. Yes, absolutely, it would be for all kinds of
communications not just verbal ones.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK. So, then, let me ask you, Mr.
McGuinness. and I appreciate you traveling all the way here and
I represent east Texas and I have enjoyed listening to your far
east Texas accent this morning. But one of the topics that is
the subject of debate and, ultimately, reauthorization here in
this country will be tools like 702 of our FISA Amendment Act
that a tool that can result in the incidental collection on
U.S. persons. So, how does the U.K. treat incidentally-
collected communications that involve foreign persons under
this?
Mr. McGuinness. Let me say, first of all, my family in East
Texas, I hope you are looking after them well, my aunt, and
uncle, and cousins. So, to be clear, I think we said it, but it
is worth saying again. The proposed U.K.-U.S. framework that we
are talking about is not about U.S. citizens and not about
persons in the United States; categorically, not. When we talk
about foreign persons and how they are protected in this, it is
U.S. persons who are protected.
Other foreign citizens are not. That is because the
conspiracies that we look at for almost everything that we look
at under serious crime, unless there is a single actor,
involved people of multiple nationalities. And that is true if
we are looking at are known Albanian crime groups, trafficking
people into the U.K. That is true if we are looking at recent
conspirators and attackers in the United Kingdom who carried
out attacks. There are multiple nationalities, multiple
connections, externally.
And we covered this a little bit earlier, but it is worth
repeating; we, within this agreement and within the language
that has been sent by the administration of the Congress, there
is a very clear protection for the rights of U.S. citizens and
U.S. persons; an expectation that, should we inadvertently
collect the communications of a U.S. person, that as soon as
that is evident, we will desist, and we will delete the data;
we will minimize the data. So, that protections are in place.
That is, obviously, something the exact detail of how we do
that is to be discussed if you agree there should be an
agreement. But I am confident that we can set a very high
standard.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK, and my time has expired, but that would
apply, for instance, if a U.K. subject communicates via email
with a U.S. person? You are talking about applying those
privacy safeguards to the U.S. person?
Mr. McGuinness. Indeed, if I write to my cousins.
Mr. Ratcliffe. OK. Very good. I appreciate that. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. King. The gentleman yields back his time. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
our witnesses. Mr. McGuinness. in particular, welcome. We
appreciate your long travel and thank you for your thoughtful
words at the beginning of your testimony. And I hope you feel
the same prayers and thoughts of all of the American people
with respect to the citizens of the U.K., in particular, the
families of the loved ones who were killed or injured in those
attacks in your own country.
I think there is broad consensus in our committee that we
need to urgently respond to the issues that both of the
witnesses have raised. And I think our committee took up the
Email Privacy Act in the hope of developing and implementing a
uniform domestic standard for law enforcement based on probable
cause, a standard we are familiar with here in the United
States. But that we also need a uniform standard that provides
clear guidance to all parties for overseas applications of
electronic information.
And I think, as the gentlelady from California mentioned,
it is of particular concern to American companies. We do not
want to put them in a position where, despite their best
efforts to comply with prevailing law, that they are in a
position of, by any action, either complying with one law and
inadvertently or unintentionally violating another, and it puts
them in an impossible position. So, I think it really
underscores the urgency of our work.
And so, I guess my first question is kind of what your
sense is, that is both of you, with respect to the current MLAT
process, you know, there has been a lot of talk about reform.
Is it mostly that we have to figure out ways to accelerate the
decision making and application process? Does it mostly strike
the right balance, or beyond sort of the speed and efficiency
of it, are there other reforms that you think are critical?
And, particularly, your thoughts on the legislation that
was introduced in the last Congress by Ms. DelBene and Mr.
Marino. Did that strike the right balance and address all or
most of your concerns?
Mr. Downing. So, I want to be clear that the MLAT process
is an important tool, but I think it is also clear that, as we
have entered a global and internet-connected world, that it is
not a sufficient tool that we can use in all the times and
situations that we need. That is why we are looking at faster
processes such as the U.S.-U.K. agreement.
That being said, I think we are not going to ever reach a
point where we have bilateral agreements with every country in
the world. And even if we did, there is still going to be the
need for mutual legal assistance treaty processes, for example,
when the U.K. needs information about a criminal in the United
States.
However, the MLAT process will be benefited, interestingly,
by bilateral agreements, because it will take some of the
pressure off of it. Some of the cases could be handled in that
way.
You have to think about the MLAT process in two directions.
One is our outbound requests, how quickly other countries are
complying with that. Unfortunately, it is often very slow and
cumbersome, and, of course, we do not have MLATs with some
countries. As far as the inbound requests, we at the Department
of Justice are taking a lot of steps to try to do a better job
of it. Unfortunately, the requests, especially for electronic
evidence, have just risen massively over the last decade, and
resources have not necessarily kept pace with that.
We have done a number of reforms, though. We have created a
whole cyber team to focus on these kinds of requests in
particular. We have improved efficiency by focusing our efforts
by going to the courts here in the District of Columbia rather
than spreading these out all over the country.
And we have really made some substantial gains. I had a
couple of figures prepared. In the 2013 to 2016 timeframe, we
saw our increase in our requests go up by 175 percent, but the
number of ones that we were able to resolve went up by 532
percent. So, we are cutting into the backlog. We are doing a
better job of it. However, there are still a lot of hurdles.
In particular, this was partly accomplished by a one-time
transfer of funding from one pot to another. And without a
sustainable amount of resources to put into this problem, we
actually hired a number of attorneys; we need to be able to
support them if we are going to continue to make progress on
this. So, I think there are opportunities for improvement. We
will continue to work hard on that and hopefully we will also
be able to see improvement when we make our requests going out,
which is consistently also an issue that we are going to have
to grapple with as well.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Mr. McGuinness.
Mr. McGuinness. So I would strongly endorse what Mr.
Downing has said about the importance of MLATs, both, actually,
bilaterally between the U.K. and the U.S., but also as a
mechanism that will allow us to deal with countries that cannot
reach the high standards that are being set by this proposal
here. MLATs are too slow. Well, we need to do work on that. We
need to relieve the pressure on them, absolutely.
They also are backward-looking. And I think we would all
agree that in some of the egregious crimes that we are looking
at, these terrorist attacks and conspiracies that we have,
child sexual exploitation, trafficking of human beings, that
actually, we want to get into stopping it and preventing it.
And the MLAT will not really allow you to do that except in
prosecuting some of the people doing it. So, this agreement
allows us to do more of that preventative work to our mutual
benefit.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I see my time has expired. Thank
you both.
Mr. Downing. Thank you.
Mr. King. The gentleman from Rhode Island has returned his
time. The chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes. And I
would first turn to Mr. Downing and thank you for your
testimony. And I wanted to understand how a section 2703
warrant is actually issued, the functionality of that. Could
you explain that to the panel?
Mr. Downing. Absolutely. 2703 warrants are actually
executed much more like a subpoena. The officer would swear out
the warrant before the court, supply probable cause, do all the
steps, and have the judge sign it. And then, that is simply
provided to the provider. Under 2703(a) it says that the
warrant may compel the production. That is, it is a compulsion
order, not a situation where the officer goes to Google's
headquarters with a gun and says, ``Stand away from the
keyboards. I am here to seize the evidence.'' Instead----
Mr. King. How does it actually arrive, then? How is it
actually presented to, say, Microsoft in Ireland? How does it
get there?
Mr. Downing. So, we would normally not present it to
Microsoft in Ireland. We would present it to the domestic
service provider. It varies between providers. In the old days,
we would fax them. Now, there are electronic means of
transferring the information. But----
Mr. King. So, I get that. Then you swear out a warrant; the
judge approves it; and then the document, perhaps a PDF
document, is emailed, then, to the company that is in control
of the information you are seeking?
Mr. Downing. That is correct.
Mr. King. And if that company is domiciled in Ireland
rather than the United States, is there a legal difference?
Mr. Downing. Domiciled? No. I mean, if the company is in
the United States doing business in the United States,
employees in the United States----
Mr. King. A U.S. presence.
Mr. Downing [continuing]. We would regard that as being
under the jurisdiction of the court.
Mr. King. OK. So, any company domiciled anywhere that has a
U.S. presence, then, is subject to a 2703 warrant?
Mr. Downing. Any company that would be inside the
jurisdiction of the court, yes.
Mr. King. OK. And if that company then holds that
information in Ireland, as a topic we are discussing here, and
you do not review that data until it is back inside the
domestic boundaries of the United States?
Mr. Downing. That is true, yes. It would be disclosed to us
here.
Mr. King. That is how you qualify that a warrant then is
valid and can be applied under these circumstances we are
discussing?
Mr. Downing. Well, it would have to be that the company not
only has a presence here, but that there is a person inside the
United States who has possession or control over the
information. So, in the case of Microsoft, for example, the
employees here have----
Mr. King. Or access to that information that might be held
in a foreign country.
Mr. Downing. Or access to? I am sorry.
Mr. King. Well, as I understand this case with Microsoft,
the data was in Ireland.
Mr. Downing. That is true.
Mr. King. And the warrant was served, we think, to the
Microsoft officials here in the United States----
Mr. Downing. That is correct.
Mr. King [continuing]. Who, then, were compelled by the
court to access that information and deliver it to justice.
Mr. Downing. That is correct. They had possession and
control, those are the sort of legal words of this----
Mr. King. OK. Let's just say you had a justice official in
Ireland that could walk into the headquarters in Ireland of
Microsoft, and that warrant was served electronically and
emailed over there to Ireland. Under this warrant, could they
hand them the data off of their hard drive, let's say, in a
thumb drive condition?
Mr. Downing. I am sorry; I lost you on that hypothetical.
It is a----
Mr. King. I am just intrigued by this legal technicality
of, if the data is in a foreign country and there is a U.S.
presence for that company, the warrant can be served in
America, but you cannot look at the data until it gets back
into America. That seems to me a very finely-split legal hair,
and I am trying to understand that rationale. We have seen some
of these finely-split legal hairs rationale in the past before
this committee, and they do not always hold up.
Mr. Downing. I guess I do not see it as a legal hair. Over
the last many decades, we have had situations where we serve a
subpoena on a company and the paper documents might be located
overseas; perhaps they are bank records, and we have required
the company to comply with that subpoena. And we have a whole
doctrine to deal with the potential conflicts of law.
If the company comes forward and says, ``I cannot do it
because there is a real conflict,'' then the courts would
balance that kind of conflict. I would expect that kind of
analysis would be what would happen in this situation as well.
Mr. King. Mr. Downing, my time is clicking down. But I just
was caught by perfectly proper, and I will dig into that
perhaps a little later. But I wanted to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Paddy McGuinness for his presence here, and I want
the committee to know that you rolled out significant
hospitality to myself and Chairman Goodlatte and several others
almost a year ago, around June 25 or so last year, shortly
after the Brexit vote.
We had a deep and engaging discussion and were very well-
informed by yourself and a number of other persons that were
there in the briefing table. And the intent that flowed from
that discussion seems to also flow from your testimony here
today. And I want to thank you formally for your efforts on
this. And my sense of what we have negotiated so far is in
keeping with those things that we saw and discussed in London
almost a year ago, and any final words you would like to say,
Mr. McGuinness, I would like to hear them.
Mr. McGuinness. Thank you very much. Can I say, first of
all, I am most grateful for the engagement of this committee in
this business? This is vital interest to the United Kingdom.
This will enable us to keep ourselves and our American allies
safer, and so I am most grateful for it.
I am also really grateful, and we have been heartened and
our resolve strengthened, by the practical support we have
received from the United States, but also the moral support,
and I heard some of it here today, in the face of what has
happened to us over the recent months. And I suppose my last
message, apart from being grateful, is simply to say that we
are resilient and are confident to our ability to see through
this slightly difficult period and get to a better place, not
least with your help.
Mr. King. We have fought together through much more
difficult endeavors in the past. We will demonstrate that to
the world, Mr. McGuinness. Thank you very much. And I see my
time has expired. Now, I would recognize the gentleman from
Maryland, Mr. Raskin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And Mr.
Downing, Mr. McGuinness, welcome. Thank you for your excellent
testimony. Mr. McGuinness, let me just echo my colleagues in
saying we thank you for your words of solidarity and
encouragement, and we return them to you and the people of the
United Kingdom as you deal with the violence and terror that
have beset the people of your country.
I am persuaded, very much, by the testimony that the laws
governing law enforcement access to data across borders are in
critical need of revision and modernization at this point. And
because of the Second Circuit decision in Microsoft Ireland,
the U.S. law enforcement is blocked from accessing data in
legitimate investigations based simply on the fortuity of where
the data happens to be held. And the mirror image problem
applies to foreign countries in trying to access data that you
need in order to solve and prevent crimes. So, the suggestion,
as I understand it, is for a bilateral agreement between the
U.S. and the U.K., and then perhaps a series of bilateral
agreements with other countries.
I want to make sure that both of you agree that such
agreements should only be undertaken where both sides respect
basic rule of law principles and basic human rights principles.
Am I correct in saying that?
Mr. Downing. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Raskin. And, Mr. McGuinness, you agree?
Mr. McGuinness. Strongly so.
Mr. Raskin. In other words, we are very happy to guarantee
the mutual transmission of law enforcement data when we know it
is not going to be abused, when we know that the government
that obtains it will respect the rule of law, the ability of
people to defend themselves, have notice and opportunity to be
heard and so on, and where basic human rights norms are, in
fact, being observed.
Does it follow, then, that the countries with which we
engage in such mutual bilateral agreements themselves should
also not turn over any law enforcement data to authoritarian
regimes or regimes that fall outside of a rule of law or human
rights framework? Does that follow?
Mr. Downing. I think I would not be quite so categorical
about that. It is also possible that authoritarian regimes have
their own perfectly legitimate crime and security problems, and
there may be situations where evidence lawfully gathered could
be used to prevent a serious terrorist attack in another
country.
Nevertheless, your basic premise is right, that there
should be appropriate restrictions on the sharing of
information and that it should not be used as a free ride or a
way of getting any benefit that would not normally be there.
Mr. McGuinness. So, if I may, so far, clearly we have been
having, in principle, discussions of what an agreement might be
like rather than what an agreement will be, because we do not
have your agreement that there should be an agreement. But our
understanding has been, our expectation is, that there will not
be onward passage of data that is provided through this
reciprocal agreement.
So, let us say we are investigating an Albanian crime
group. We get coverage of it and we learn of a harm that is
occurring in a third country that does not have appropriate
human rights standards or privacy respect, or whatever it is.
We would still want to tell them of the harm and enable them to
deal with it, and we would go and do that. We just simply would
not give them the data. So, we would give them the result of
the investigation, and I think that provides us with some
protection.
Mr. Raskin. And that is for the purposes of crime
prevention?
Mr. McGuinness. Yeah, for the purposes of crime prevention,
for instance.
Mr. Raskin. What is the scope of the agreement in terms of
which crimes are incorporated within it? I think I saw
someplace that serious crimes. But is there any definition of
that? Is that what we call felonies in the United States?
Mr. McGuinness. So, the definition we have been working on
in the United Kingdom is a crime which gets a mandatory
sentence of three years or more. So, that provides us with a
baseline, and then we go above that, and that covers the range
of crimes that we have been using in our testimony today.
Mr. Raskin. Got you. And to what extent do we need a
multilateral treaty to deal with this? And could such a
multilateral treaty actually advance rule of law and due
process concerns in countries where it is in danger?
Mr. Downing. So, I think the idea that other countries may
be willing to raise their standards in order to meet the
obligations under this in order to get access to this type of
agreement is very much one thing that we have given some
thought to and, I think, an advantage of the system that we
have. We are open to all sorts of ways of thinking about this
and doing it efficiently.
So, having a multilateral agreement could be a way forward,
so long as all the countries that were in that group met the
basic rules that we are setting out, that Congress would set
out if they were to pass the proposal as we suggested it. So,
it would have to be that they all meet that robust standard,
but having a more efficient way of doing it on a faster basis,
that is something we would certainly be open to.
Mr. Raskin. OK. I have gone over, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back. Thank you.
Chairman Goodlatte. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Collins, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think one of the
things we have seen here, and, Mr. McGuinness, thank you for
being a part of this. I want to start with you and then I am
going to come to Mr. Downing. In the treaty perspective, and I
know there has been some discussion and we just handle this
sort of in a treaty mode if we do it bilaterally, which I think
with one of our greatest friends, you know, the U.K., would be
not a problem. But the reality here is that this is a subject
that spans far more borders than just this.
And I think following up a little bit on my friend from
Maryland's question, is how do we see this with other players,
China, others, you know, where these markets or even in the EU,
working to that? Really, bilateral is a good step, but it is
not really addressing completely this issue, would you think?
Mr. McGuinness. So, if I may, I think I have a couple of
thoughts for you. The first thought I have is that this way
forward is one we have worked up with the close support of the
major U.S. tech companies who see this as a way out of the bind
that they are in. And they see it as a way we can build
incrementally into a better space. First thought.
Second thought, when I go and talk to European colleagues,
as I do regularly, they are, like, people in a closed room with
no exit, where they are suffering from crime, or in the case
particularly of northwestern Europe, they are facing terrorism
of a kind that they find it very hard to deal with, and they
have not got the data that they need. And they are thinking of
solutions within their national boundaries, data localization
and the rest, and this agreement is a way out of that position.
And so, it may be that you do it individually with them. It
may be eventually you are able to do it more broadly. But what
we need, as I think the Justice Department have said, is we
show there is a way of doing this. If we show there is a way of
doing it, we will see it through.
Lastly, in terms of China, I think, as we had a question
earlier about standards in North Korea and Cuba and various
other states, it will be a wonderful thing if we can get them
to raise their respect for freedom of expression and privacy
and the rights of the citizen. There are other mechanisms for
providing data to them, and we talked about MLAT here, and I
think we are just going to have to have a multiplicity of ways
of dealing with the more difficult jurisdictions. But,
actually, we have that anyway in our interactions with them.
Mr. Collins. Well, look, I am very sympathetic. Our tech
companies especially here in the U.S. are outstanding, and they
have, you know, they model and they go around the world. I
think there is some issues, I think not only raising security,
privacy, but also protection and content. There is a lot of
other issues here that we could get into with this situation.
Mr. Downing, though, I do believe there is an issue here,
and it has been addressed here and we are looking at from a
legislative standpoint, and then based on the written
testimony, it is safe to assume that your belief is the
government should be able to obtain this information
regardless, correct? In the United States, regardless of the
data's location.
Mr. Downing. That is correct. That is our proposal.
Mr. Collins. OK. Well, and just hypothetically here, if so,
how would we, I guess, as a country, react if we adopted this
position? For example, if the Chinese government required a
Chinese company, like Alibaba, which maintains data centers in
the U.S., to produce information that belongs to a U.S.
citizen? Would that not jeopardize individual's interest here
in companies here in the U.S.?
Mr. Downing. It is already the case that the Chinese
government claims that right, as do, frankly, as I mentioned,
many countries around the world: Canada, Mexico, Ireland,
Australia----
Mr. Collins. But we are sort of the buffer at this point to
say, ``Hang on a second.'' That is why this Congress
legislatively should be looking at this, because, you know,
again, I think that is the question I am saying is, are we
tactically going down a road that is not, at this point, lining
up with the privacy needs and privacy interests with our
companies and with our citizenry in regard to regimes that we
would never agree to this on any circumstance?
Mr. Downing. So, with respect to, say, a country that we
would not be willing to enter into a bilateral agreement: for
them, the restrictions on disclosure under ECPA would not be
lifted, and therefore, the Chinese court orders would likely
not be complied with by the U.S. companies. So, we are
interested in reducing those conflicts of law for our
companies, but doing it in a selective and positive way with
countries that we can agree have a respect and a robust
protection for civil liberties and the rights of their people.
Mr. Collins. And I think that is, you know, as we get to do
here in hearings and even with the second panel and others
which I will be in and out of a lot, that is the ideal. But we
also have to reel in the realities of data in companies in the
U.S. and others and where they store the data and how they move
their data and how some of these are applicable interests, and
I think that has to be given some deference to these tech
companies.
And the growth: we are still even in their expansion that
we have seen in the last little bit are still at that area of
growth that people more and more depend on this privacy, more
and more expect this privacy, and I think that has been said
even 10 years ago.
This is the next big debate that we have to have, and I
think it is something that I am very concerned about,
especially dealing with our companies who are providing this.
And it is a balance.
And so, for me, it is just really a concern here that the
DOJ look at it also from our perspective as well, and when we
legislatively fix this, it is not just a, ``We are not going to
go here. We believe this,'' but there is a balance that we need
to strike. And that is the thing I believe. And I think our
tech companies deserve that, but more importantly, the American
people deserve it, and then from a citizenry and citizenry of
the world with our friends across Europe and other places. So,
with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Goodlatte. The chair thanks the gentleman and
recognizes the gentlewoman from Washington, Ms. Jayapal for 5
minutes.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I just
want to again extend my thanks to both of you, and,
specifically, to Mr. McGuinness for making the journey at a
very difficult time. You know that the United States stands in
firm alliance and solidarity with the United Kingdom.
I absolutely agree that we need a comprehensive framework
that takes into account our very global, interconnected economy
and, at the same time, balances our many needs. And, of course,
we are very proud in Washington State of our extremely
innovative tech sector. We want to make sure that the economic
benefits of our digital economy continue to come to the United
States and benefit the United States.
We also want to make sure that we are protecting the
global, national, and domestic security, and protecting our
civil liberties and privacy rights of U.S. citizens. And I
agree with our ranking member when he said at the very
beginning that we do need to make sure that we get our details
right.
Mr. Downing, I wanted to just follow up on Mr. Raskin's
question about what constitutes serious crimes, because
obviously, public discussion is centered around investigations
into serious crimes. I know Mr. McGuinness defined it as
anything that gives you three years or more. But can you give
me a little bit more detail in terms of how we would assess
what is truly serious crime?
And would these agreements also apply to less-specific
national security threats? And with regard to the serious
crimes, because of the way our justice system works, we have a
lot of mandatory minimums, we have other things that put
certain crimes into a framework that may not comport with the
United Kingdom. Can you just give a little bit of insight into
that?
Mr. Downing. So, we were choosing the framing of serious
crime in order to provide at least a little bit of flexibility
as different countries, as you correctly point out, have
slightly different approaches to sentencing in their different
countries, and what might constitute a particularly severe
sentence in the U.K., may not be quite regarded in the same
way.
I would see, for our law, it would be, you know, felony
crimes would be probably a rough-and-ready way of looking at
it. But the reason we did not try to specify it with even
greater specificity in the proposed framework is that there may
be a need for some flexibility.
With respect to national security threats, I want to be
clear, this is not an intelligence-gathering tool. The
agreement is aimed at the investigation and prevention of
crime. Of course, there are some national security threats such
as terrorist threats that also are crimes, and so would be
covered here. But it is not intended as a sort of
counterintelligence or other national security work. It is a
provision oriented toward solving and preventing crime.
Ms. Jayapal. That is helpful. Thank you. And in the
proposed legislation from the department, you talk about orders
issued by a foreign government must be subject to review or
oversight. Can you clarify exactly what you mean by oversight?
What would Congress's role be in that? How do you foresee
Congress having that very active role in oversight that I
believe we should have?
Mr. Downing. So, I think the provision that you are
referring to talks about the oversight of legal process that is
issued within one of the two parties. That is, when the British
police officer is investigating an organized crime group, there
needs to be oversight of the application for that court order.
Slightly different question, I think, is what is Congress'
role in overseeing this entire process of developing a
framework and an agreement? And as I have said, I think our
expectation is that there will be close collaboration with
Congress. We certainly worked hard over the last year to try to
be involved with committee staff on both sides of the House and
the Senate.
We also see a strong congressional role in setting up this
whole framework. It is very much a congressional choice to be
able to figure out what the rules ought to be for these
agreements going forward. And then, there would be notice to
Congress before any agreement goes into effect to make sure
that Congress has a role at that stage as well.
Ms. Jayapal. And so, you would be willing to subject these
agreements to a vote by Congress?
Mr. Downing. So, the proposal does not formally create a
requirement that there be a vote by Congress. This is more
like, I suppose----
Ms. Jayapal. But would you be willing to agree to that,
though?
Mr. Downing. I am not sure what you mean, a vote by
Congress. I think Congress is, of course, always able to pass a
law that would block this kind of thing, so that does not need
to be said, I suppose, if you like, that Congress has that
authority to do so.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. Mr. McGuinness, one of the chief
concerns underlying this discussion has been the move towards
data localization, and I know my time has expired, but if you
could just quickly say, economically and politically, what are
some of the harms of data localization laws?
Mr. McGuinness. So, the United Kingdom, Her Majesty's
government, is opposed to data localization. And we are opposed
to it because we think it undoes the good that has been done
economically and in terms of our ability finally to live our
lives that we get from network systems that are agnostic about
where data is and where it goes. So, we are opposed to it.
We see data localization, and the companies are better to
speak to this, and I think you have colleagues from Google
coming afterwards, but we see it as, frankly, slowing down the
functioning of the internet in itself, perhaps technically, but
also, frankly, potentially limiting the value of commerce
through the internet. And also, frankly, it is going to lead to
many more difficulties about ownership of data and the working
system, so we are opposed to it. It is a matter of policy.
Chairman Goodlatte. Well, I want to thank both of you for
your participation and forbearance. We have been going for over
2 hours, and we thank you both for very interesting testimony
and very important issue.
So, thank you, Mr. McGuinness, for coming across the pond,
as they say, to join us today, and Mr. Downing, you did not
have to travel quite as far, but it is important that the two
of you be working together on finding ways to solve this
problem. And we will definitely be playing a role up front and
as we move forward. So, thank you both and we will excuse you--
--
Mr. Downing. Thank you very much. We look forward to
working with you.
Chairman Goodlatte. We excuse you and move to our second
panel. And for those of you who may be wondering, we are going
to go right into this second panel. So, if Mr. Salgado and Mr.
Littlehale and Mr. Calabrese and Mr. Woods would come forward,
we will get started right away.
While you are still standing, why not remain standing so I
can swear you in? And then, I will introduce all of you. So, if
you would raise your right hand.
Do you and each of you solemnly swear that the testimony
that you are about to give shall be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Let the record reflect that all of the witnesses responded
in the affirmative.
And I will begin by introducing Mr. Salgado. Mr. Richard
Salgado is the director of Law Enforcement and Information
Security for Google. Previously, Mr. Salgado was with Yahoo,
focusing on international security and compliance work. Mr.
Salgado has also served as senior counsel in the Computer Crime
and Intellectual Property Section of the United States
Department of Justice.
At the Department of Justice, Mr. Salgado specialized in
investigating and prosecuting computer network cases that dealt
with technology-driven privacy crimes. He has served as a legal
lecturer at Stanford Law School, adjunct law professor at
Georgetown University Law Center, and George Mason Law School,
and as a faculty member of the National Judicial College. He is
a graduate of the University of New Mexico and Yale Law School.
Mr. Richard Littlehale is the Special Agent in Charge of
the Technical Services Unit at the Tennessee Bureau of
Investigation. Mr. Littlehale coordinates and supervises a wide
range of advanced technologies in support of law enforcement
operations. Mr. Littlehale, along with TBI special agents,
specialize in developing evidence from communications records
in a wide range of cases, including homicides, internet crimes
against children, and computer intrusions.
Mr. Littlehale has also served as a legal adviser to the
Tennessee Bureau's Drug Investigation Division. In this role,
he was responsible for providing field and office legal support
for TBI criminal investigators and their supervisors. Mr.
Littlehale is a graduate of Bowdoin College and Vanderbilt Law
School.
Mr. Chris Calabrese is the vice president of Policy at the
Center for Democracy and Technology. Mr. Calabrese has long
been an advocate for privacy protections, having testified
before Congress and appeared in many news media outlets
discussing technology and privacy issues. Previously, Mr.
Calabrese served as legislative counsel at the American Civil
Liberties Union, Washington Legislative Office.
While at the ACLU, Mr. Calabrese led the office's advocacy
efforts related to privacy by developing proactive strategies
on pending Federal legislation concerning privacy and new
technology. Prior to joining the ACLU, he served as legal
counsel to the Massachusetts Senate majority leader. As legal
counsel, Mr. Calabrese helped on legislation pertaining to
privacy and antidiscrimination laws. He is a graduate of
Harvard University and Georgetown University Law Center.
Professor Andrew Keane Woods is an assistant professor of
law at the University of Kentucky College of Law. His teaching
and scholarship include cybersecurity and the regulation of
technology, contract law, international law, and empirical
legal studies. Previously, Professor Woods was a post-doctoral
fellow at Stanford University at the Center for International
Security and Cooperation. Prior to that, he was a fellow at
Harvard Law School. Professor Woods is a graduate of Brown
University, Harvard Law School, and was a Gates Scholar at the
University of Cambridge where he received his Ph.D. in
politics.
I want to welcome all of you. Your written statement will
be entered into the record in its entirety, and we ask that you
summarize your testimony in 5 minutes. To help you stay within
that time, there is a timing light on your table. When the
light switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute to
conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, that is it.
Your time is up. And we will start with Mr. Salgado. Yeah, we
will start with Mr. Salgado. Welcome.

STATEMENTS OF RICHARD SALGADO, DIRECTOR, LAW ENFORCEMENT AND
INFORMATION SECURITY, GOOGLE; RICHARD LITTLEHALE, SPECIAL AGENT
IN CHARGE, TECHNICAL SERVICES UNIT, TENNESSEE BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION; CHRIS CALABRESE, VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY, CENTER
FOR DEMOCRACY & TECHNOLOGY; AND ANDREW WOODS, ASSISTANT
PROFESSOR OF LAW, UNIVERSITY OF KENTUCKY COLLEGE OF LAW

STATEMENT OF RICHARD SALGADO

Mr. Salgado. Chairman Goodlatte and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
this afternoon to discuss the issue of cross-border law
enforcement requests for user data.
Today, I want to discuss two distinct but related
challenges that confront law enforcement agencies and service
providers alike. These challenges arise from the fact that
ECPA, a statute that has been vital for decades, has become
antiquated in some key respects. This has left courts to
interpret the statute in the context of facts that Congress
could not have anticipated in 1986 when ECPA was passed.
It also leaves law enforcement agencies around the world
looking for mechanisms to circumvent the statute. Some of those
mechanisms are aggressive and even dangerous, but can also be
made entirely unnecessary if we just modernize the law.
First, applying well-established rules of statutory
interpretation, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals last year
held that warrants issued under ECPA cannot compel service
providers to search for, seize, and produce data that is stored
outside the United States.
This, of course, has presented challenges to law
enforcement, as you have heard from the Department of Justice.
Other cases pending around the country that raise the same
issues have judges working to understand what Congress intended
in the statute that was enacted well before providers like
Google and Facebook even existed.
Courts are being asked to resolve these disputes in ways
that are divorced from sound policy solutions without the
opportunity for robust debate among the stakeholders, and
indeed, potentially entirely in closed courtrooms. This is
hardly the path for appropriately addressing the equities of
users, law enforcement agencies, service providers in
addressing international comity. The source of all of this is a
statute that needs to be updated to reflect the technical,
business, and other realities of our time.
Second, ECPA includes a broad, so-called blocking provision
that restricts the circumstances in which U.S. service
providers may disclose the content of users' communications to
government agencies outside the United States. There are
legitimate reasons that a country may wish to control how and
to whom data can be disclosed.
For example, to prevent disclosure of information to
countries with poor human rights records. A broad blocking
statute that is divorced from these sorts of concerns and
lacking nuance, however, can leave governments that have a
legitimate need for information looking for alternative means
of acquisition that unnecessarily redound to the detriment of
users' privacy and civil liberties.
The blocking provision in ECPA is a source of enormous
frustration for democratic countries that respect the rule of
law and maintain robust, substantive, and procedural
protections of civil liberties. These countries may be unable
to obtain timely access to digital evidence, solely because it
is retained by a U.S. service provider subject to ECPA, even
for crimes that are wholly domestic in nature. The inability to
obtain this data creates incentives for these countries to seek
other unilateral techniques to get the information, including
enforcement of their surveillance laws extraterritorially, even
in the face of conflicting U.S. law.
It also creates incentives for enactment of data
localization laws and aggressive investigation efforts that can
undermine security in general. It is quite clear that the
status quo is unsustainable as technology involves and has
flourished and services offered by the U.S. internet companies
are being used by people outside the U.S. Key assumptions
around ECPA are obsolete. Congress should holistically
modernize ECPA to address the many challenges that have emerged
in recent years.
We respectfully recommend that an effort to update ECPA
include the following three changes. First, require government
entities in the U.S. to obtain a search warrant to compel the
production of communications content from providers.
Second, provide clear mechanisms for the U.S. Government to
obtain user data from service providers wherever the data may
be stored, but with protections built in for certain cases when
the U.S. Government seeks contents of users who are nationals
of other countries or located abroad. Third, lift the blocking
provision in ECPA to permit U.S. providers to disclose data to
certain foreign governments in response to appropriate legal
process in serious cases when the domestic laws of those
foreign countries provide baseline privacy, due process, and
human rights guarantees.
There is no panacea for the range of challenges presented
by aging legal regimes. But we believe that these three steps
ensure that ECPA's foundational construction is on the basis of
sound policy principles that reflect the equity of users, law
enforcement, service providers, and international comity. Thank
you for your time, and I would be happy to answer questions.
Mr. Collins. The chair now recognizes Mr. Littlehale.

STATEMENT OF RICHARD LITTLEHALE

Mr. Littlehale. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Conyers,
members of the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify.
I am a technical investigator in Tennessee, and I chair the
Technology and Digital Evidence Committee of the Association of
State Criminal Investigative Agencies.
For more than 20 years, I have helped criminal
investigators obtain and use communications records for use in
both technical investigations, like internet crimes against
children in cyber cases, and in the range of other criminal
cases that we support.
My community faces a range of barriers that impede our
lawful access to digital evidence, and the problem is growing
as mobile apps and internet-connected devices proliferate. We
are told it is a golden age of surveillance, but those of us in
the trenches doing investigations and protecting the public see
things differently as we are turned away empty-handed from one
source of critical evidence after another.
The challenge that brings us here today is the Second
Circuit's Microsoft/Ireland decision, which is a growing
problem for the State and local law enforcement community.
Despite grave concerns expressed by concurring and dissenting
judges, despite district court judges in five other circuits
who have declined to follow the ruling, many tech companies
continue to apply the standard across the board and reject
legal demands everywhere in the U.S., creating another blind
spot in State and local law enforcement's ability to access
digital evidence.
Let me give a couple of examples to show you why this
practice is so frustrating for us. In testimony before the
Senate Judiciary Committee last month, one of my peers from
Massachusetts described a California case involving the
disappearance and suspected murder of a young girl.
The investigators developed information that the contents
of an account maintained with a cloud service provider could
help them determine what happened to the girl and where to look
for additional evidence. A court agreed and issued a search
warrant. The service provider objected to the production of any
contents stored outside the U.S., which according to the
investigators, included the categories of records most likely
to be useful in that case.
A second example comes from the State of Mississippi. A
service provider advised the National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children that an unknown party had uploaded child
exploitation images to a cloud account. The investigator, who
got the case from NCMEC, sought a search warrant for the
contents of the account. While waiting for the service provider
to respond, the investigator was able to identify and confront
a suspect, who confessed that it was his practice to meet
people online and share child pornography images in order to
receive similar images in return.
When asked whether he received any pictures that made him
think the senders were actively molesting children, he stated
he did not know, but that he was talking with ``some very bad
people.'' The investigator received a foreign evidence denial
as to some of the requested account contents, though everything
points to the suspect accessing the account from within
Mississippi. The investigator sent two further requests for
information on how to obtain the content that might lead to
unknown minor victims. As of yesterday, the investigator has
not received a response.
When investigators face foreign evidence denials like
these, their only option is to pursue the mutual legal
assistance treaty process, which is widely regarded in the law
enforcement community as too cumbersome to be effective. Delays
run from many months to years.
This simply does not allow investigators to obtain the
evidence that they need in a timeframe that is useful. All of
that assumes, of course, that the service provider tells the
agency what country to direct the MLAT to, which does not
always happen.
Everyone agrees that this situation is problematic.
Evidence that can help solve crimes committed in the U.S. by
people in the U.S. against victims in the U.S. is often
unavailable even after a judge signs an appropriate legal
demand. In Judge Lynch's concurrence to the Microsoft Ireland
panel decision, he writes, ``Without any illusion that the
result should be regarded as a rational policy outcome, let
alone celebrated as a milestone in protecting privacy.''
We agree, and we hope that Congress can take quick action,
carefully weighing public safety needs alongside the business
interests of providers and the privacy concerns of their
customers. Public safety should not be an afterthought or side
issue as technology advances. My peers and I are eager to help
where we can in collaboration with our fellow Federal partners.
To wrap up, Mr. Chairman, State and local law enforcement
investigators see this issue of evidence stored abroad as part
of a broader policy challenge which includes, among other
things, the lack of a legal framework around service provider
response to legal demands, data retention, and a lack of good
information about what evidence is even available on service
provider networks. We agree that laws intended to provide law
enforcement access to digital evidence like ECPA and CALEA need
to be updated to make sense in the 21st century, but those
updates must be balanced to address the very real needs of the
law enforcement community and crime victims to avoid
unnecessary barriers to investigations. We greatly appreciate
this committee's ongoing solicitation of our input, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, sir. Mr. Calabrese.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS CALABRESE

Mr. Calabrese. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Conyers, members of the committee. First, let me just
say how happy I am to see everyone here safe and sound after
yesterday's tragic events. Our thoughts and prayers go out to
the victims, but I am just glad to see so many friendly faces
here safe and well. Thank you.
We appreciate the opportunity to testify on behalf of the
Center for Democracy and Technology. CDT is a nonpartisan
advocacy organization dedicated to protecting privacy, free
speech, and innovation online. We applaud the committee for
holding this hearing today. There is no question that the
system for sharing information across borders is in need of
reform. Law enforcement is correct that it is slow and
sometimes frustrating.
U.S. service providers rightly worry about being caught up
in a conflict of laws. However, it is worth noting the system
does have benefits. The most notable is that in many cases,
citizens around the world are protected by the strong privacy
guarantees of the U.S. Constitution, specifically the warrant
requirement of the Fourth Amendment. We must not lose that
commitment to privacy even as we reform the broken elements of
the system.
CDT believes the best way to achieve reform is through a
package of legislative changes, specifically, passage of the
Email Privacy Act, adoption of a structure for privacy-
protective bilateral agreements, mutual legal assistance treaty
reform, and enactment of a version of the International
Communications Privacy Act, ICPA.
First, Congress must set a privacy baseline in the U.S. in
U.S. law by passing the Email Privacy Act. This committee is
intimately familiar with this bill, having stewarded it through
unanimous House passage over the last two Congresses. While a
warrant for content is generally assumed to be the default,
including by the Department of Justice in its testimony today,
as the committee knows, that is not what ECPA says.
Because the law was passed in 1986 and has not been
substantially updated since, in many cases, it authorizes
access to content with the use of a simple subpoena with
notice. Service providers are to be commended for insisting on
a warrant pursuant to the Sixth Circuit decision in Warshak,
and DOJ has stated that seeking a warrant is their policy in
criminal cases. But appellate court decisions and Department
policies are not a substitute for Federal statutory reform.
Second, once we have a baseline in U.S. law, we must extend
it to other rights-respecting Nations through a strong privacy-
protective framework of bilateral agreements between Nations.
These agreements would be safety valves, allowing speedy access
for law enforcement, reducing conflicts of law, and reducing
pressure on the MLAT system. The Department of Justice has made
a good start in laying out such a framework.
There are, however, important areas where it must improve,
including how the proposal handles which Nations will qualify
as partners, enhancements to legal standards for accessing
information, and limitations on privacy-invasive techniques
like the use of metadata and wiretapping. With these
improvements, bilateral agreements can speed law enforcement
access, respect national law, and improve privacy.
Third, since not every Nation will qualify for a bilateral
agreement, Congress should reform the existing MLAT process.
ICPA contains important reforms that should be adopted to speed
the process. In addition, the European Union is developing
materials to educate their local law enforcement on how to best
meet the U.S. probable cause standard. Those materials can and
should be used globally.
Finally, any proposal should include the principles
embodied in ICPA when U.S. law enforcement seeks to access
communications. ICPA rightly moves away from the use of
location of data as a standard and towards the nationality of
individuals under investigation. It also respects the interests
of other Nations by deferring to them in cases where MLAT
agreements are in place. This framework is not perfect.
Specifically, it may result in adoption of extraterritorial
warrants by other Nations or unintentionally allow some Nations
to slow investigations. CDT is happy to work with the committee
to address these concerns and is encouraged by the number of
positive ideas already under discussion, including a mandatory
comity analysis by courts and reciprocal notice and control
provisions for other Nations.
While none of these solutions will be enough on their own,
CDT believes that collectively, they can safeguard
international comity, assist law enforcement, and most
importantly, protect individual privacy.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, sir. Now, Professor Woods.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW WOODS

Mr. Woods. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Conyers, members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to
testify here today.
ECPA is the single leading cause of conflicts of laws in
the tech world today, so I am grateful that committee has shown
great leadership in this context. The good news is that this is
actually a pretty easy problem to fix.
ECPA operates, as you have heard, as a blocking statute,
standing in the way of American tech firms' compliance with
lawful government requests for data both here and abroad.
Remove those blocking features, and you solve the bulk of the
problem. Now, this means two things. First, reverse the Second
Circuit's recent decision so that a production order under ECPA
can compel a U.S. firm to comply, regardless of where they
choose to store their data. And second, allow U.S. firms to
voluntarily comply with foreign law enforcement requests
wherever they choose to operate.
On this second point, I actually think the solution may be
simpler than DOJ has made it out to be. You need not specify
which countries can enforce their laws against American tech
firms, nor the conditions under which they do so. I used to
think that was a really good idea. After all, if you care about
privacy, surely you would want to clarify how and when and
which foreign governments can access internet content.
But I am less sure about the wisdom of telling other
countries how to behave today. You do not tell Citibank and
Costco under what conditions they can comply with British law.
Why tell Google and Microsoft? Indeed, if you were to propose
to make it harder for American banks or America's retailers to
do business in other countries, you would likely never hear the
end of it. Not only does blocking foreign government interests
make them mad, with all of the attendant diplomatic fallout,
but I believe it makes the internet less secure.
When countries cannot enforce their laws, they do a number
of unfortunate things, and in particular, three.
First, they make it hard on U.S. businesses, arresting
their employees, increasing operating costs, often by demanding
that data be stored locally.
Two, they increase their efforts at surveillance, often
without court supervision.
And three, they threaten to retaliate against the United
States by imposing their own ECPA-like blocking statutes. This
last point is an underappreciated one. In a not-too-distant
future, many Americans, perhaps most, will be running around
with a foreign-made app on their phones.
In the wake of some crime, American law enforcement will
seek access to data held by the foreign app maker doing
business here in the U.S. If the app maker is from a country
that has a blocking statute like ECPA or a country that is
excluded from the bilateral or multilateral club that DOJ has
envisioned, our law enforcement agents will be in trouble.
These foreign government reactions to our blocking statute
are unfortunate, but they are also understandable. Indeed, it
is partly American law enforcement's own frustration here that
has led them to call for back doors on encrypted services, the
unregulated use of Stingrays, and other desperate and, in my
view, foolish measures.
When I speak to prosecutors in Brazil and India and France,
they ask one question: why should we need to follow American
rules in order to enforce our own laws on our own soil? The
answer, of course, is that they should not. The lodestar of
conflicts of laws has always been the respect for sovereign
interests, and if we craft a regime that does not do that, I
fear we will regret it.
So, to briefly summarize, ECPA is easy to fix at home and
abroad. The location of data should not matter. Rather, the
location of the investigation should. Except in extreme
circumstances, if a service provider is physically present in a
jurisdiction providing services, making money there, they
should be in a position to respond to lawful and legitimate law
enforcement requests.
That is true here, and that is true abroad. This is the
position nearly every other American company finds itself in,
and tech firms should be no different. To make this a reality,
you need to reverse the Second Circuit's decision, and you need
to lift ECPA's blocking features.
Now, I just want to emphasize that I say this as someone
who cares deeply about privacy and security on the internet. In
my view, the only way to secure the future of a global internet
is to provide room for governance differences around the world.
Either the laws bend, or the technology will be bent and
broken.
Keep in mind, we are not talking today about the hard stuff
like warrantless surveillance, State efforts to weaken
encryption or force data localization. Rather, we are talking
about a simple step that you can take today to prevent those
things. Thank you very much for your time, and I look forward
to your questions.
Mr. Collins [presiding]. Thank you, Professor Woods. I will
start the questioning here as we go.
Mr. Salgado, I have a question. From your perspective, how
urgent is this problem? And are we talking only a handful of
countries here that are enacting data production and data
localization requirements? What are the impact, you know, if
you can quickly sort of answer that, the impact of these laws?
Mr. Salgado. Thank you for the question. I think it is
quite urgent. The two issues that we are talking about here,
both the blocking statute question about the ability to comply
with requests outside the United States as well as being able
to produce data that is stored outside of the United States to
U.S. authorities, both of those are urgent matters. They are
threats to public safety. They are threats to American
companies.
Mr. Collins. OK. And also, then, it has been talked about a
little bit here, some have argued that it should be nationality
or location of the customer that determines the country's law,
you know, which one controls. It is sort of a two-part
question. One, is Google able to definitively determine the
location of the customer? And number two, are they definitively
able to determine the nationality of a customer?
Mr. Salgado. The answer is no. We very unlikely would be
able to be determinative. We may have information that could
inform a court that needs to decide whether notice, if that is
the approach we are taking, needs to be given to the other
jurisdiction.
So, a provider may have relevant information to help inform
a decision like that. Law enforcement itself should probably
bear the burden of being able to establish that they have at
least gone through the steps to try to determine the location
of the user to determine whether they are excused from other
requirements.
Mr. Collins. And in some ways, would not the nationality
actually be a slippery slope question for a tech company, or
frankly, even law enforcement there, unless there is, you know,
definitive kind of answers to that question?
Mr. Salgado. There needs to be a standard. It may be that
the standard is not definitive. It is something less than that,
that there is credible evidence, you know, there is a whole
list of possible standards.
Mr. Collins. Preponderance?
Mr. Salgado. Preponderance, it could be----
Mr. Collins. OK.
Mr. Salgado. Right, from mere evidence all the way to the
full more likely than not.
Mr. Collins. Without doubt.
Mr. Salgado. So, that would be an issue for debate to come
up with what is the right level.
Mr. Collins. Great. Well, I will come back in just a
second. Professor Woods, what kind of reforms to the MLAT
process do you believe should be made? And you know, these
impacts do you think would improve the process it would have on
international conflict of laws that are being discussed?
Mr. Woods. Yeah. So, as I say, the easiest way to resolve
this problem is to allow countries that operate globally to
respond to lawful requests where they receive them. I would
emphasize lawful. I agree with my colleagues here that we may
be able to parse out some countries we think do not operate by
the rule of law.
But we want to be in a position where the MLAT system,
which needs to be reformed in a number of ways, and I have got
ideas about how to do that, happy to speak to that, but the
MLAT system should not be the place where cross-border data
requests are made.
Mr. Collins. OK.
Mr. Woods. It is just not built for that.
Mr. Collins. OK. Granted with that. And again, this is not
a small subject we can discuss. But I do have a specific maybe
on this. What effect does data localization laws have on U.S.
national security, the ability of U.S. intelligence community
to collect the necessary intelligence to protect the homeland?
Can you answer that maybe, briefly?
Mr. Woods. My understanding is that it is considerably
harder for U.S. law enforcement to get access to data when it
is stored under a forced localization mandate abroad.
Mr. Collins. OK. All right. One question, and we have had
this before when Mr. Littlehale has been here before, and we
have had questions. But I do want to go back. And I understand
the balance of law enforcement and the needs here. But in most
examples, which, of course, would be the problems, Mr. Salgado,
do you think that every example on a negative light that was
given is where tech was not cooperating? I would like to at
least hear the other side, because we have heard this before.
Tech does cooperate with law enforcement, correct?
Mr. Salgado. Oh, well, certainly. Speaking for Google, the
rules are generally pretty clear about what it is we are
required to do and what the legal process should look like, and
it works pretty well. There is emergency situations where the
law enforcement may not have time to go through legal process.
We respond to those to save lives and to prevent physical
injury when needed. I think in general, the ecosystem works
pretty well.
The statute, though, is pretty aged at this point, and it
is no longer reflecting what is really happening. And the
result of that is that law enforcement is getting frustrated
because of interpretations like what we saw out of the Second
Circuit, and other jurisdictions are having to adopt to the
limitations they are facing under U.S. law by engaging in
sometimes unsavory techniques to try to be able to get the
information.
Mr. Collins. So, really, from your perspective, at the end
of the day, you know, you may have differences of opinion on
protection of privacy from your business model and other
standpoints, but at the end of the day, your company, in
particular, but other tech companies as well who deal in this
are more than willing to find a solution here that protects not
only privacy business decisions, but also the needs of our
security and our law enforcement?
Mr. Salgado. Absolutely right. And, in fact, this is a
situation where I think with these recommendations we have made
today, we can actually increase privacy protections and enhance
law enforcement access----
Mr. Collins. Right. So, any broad sweeping discussion, that
is the more true answer, and there are exceptions to
everything. But I think we are moving forward on an answer, and
that is the good part.
With that, I am honored to turn over the questioning to my
dear friend, the ranking member of this full committee, Mr.
John Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir. And I appreciate the witnesses
and their differing views. But let me start with Mr. Calabrese,
please. Sir, in your view, what are the shortcomings of the
administration's proposed criteria for admission into the
bilateral framework?
Mr. Calabrese. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. So, I think there
are four. The first is the way the inclusion in the club is
handled. So, first of all, we should not have factors to
consider; we should have mandatory standards that have to be
met. And we should also have a better process for lifting up
the factual basis for making that determination, an APA-type
process so we can get facts for whether you meet particular
standards. The second is improvements to how we handle
metadata.
Obviously, this is incredibly sensitive information. And
ECPA currently allows the voluntary sharing of metadata with
foreign countries, and I think we need to address that. The
third is I think we need a bar on wiretapping. Wiretapping is
among the most sensitive types of invasion we have in our legal
system, and I do not think we should allow it willy-nilly to be
done by foreign governments, almost certainly at a lower
standard.
And finally, we need to look closely at the substantive
standards and procedural requirements put in place by the
bilateral agreement and look to raise them to be closer to a
probable cause standard.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir. Let me ask you, in your
opinion, must we hold other Nations to our Fourth Amendment
standard for access to content? For example, a warrant based on
probable cause, even that standard is wholly foreign to legal
systems that on the whole have decent privacy regimes?
Mr. Calabrese. It is a very fair question. I think the
first thing we should do is hold ourselves, of course, to the
probable cause standard and pass the Email Privacy Act. The
second thing, I think what we need to look for is comparable
legal regimes, comparable legal standards. And I do not think
we should insist on, foreign governments having exactly the
same rules we have. They need to be comparable privacy
standards. They need to meet international norms, such as human
rights standards. And if we can get that kind of normalization
with our key allies, I think we will have real privacy
improvements.
Mr. Conyers. Anyone want to add anything to that? Yes, sir?
Mr. Woods. It is a great question, and when I have looked
at the burdens on the MLAT System, there are at least two
distinct kinds of burdens. One is that foreign countries say,
``Why should we have to go through this process and make the
request to the United States, let alone just solve it here
domestically in our courts?'' If it is a Brazilian murder, a
Brazilian crime, Brazilian victim, and everything happens in
Rio, why are we contacting the U.S.?'' That is crazy, right?
Separate from that, wherever the request happens, whether it is
international or not, there is a resentment of having to use an
American standard.
And I fear that if we adopt a regime that relies, as you
say, on an American standard like the Fourth Amendment
standard, although it is the gold standard, we will incentivize
States who resent being left out of the club or being forced to
bow to that American standard, that they will do things like
find ways to enforce their laws without our permission. And
every single one of those possible ways to do that is worse
than us negotiating a reasonable way for them to get lawful
access to data.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you. Mr. Salgado, has the Microsoft
decision changed how your company responds to the government's
demands for information under the Stored Communications Act?
Mr. Salgado. Yes, sir. It certainly has. As I think the
chairman said in the opening comments, the Second Circuit
pointed out that there is a problem in the statute that really,
until then, had not been pointed out, and that is that it
appears that the statute does not cover data that is outside
the United States and not in the United States or that the
warrant requirement does not reach that far. As a result, that
means that the warrants we receive, actually, are not effective
to reach the data that is stored outside the United States. And
as a result, we do not produce that data in response to those
warrants.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Collins. Thank you for that. The chair now recognizes
Mr. Marino. And just for the sake of the meeting, after Mr.
Marino's question because votes have been called, we will be
adjourning, in light of the situation, the rest of the day. So,
Mr. Marino, your line of question.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. I am going to cut right to the
chase. First of all, without objection, I would like to
introduce into the record the testimony of Microsoft's chief
legal officer, Brad Smith, from the Senate Judiciary
Committee's hearing on this same topic from May 10, 2017.
Mr. Collins. Without objection, so ordered.
This information is available at the Committee and can be
accessed online at https://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU00/
20170615/106117/HHRG-115-JU00-20170615-SD002.pdf.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Excuse me, thank you for being here.
Are you familiar with my legislation from over the last 2
years, the LEADS Act? Give me your opinion. Ms. DelBene and I,
from across the aisle, put this together, and it just puts
together a legal framework for U.S. law agencies to acquire
evidence from overseas.
I always think something needs to be tweaked, but can each
of you take a couple of seconds and address the LEADS Act and
what might have to be added or taken out? Because I am a law
enforcement guy, and I do like the idea that we have agreed, so
far, I think we have agreed, that business and law enforcement
have to sit down and work this out.
There has got to be give and take on each side, and from a
law enforcement perspective, I have been in situations where
children have been kidnapped. As a prosecutor, we know that we
have to have evidence almost immediately or else within 48
hours because the chances of retrieving them after that are
very small. And we cannot be in a position where we are waiting
for someone to argue an issue brought before a court saying why
we should or should not respond to something. So, could you
please respond to that array of questions?
Mr. Salgado. I guess we will start on this end. Yes, I
think that there is an agreement here that we need to do
something, that we are in an untenable situation, all of the
stakeholders here, and I would include the courts in that. I
think that the solution, though, is not in a statutory change
that doubles down on location of data. I think we need to
change the focus of the limits of the warrant requirement to
the user rather than where the user's data is located.
And hence, the recommendation that we make, which is let's
change the statute to reflect where the user is or where the
user is a national, and focus on those equities rather than in
the case of Google, where the intelligent, modern network has
selected to store the data for some period of time.
Mr. Marino. OK. Anyone else care to respond?
Mr. Calabrese. Yeah. First of all, thank you. You clearly
started an important debate with your legislation that is
ongoing today. And I think we are getting closer to a solution,
and it is a good piece of legislation. I mean, there were a
couple of things I think concerned CDT. One was the one that
Rick just mentioned, which is, sort of, you worry about
embedding a technical solution or, you know, interfering with
how a technical outcome would happen within an industry's
systems with a legal standard.
I think the second one, and one that CDT is worried about,
is potentially the impetus towards encouraging other countries
to engage in extraterritorial warrants. And I think that is one
of the reasons we have talked so much about bilateral
agreements. I think they are a nice safety valve in this same
context, right? Because they say, ``That is fine. We want to
give you the same deal that we have here, and here is how you
do it. Here is the whole process.'' And I think that is an
important safety valve, and I think, obviously, clearly be
coupled with the work that you are already doing.
Mr. Marino. We have to respect other countries' laws, but
we cannot be put in a position where those laws are so in
opposite in law enforcement to what ours are.
Mr. Woods. I just want to echo Chris' point that you are at
the forefront in starting to look at this with the LEADS Act,
and I was excited when it was announced.
Mr. Marino. I have got to give my staff credit for that.
They are pretty much the brains of the outfit.
Mr. Woods. I also want to echo Rick's concern about having
anything turn on the location of the data. I think at the end
of the day, the old-school principles of jurisdiction ought to
apply; and that is to say, I think consistent with what you
were saying, legitimate State interests.
When the United States has a legitimate interest in
resolving a crime that has happened here in the United States,
if a business is here in the United States, doing business,
making money, availing itself of this forum, it ought to be
responsive to law enforcement investigations. That is not about
where they store their data. That is about where they operate
and where the crime occurs.
Mr. Littlehale. I would just very quickly point out that
from our perspective, the real challenge comes in looking at
reform in the area of all of these statutes where we are going
to get the information in order to make the demonstrations that
we are required to about where the particular, either the data
is or the person is, nationality, and so forth.
Very often, in a time-sensitive environment, we are dealing
with a limited pool of information where we can get information
because, as was pointed out earlier in the hearing, we do not
have the ability to go out and gather that evidence ourselves.
We are dependent on what we can get by service of legal
demands. So, I think any effort to look at that must take that
set of realities into account. And we look forward to the
conversation.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. This concludes today's hearing.
Thanks to all the witnesses for attending and sitting through
what has been a longer hearing. Without objection, all members
will have 5 legislative days to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses and additional materials for the
record. With that, the hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:23 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
