- OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING: REGULATION AND COMPETITION

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING: REGULATION AND COMPETITION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON REGULATORY REFORM,
COMMERCIAL AND ANTITRUST LAW

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 12, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

29-777                        WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan,
Wisconsin                          Ranking Member
LAMAR SMITH, Texas                   JERROLD NADLER, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
STEVE KING, Iowa                     STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                   Georgia
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       LUIS V. GUTIERREZ, Illinois
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 KAREN BASS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             CEDRIC L. RICHMOND, Louisiana
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           HAKEEM S. JEFFRIES, New York
RAUL LABRADOR, Idaho                 DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              ERIC SWALWELL, California
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                TED LIEU, California
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland
KEN BUCK, Colorado                   PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
MATT GAETZ, Florida
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana
ANDY BIGGS, Arizona

Shelley Husband, Chief of Staff & General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director & Chief Counsel

------

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law

TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania, Chairman
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas, Vice-Chairman
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
DOUG COLLINS, Georgia                HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
KEN BUCK, Colorado                     Georgia
JOHN RATCLIFFE, Texas                ERIC SWALWELL, California
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  PRAMILA JAYAPAL, Washington
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

C O N T E N T S

----------

SEPTEMBER 12, 2017
OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, Virginia, Chairman, Committee on the
Judiciary......................................................     3
The Honorable David Cicilline, Rhode Island, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust
Law, Committee on the Judiciary................................     3

WITNESSES

Ms. Maureen K. Ohlhausen, Acting Chairman, Federal Trade
Commission Oral Statement......................................     6
Mr. Robert E. Johnson, Esq., Attorney, Institute for Justice Oral
Statement......................................................     7
Ms. Sarah O. Allen, Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General,
Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Virginia
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Ms. Rebecca H. Allensworth, Esq., Professor of Law, Vanderbilt
Law School Oral Statement......................................    10

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Responses to Questions for the Record from Robert E. Johnson,
Esq., Attorney, Institute for Justice..........................    30
Responses to Questions for the Record from Ms. Sarah O. Allen,
Esq., Senior Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney
General of the Commonwealth of Virginia........................    34
Responses to Questions for the Record from Ms. Rebecca H.
Allensworth, Esq., Professor of Law, Vanderbilt Law School.....    48
Statement submitted by the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., Michigan,
Committee on the Judiciary. This material is available at the
Committee and can be accessed on the Committee Repository at:
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-
115-JU05-MState-C000714-20170912.pdf
Testimony submitted by the Honorable Tom Marino, Pennsylvania,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and
Antitrust Law, Committee on the Judiciary. This material is
available at the Committee and can be accessed on the Committee
Repository at:
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-
115-JU05-20170912-SD004.pdf
Testimony submitted by the Honorable David Cicilline, Rhode
Island, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law, Committee on the Judiciary. These
materials are available at the Committee and can be accessed on
the Committee Repository at:
http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-
115-JU05-20170912-SD003.pdf

OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING: REGULATION AND COMPETITION

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 2017

House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform,
Commercial and Antitrust Law

Committee on the Judiciary

Washington, DC

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:07 p.m., in
Room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Darrell E. Issa
presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Issa, Collins,
Ratcliffe, Gaetz, Handel, Cicilline, Johnson, Swalwell,
Jayapal, and Schneider.
Staff Present: Ryan Dattilo, Counsel; Andrea Woodard,
Clerk; and Slade Bond, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Issa. The Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial
and Antitrust Law will come to order. Without objection, the
Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the Committee at any
time.
We welcome today today's hearing on, ``Occupational
Licensing: Regulation and Competition.'' And I now recognize
myself for a short opening statement.
Occupational licensing has exploded in this country over
the last few decades without any apparent connection to the
correlation--or correlation to public health or safety. In a
2015 report, the Obama White House pointed out that more than
one-fourth of Americans are required to obtain some form of
occupational licensing. While many States' occupational
licensing requirements would tend to promote consumer health
and safety, others serve as barriers to competition and to
entry and are constructed by incumbent industry interests,
inevitably rising prices and reducing consumer choice in a
marketplace.
The research done on occupations newly subject to license
reveals, that licensees often raise prices and reduce
employment without any corresponding increase in productivity
or service quality. A 2011 study estimated that some
restrictions have resulted in 2.85 million fewer jobs in
regulated industries and have cost as much as $203 billion.
Perhaps these figures would be less troubling if effects of
occupational licensing were confined to occupations typically
subject to the licensing process, such as public health or
public safety. But these net costs come from new licenses
levied on occupations such as interior designers, shampooers,
florists, home entertainment installers, funeral home
attendants, and one of my favorite, casket manufacturers.
Often, these quasi-government regulatory regimes have the
effect of not only--of not promoting public safety but shifting
innovation and reducing competition.
One serious impact of occupational licensing is decrease in
geographic mobility. And what I mean by that, as an example, in
my district, there are 47,000 marines, almost half are married.
Those marines travel and are redeployed every 18 to 36 months.
Their spouses must move to another area, and most of them work.
If they are schoolteachers, they may be subject to a multi-
State compact. If they are hair braiders or other professions,
some of which we will discuss today, it is unlikely that there
is any reciprocal relationship between Virginia, North
Carolina, and California.
This patchwork of overly burdensome occupational licensing
laws means that, when you arrive in a new location, even after
formal education, a licensing process, and years on the job,
you will likely have to begin that same process over again.
This certainly causes people to be unable to be reemployed even
when they would be, by any reasonable definition, fully
qualified for the position.
That is not to say that we do not want to support and
continue a long tradition of licensing through medical boards
and the like, doctors, lawyers, nurses, real estate
professionals, and, of course, people in the construction
industry required to be responsible, such as general
contractors.
Before the August recess, I introduced legislation that
would serve as a means to crack down on boards engaged in
anticompetitive behavior while creating--and I want to stress
this--creating a specific safe haven for certain
environmental--and certain the environment for boards that
serve in the public interest. The Supreme Court decision in
North Carolina Dental case left open to interpretation what
steps a State must take to ensure that the board--the boards
satisfy the sanctions, that the boards it has sanctioned are
not found liable for violation of antitrust.
Today, the term active supervised is not defined in law but
defined in a single court case, a course case that in many ways
comes more than half a century after States explicitly were
allowed to create these boards and to rely on these boards as
antitrust exceptions. The speed with which court cases can
resolve problems are not fast enough and certainly create a
burden for States that do not want to have to legislate every
part of regulation.
The Restoring Board Immunity Act would offer States a
certainty in exchange for the adoption of an oversight
mechanism to ensure boards are operating in the public interest
and not stifling competition.
We have an excellent panel today. We have a really
excellent panel today, and I would like to thank you for being
here. When somebody puts together a panel, you often hope to
get the kinds of different views and different capability, and,
of course, different enforcement requirements that we have
today.
So I am delighted now to recognize the Ranking Member for
his opening statement and get to our board.
Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling today's
important hearing. And welcome to the panel. I look forward to
hearing your testimony.
Creating economic opportunity for working Americans must be
a national priority. It is essential that we invest in a
stronger America that delivers good-paying jobs through
apprenticeship programs, on-the-job training, and education,
and a system of competition that helps workers and small
businesses. That is why House and Senate Democrats have
proposed A Better Deal, a bold economic agenda that will give
workers new opportunities to get ahead.
Right now, nearly a third of American jobs require a State
license. This includes many jobs that have little impact on
public health or consumer safety. And as the Obama
administration reported last year, this threatens to, ``raise
the price of goods and services, restrict employment
opportunities, and make it more difficult for workers to take
their skills across State lines.''
Excessive licensing keeps jobs out of reach for too many
working families who cannot afford large, upfront costs just to
qualify for employment. For example, to work as a security
guard, a job that typically pays less than $30,000, a Michigan
resident must have 3 years of education and training. Other
States require less than 2 weeks of training for the same job.
What is worse, because these standards differ by State,
military families are disproportionately affected because they
are 10 times more likely to relocate across State lines.
In response to this growing problem, the Obama
administration issued a series of best practices for States to
reduce licensing barriers to employment and mobility, along
with a call to action for Governors to streamline requirements
for service members, veterans, and spouses.
Today's hearing is an important opportunity to consider
whether we can do more. More than 70 years ago, the Supreme
Court held, in Parker v. Brown, that the antitrust laws do not
apply to a State's sovereign action. But recently, the Court
held in North Carolina Dental that this exemption does not
apply to State boards controlled by private parties or active
market participants. As the Court noted, these boards have a
structural risk of confusing their own interests with the
State's policy goals.
In these circumstances, States must actively supervise the
anticompetitive conduct of these agencies to receive antitrust
immunity. This requirement is essential to ensuring that State
boards are serving the public interest.
I look forward to hearing whether Congress should have a
role in clarifying this standard.
And, with that, I thank the Chairman for calling today's
hearing. And again, with our esteemed panel of witnesses, thank
you for your participation today. And I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now recognize the Chairman of the full Committee, Mr.
Goodlatte of Virginia, for his opening remarks.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The United States has been and continues to be a champion
of free and open markets. An open market place cultivates
competition among service providers and is the very foundation
of maintaining lower prices, higher quality products and
services, and superior innovation.
The antitrust laws established in this country serve a
valuable role in promoting competition, and the Judiciary
Committee routinely exercises oversight authority to ensure
that these laws are applied in a manner that is transparent,
fair, predictable, and reasonably stable over time.
All occupational licensing restrains competition to a
certain extent by restricting who can provide certain services.
While occupational licensing can serve the important function
of maintaining quality and safety in key vocations, poorly
executed licensing schemes can be detrimental. In some
instances, control of regulatory boards by incumbent interests
can transform the boards into market gatekeepers, limiting
entry into regulated industries and benefiting the established
practitioners that control the boards. Often, boards' licensing
requirements are not proportional to the regulated occupation's
impact on public health, making it difficult for newcomers to
enter well-paying industries, harming consumers through higher
prices and generally disrupting otherwise competitive
marketplaces.
The Federal Trade Commission and Acting Chairman Ohlhausen
have made significant strides to fight back the tide of
anticompetitive occupational licensing. It was an FTC
enforcement action that led to the Supreme Court's recent
decision in North Carolina Dental, which casts doubt on whether
boards fall under the State action doctrine, a judicial rule
granting antitrust immunity to State-level regulations
restricting competition. The FTC has also issued guidance
regarding when a State exerts sufficient active supervision
over a regulatory board controlled by market participants such
that it can invoke State action antitrust immunity. And the
Commission recently launched an Economic Liberty Task Force to
address regulatory hurdles to job growth, including
occupational licensing.
States around the country have also made inroads to limit
the undesirable aspects of occupational licensing. Occupational
licensing requirements are an often unnecessary burden on low-
income Americans and military families struggling to earn a
living. During the most recent legislative session in Arizona,
State Representative Jeff Weninger sponsored a bill that allows
individuals with household incomes below 200 percent of the
Federal poverty line to obtain an occupational license without
paying the accompanying fee. A similar bill passed in Florida
this year.
Finally, Congressman Issa recently introduced the Restoring
Board Immunity Act to address two major problems related to
occupational licensing boards. One, the cost associated with
onerous and arbitrary occupational licensing and, two, the
potential that the threat of monetary damages under Federal
antitrust law may chill the willingness of worthy individuals
to serve as board members and officers.
Today's hearing will help inform the committee regarding
the recent proliferation in occupational licensing, the impact
of the Supreme Court's decision in North Carolina Dental, and
potential legislation to address concerns in this important
area. I look forward to hearing the witnesses' views on these
issues and how the FTC, Congress, and the States can work
together to address the anticompetitive impacts arising from
significant growth in occupational licensing.
Today's testimony will help the Committee gain a better
understanding of the seriousness of these issues and how they
might be addressed. And I am pleased to welcome all of the
witnesses here today, and especially Commissioner Ohlhausen,
who has done great service on the FTC. I want to thank you all
for your participation. I look forward to your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We now recognize the Ranking Member for unanimous consent.
Mr. Cicilline. Yes. I ask unanimous consent that the
opening statement of the Ranking Member, Mr. Conyers, be
introduced into the record.
Mr. Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
Statement submitted by the Honorable John Conyers, Jr.,
Michigan, Committee on the Judiciary. This material is
available at the Committee and can be accessed on the Committee
Repository at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/
106382/HHRG-115-JU05-MState-C000714-20170912.pdf
Mr. Issa. And without objection, other members' opening
statements will be made a part of the record.
It is now my pleasure to introduce our panel of
distinguished witnesses. And I would ask all the witnesses to
please rise to take the oath. And raise your right hands.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth?
Please be seated. Let the record reflect that all witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
It is now my pleasure to introduce, as the Chairman just
did, the distinguished Acting Chairwoman of the Federal Trade
Commission, Ms. Maureen Ohlhausen, who has done great work for
a long time. And this is not her first trip here, but we
appreciate your return. Mr. Robert Johnson, attorney for the
Institute for Justice. Ms. Sarah O. Allen, senior assistant
attorney general, the Office of the Attorney General for the
Commonwealth of Virginia. Welcome. Ms. Rebecca Allensworth,
professor of law at Vanderbilt School.
For those who have not been here before, you will notice
the red, yellow, and green lights. We often muse that it is
exactly like what you see when you are driving down the road.
Green means go. Yellow means go like heck. And red, of course,
means you are stuck, you are going to have to stop. So I won't
cut anyone off mid-sentence, but let's make sure that we stick
to that last thought being the last one, and then we will allow
you to embellish during Q and A.

TESTIMONY OF MAUREEN K. OHLHAUSEN, ACTING CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSION; ROBERT E. JOHNSON, ESQ., ATTORNEY, INSTITUTE
FOR JUSTICE; SARAH O. ALLEN, ESQ., SENIOR ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL, OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
VIRGINIA; AND REBECCA H. ALLENSWORTH, ESQ., PROFESSOR OF LAW,
VANDERBILT LAW SCHOOL

TESTIMONY OF MAUREEN K. OHLHAUSEN

Ms. Ohlhausen. Chairman Issa, Ranking Member Cicilline,
Chairman Goodlatte, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today. I am Maureen
Ohlhausen, the Acting Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission,
and I am pleased to join you to discuss competition
perspectives on occupational licensing. This has long been a
significant area of interest for the Commission. And as
demonstrated by H.R. 3446, the Restoring Board Immunity (RBI)
Act of 2017, it is of interest to Congress as well.
Competition is the cornerstone of America's economy. When
sellers compete, consumers benefit from lower prices, higher
quality products and services, and greater innovation. In
furtherance of that national policy the FTC act grants the
Commission broad enforcement authority regarding both
competition and consumer protection matters in most sectors of
the economy.
The FTC has a long history with occupational licensing and
State boards from both a policy and an enforcement perspective.
The Commission and its staff have submitted hundreds of
comments and amicus curiae briefs to State and self-regulatory
entities on issues related to the intersection of antitrust and
competition law and policy and occupational licensing.
In these comments, we provide a helpful analytical
framework for State legislatures when considering occupational
licensing. In particular, we advise policy makers to consider
five key factors. First, implement licensing only when
legitimate health and safety issues or other public policy
purposes justify doing so. Second, adopt licensing that will
not have adverse effects on competition and consumers. Third,
only consider licensing that will yield other countervailing
consumer benefits, outweighing the costs of foregone
competition. Fourth, narrowly tailor regulations to minimize
the loss to competition. And, fifth, always ask if there are
less restrictive alternatives.
Elements of the proposed RBI Act are consistent with this
framework and share similar procompetitive goals. By following
this guidance, lawmakers can better avoid adopting rules that
interfere unnecessarily with an otherwise competitive
marketplace.
Although the FTC typically relies on competition advocacy
to discourage potentially anticompetitive occupational
licensing and regulations, the Commission sometimes invokes its
enforcement authority to challenge anticompetitive conduct by
regulatory boards when it falls outside protected State action.
For example, in 2010, the Commission challenged the North
Carolina Board of Dental Examiners for issuing a series of
cease and desist letters that successfully expelled low-cost
nondental providers of teeth whitening services. And the case
went to the Supreme Court, which explained that States must
ensure that any anticompetitive actions undertaken at its
direction by private actors pursuant to State law are, in fact,
approved by the State as part of its policy to displace
competition.
In light of the Commission's longstanding interest in
mitigating the anticompetitive effects of occupational
licensing and our ongoing work in this area, the Commission
supports the overall goals of the RBI legislation. At the same
time, we note a substantial body of case law regarding the
State action doctrine has already struck a careful balance
between the antitrust laws and State sovereignty. Careful
thought must be given to the details and potential unintended
consequences of any initiatives that would alter this balance.
Because occupational licensing and regulation affects an
increasingly broad swath of our economy, I formed the FTC's
Economic Liberty Task Force. One purpose of the task force is
to study the economic effects of occupational licensing on
competition. Toward that end, the FTC's Economic Liberty Task
Force hosted a roundtable discussion in July and will host a
second roundtable discussion on November 7. These programs
involve leading economic and policy experts discussing the
current state of economic learning, about the costs and
benefits of licensing and its effects on workers, consumers,
competition, and the overall economy.
So thank you for your time today, and I look forward to
your questions.
Hon. Ohlhausen's written statement is available at the
Committee or on the Committee Repository at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-115-JU05-
Wstate-OlhausenM-20170912.pdf
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT E. JOHNSON, ESQ.

Mr. Johnson. Good afternoon, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cicilline, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Robert
Johnson, and I am an attorney at the Institute for Justice, a
national public interest law firm that for decades has been at
the forefront of the fight against occupational licensing. We
have represented scores of entrepreneurs subject to arbitrary
and unnecessary licensing restrictions, from Louisiana florists
to tour guides in Philadelphia and teeth whiteners in
Connecticut.
Occupational licensing is growing at an alarming pace.
Whereas in the 1950s only one in 20 U.S. workers required an
occupational license, today, that figure stands at almost one
in four. Occupational licensing has spread because it helps
economic incumbents. Licensing limits opportunities for
workers, frustrates entrepreneurs seeking to introduce
innovative new business models, and it also raises the prices
paid by consumers. Licensing is particularly troublesome for
workers at the first rungs of the economic ladder.
Importantly, even when licensing protects against real
dangers, it can still be abused. Take medical licensing. While
some States allow nurse practitioners to meet rising demand for
medical services, in other States, doctors have used licensing
laws to strictly limit the practice of nurse practitioners,
resulting in more profits for doctors but higher medical costs
for everybody else.
Now, most licensing occurs at the State and local level.
But there is still an appropriate role here for Congress, and
that is because licensing restrictions are often imposed by
boards made of up of industry insiders. And when industry
insiders use licensing laws to exclude competition, they can be
liable under the Federal antitrust laws.
In a 2015 decision, FTC v. North Carolina Board of Dental
Examiners, the Supreme Court addressed this antitrust question
and held that boards can be liable when they violate the
antitrust laws. At the same time, the Court made clear that
States can insulate boards from liability so long as they
impose what the Court termed active supervision. And that, in
turn, raised the question of just what active supervision
entails. And, right now, nobody really knows.
But several States have responded to that decision by
enacting what you might call rubber-stamp supervision. And
these States charge licensing--or charge bureaucrats with
supervising the actions of licensing boards, but they don't
charge those bureaucrats with any actual mandate to promote
competition. And this kind of rubber-stamp supervision is bad
for everybody. It is a bad bet for the States, because the
Supreme Court, after recently deciding the North Carolina
Dental decision, is unlikely to hold that a rubber-stamp
supervisor actually satisfies the antitrust laws. And it is
certainly bad for those affected by occupational licensing as
it will not result in real reform. Result is likely to be years
of litigation as the courts hammer out a definition of active
supervision.
The Restoring Board Immunity Act seeks to clear up this
uncertainty, while also promoting reform. The Act immunizes
State licensing boards, but it only does so if States adopt a
meaningful version of active supervision. So to secure immunity
under the bill, States must do two things. First, they must
adopt a policy of using licensing only when truly necessary.
And, second, they must adopt a procedure to ensure that boards
follow that policy. And, notably, the bill gives States a
choice between two procedural enforcement mechanisms: one
administrative and one judicial. And this approach is
consistent with principles of federalism. Since the antitrust
laws are a creature of Congress, it is appropriate for Congress
to clarify how they apply. And, at the same time, the bill does
not actually require that States do anything at all. Instead,
the bill simply rewards States that adopt beneficial reforms.
In short, the bill promotes licensing reform, benefiting
consumers, workers, and entrepreneurs, while also respecting
the role of the States. The Institute for Justice is pleased to
support this bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Mr. Johnson's written statement is available at the
Committee or on the Committee Repository at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-115-JU05-
Wstate-JohnsonR-20170912.pdf
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Allen.

TESTIMONY OF SARAH O. ALLEN, ESQ.

Ms. Allen. Chairman Goodlatte, Chairman Issa, Ranking
Member Cicilline, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you
again for inviting me to speak with you today about this very
important topic to the States.
Before I start, I must reiterate the disclaimer I made in
my written testimony that my remarks today are my opinions
alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Virginia
Attorney General's Office, General Mark Herring, or any of the
other antitrust colleagues I have that are affiliated with the
National Association of Attorneys General.
Even though these are my opinions alone, my remarks are
informed by my 26 years as an antitrust enforcer, both on the
Federal level as an alumnus of the FTC and on the State level
at the Virginia Attorney General's Office. I do believe in
strong antitrust enforcement and open competition. But part of
my job at the AG's office is also to defend and advise State
agencies and boards on antitrust issues. And in the last 3
years, most of that advice has been on issues concerning State
action immunity.
One of the things that struck me when reading through the
testimony of my fellow panelists and others who are critical of
State boards is how widespread and profound the
misunderstanding is of what State boards actually do. They are
not cartels. They are not State-authorized conspiracies to
exclude new entrants and raise prices in the market. They are
arms of State government that are formed by sovereign State
legislatures to perform oversight over people that the
legislatures have chosen to include in their licensing regimes,
not the board.
The legislatures have chosen to license certain occupations
and restrict competition in those markets to protect something
they value more than open competition, which is the health,
safety, and welfare of their citizens.
The large majority of decisions made by State boards have
little to no competitive impact. Instead, they are mainly
concerned with issues, such as the proper standards of care for
their profession, holding licensees to minimum ethics
standards, protecting consumers from deceptive advertising or
fraudulent billing practices, or cases involving licensees'
mental or physical fitness to practice.
Practitioners who are active and current in their
professions are often the best people to judge these issues. It
would be difficult for States to develop this kind of expertise
in-house with bureaucrats.
Even without active supervision, State boards must follow
clearly articulated State policy. Private trade associations,
to which State boards are often unfairly compared, are under no
such restrictions.
In addition, more boards in many States do not have
jurisdiction over nonlicensees. So it is not possible for them
to do what the dentistry board in North Carolina did, which is
to overreach their statutory authority to try to shut down new
forms of lower cost or more innovative competition.
And many functions boards perform, such as determining if a
particular applicant is qualified to receive a license, are
ministerial and do not involve any discretion on the part of
the board or the individual board members. Either the applicant
meets the criteria for a license or she doesn't.
The licensing regime itself may restrict competition, but
that decision was made by the legislature, not by the board or
the individual board members. And that highlights the biggest
problem with the Restoring Board Immunity Act, in my opinion.
It targets the wrong actor. The State legislature is the entity
that is creating boards and requiring them to be overseen by
active market participants. The boards and the individual board
members are taking actions, for the most part, that they are
statutorily obligated to take.
If Congress wants State legislatures to engage in
regulatory reforms to reduce the number of professions they
license or to regulate them in less restrictive ways, then the
boards are not the proper entities to defend the competitively
restrictive decisions they did not make. And they certainly
should not be on the hook for potential treble damage liability
for these decisions. These cases should be for declaratory or
injunctive relief only, and the board and its members should be
immunized from damages liability.
In the aftermath of the NC Dental decision requiring active
supervision for antitrust immunity and the flurry of antitrust
cases filed against boards and board members since the
decision, it is getting difficult for States to find qualified
people to serve on these boards. The potential for being sued
for treble damages and the inability of many States to
indemnify them for constitutional reasons has caused some board
members to resign and many more practitioners to refuse to
serve.
And I am running out of time, but I wanted to wrap up by
saying that the board would require huge revisions to States'
legal codes and create an unfunded Federal mandate to establish
an umbrella State agency for active supervision. The Act would
also cause an arguable separation of powers problem by having
an active supervisor in the executive branch or a State judge
in the judicial branch overseeing the legislative branch.
So at the end of the day, I think the Act is really
unworkable for States to implement, and so they will not be
engaging in the regulatory reform that Congress would like to
encourage them to do. And I thank you for inviting me to speak
here today.
Ms. Allen's written statement is available at the Committee
or on the Committee Repository at: http://docs.house.gov/
meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-115-JU05-Wstate-AllenS-
20170912.pdf
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Professor.

TESTIMONY OF REBECCA H. ALLENSWORTH, ESQ.

Ms. Allensworth. Thank you, Chairman Issa, Ranking Member
Cicilline, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Conyers, and
members of the Subcommittee, for the opportunity to testify
today.
The case against excessive occupational licensing has been
made for decades by libertarians who see it as an infringement
on individual liberty--we have someone here on the panel today
that would fit that description--by progressives who see
licensing as yet another way to privilege high-status groups
while leaving immigrants, racial minorities, and ex-offenders
out of the labor market. And, of course, by conservatives who
see licensing as just more governmental red tape keeping
markets from operating freely and fairly.
Yet in the half century since licensing first came under
fire, it has only proliferated. Nearly a third of Americans
need a State license to work, and the licensed professions have
swelled to include hair braiders, casket sellers, and floral
designers.
How can it be that excessive occupational licensing has
survived, even thrived, in this environment of bipartisan
support for reform? The answer is the regulatory institution
targeted by this bill that we are discussing today, the State-
level occupational licensing board.
Almost a third of our workforce is regulated by a
constellation of over 1,700 State boards, each so small and so
politically irrelevant as to be invisible. My research has
shown that nearly all of them, over 85 percent, are required by
statute to be dominated by currently licensed working
professionals. That is right, these boards are formed by law as
cartels.
So here you will see where my perspective differs sharply
from Ms. Allen's. And I will pause to say, what is a cartel? A
cartel is a group of competitors who get together, set the
terms of entry into their profession or the things that they
sell, determine what the kinds of competition will be allowed,
what other kinds of competition won't be allowed. And that
perfectly describes a State occupational licensing board. It is
basically totally nongovernmental.
In 2015, the Supreme Court finally recognized these boards
for what they are: not arms of the States, but combinations of
competitors. Until North Carolina Dental, it was widely
believed that boards enjoyed a legal loophole that allowed them
to operate without oversight from the States and without
Federal accountability for their anticompetitive practices. But
in 2015, the Supreme Court decided that boards must bow to
either State control or Federal antitrust lawsuits. It is this
legal development that provides new hope for meaningful reform.
The introduction of this bill represents a promising effort
in that direction. It offers States a carrot, a new way to
immunize their licensing boards from the Sherman Act, if they
adopt a policy of creating only efficient licensing laws and
then either create an office of supervision of occupational
boards or create a cause of action allowing individuals to sue
to invalidate any licensing laws that do not conform to that
policy of efficiency. Of course, States also have the option of
doing nothing and rolling the dice with the court's existing
State action doctrine.
The bill's greatest strength is the first option: the
active supervision option that encourages States to supervise
their boards, restoring transparency and accountability to
licensing regulation. In other words, this would make licensing
regulation governmental again, taking the cartel--taking away
the power of the boards to act as a cartel and putting it in
the hands of State government.
I advocated for a similar reform in an article I wrote last
year, and I generally support this portion of the bill, except
to the extent that it may give too little regulatory freedom to
States by mandating that States use a least restrictive
alternative test for all of their licensing regulation. The
bill does well to require that licensing rules address only
real threats to public health and safety, but it goes too far
by making States show that they had no other regulatory
alternative.
I am less enthusiastic about the second option in the bill,
the one that gives States immunity if they create a substantive
right to efficient occupational regulation and a cause of
action to enforce it. This section also has the least
restrictive alternative analysis problem, and it has the
additional flaw of relying on courts to balance regulatory
alternatives and to do so in a case-by-case manner.
This issue is too important and too complex to be resolved
by State courts on an ad hoc basis. And the result is likely to
be one of two undesirable outcomes: either broad deference to
the boards or wholesale deregulation of the professions. A
better approach, in my opinion, would be to streamline the bill
to its first option, to offer immunity to licensing boards that
are supervised according to the bill's terms.
Thanks again for this opportunity to speak to you about
this bill, and I look forward to your questions.
Ms. Allensworth's written statement is available at the
Committee or on the Committee Repository at: http://
docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-115-JU05-
Wstate-AllensworthR-20170912.pdf
Mr. Issa. I do too, I do find it interesting that a former
clerk for Anthony Kennedy and a former, I guess, researcher for
Elizabeth Warren when she was at Harvard are on each side of
you, Ms. Allen. I know you are in good company and feel that
your left and your right is properly covered.
I am going to try and focus on Virginia for just a moment.
Virginia is one of the States that had hair braiding regulated.
And the legislature was lobbied in Virginia by the hair salon
industry to make sure that if you want to be a hair braider,
you had to be a hair salon. So although I hear what you say,
the State of Virginia, for a period of time, based on a board/
inside--and you called it--these were government entities--took
the advice and elevated simple hair braiding to a cartel,
essentially, of a much higher level. You had to have a
facility, you had to have the right chair, you had to have the
right water, and you had to have everything to braid hair.
Now, during Governor McDonnell's period of time, it was
gotten rid of because it showed no public--I forget the exact
language--evidence of public harm to get rid of it.
I heard what you said, but I am going to ask you a simple
question. By my standard, simple. You mentioned and somewhat
derided trade associations. But trade associations are fully
covered by the antitrust laws. They live in terror that two of
their board members will say the wrong thing in a meeting.
Having been the Chairman of a major trade association, trust
me, I have seen it, that you are overly concerned. And yet you
would purport that it is burdensome in Virginia, in return for
this immunity, to have active supervision, and yet you called
them an arm of government.
Are they an arm of government, in your opinion, as you said
in your opening statement?
Ms. Allen. Yes.
Mr. Issa. If they are an arm of government, in Virginia,
don't you require that people not have an economic conflict of
interest in their everyday voting? In other words, aren't you
covered by not making decisions where you have an economic
benefit of that decision? Isn't that true?
Ms. Allen. I am not sure about what it would--how it
applies to me. But I think that the situation here is that the
many, many decisions that the board makes----
Mr. Issa. If you were in an antitrust case and you owned
stock in the company, would you be allowed to prosecute that
case or would you recuse yourself?
Ms. Allen. I would recuse myself.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So we have established the conflicts of
interest by government officials are critical. Additionally,
your legislature, even though it is a part-time legislature,
they find themselves recusing themselves if they have major
interest in a specific entity that would be affected directly
by a bill. True?
Ms. Allen. I assume so, yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And yet these boards have no such
objection. So the one point I want to make, using your
testimony, is you want them to be public entities. But you
don't currently, nor do virtually any States, require that they
essentially recuse themselves from self-dealing. So if you have
got people who can self deal, such as hair salons that can rake
in braiding, or even dentists who can bring in additional
revenue from tooth whitening, and you don't have them live up
to the same ethical standards, isn't that where we are stepping
in and where this legislation, which Professor Allensworth is
not thrilled with, she wants some changes, but that is why we
have a requirement here, is there is an inherent conflict
because they are acting as government entities, but they are
not bound by the normal ethics that the FTC commissioner would
be bound by in her government role.
Ms. Allen. Well, to the contrary, Chairman Issa, I believe
that the standards of ethics for many of these boards are very
stringent. I know that the State bar has very stringent ethics
rules and so does the Board of Medicine and so----
Mr. Issa. Let's go through that.
Mr. Johnson, I will go to you. And I would like to get to
all of you quickly. Do you see that they are allowed to rule in
areas that specifically limit competition or raise potential
revenues that come to their industries?
Mr. Johnson. Absolutely. That is what they exist to do.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Professor Allensworth, do you agree?
Ms. Allensworth. They are regulating entry--they regulate
entry and they are regulating the terms of competition. So that
is always going to be a conflict of interest for currently
licensed working board members.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And Ms. Ohlhausen--Chairman, your past work
of the FTC is specifically for that reason, isn't it, that
overreach by people who have an economic benefit and do so
without a demonstrated need for what they are asking for?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Issa. So when we look--and I know Ms. Allen said that
these things don't apply to the North Carolina Dental case, but
hair salons in Virginia that wanted to make sure that braiding
had to come into their establishments, isn't it really a first
cousin, if not a direct sibling, of the North Carolina Dental
case?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Yes, I think it is. And the Supreme Court
has recognized the risk of board members confusing their own
interests with the State's policy goals.
Mr. Issa. Okay. I want to be respectful of the clock, so I
will now go to the Ranking Member, Mr. Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again to
our witnesses.
I would like to begin with you, Acting Chairman Ohlhausen.
In the same way that excessive licensing hurts workers,
entrepreneurs, limit market mobility and innovation, so too do
non-compete agreements. According to a report by The New York
Times, these clauses have become pervasive, unreasonably broad
in duration and scope, and cover one in five Americans, from
hairdressers to engineers. Leading economist Alan Krueger has
described the prevalence of non-competes as an act to prevent
the forces of competition to rig the labor market against
workers. And the Treasury Department, likewise, reported last
year that non-competes diminish workers' earnings, mobility,
and economic opportunity.
Through its competition enforcement, the Federal Trade
Commission can be a leader against these structural impediments
to open labor markets, just as it can be against occupational
licensing. And so I would like to ask you what resources has
the Commission dedicated to policing unreasonable non-compete
clauses in employment contracts? And are you concerned that
non-compete clauses are being unfairly used by businesses to
unreasonably restrain trade in violation of the antitrust laws?
Ms. Ohlhausen. So last year, the FTC and the Department of
Justice put out guidelines for HR professionals. And one of the
things that it cautioned against in there is HR professionals
getting together and coming up collectively with terms that
they are going to impose on employees and their businesses,
that that could raise a competition concern, and be an
antitrust violation.
I think, also, as we look at all barriers to additional
economic liberty, we can certainly look at the problem that may
be raised by some, extensive or inappropriate noncompete
agreements.
Mr. Cicilline. I am also very concerned that the
consolidation is a threat to the economic opportunity to
working Americans. Many leading economists agree that the
concentration of labor markets gives corporations the ability
to hoard profits at the expense of workers. And yesterday, you
remarked that antitrust is not suited to address economic
problems such as income or inequality. But isn't enforcement
and promoting competition critical to avoiding the harms of
consolidation such as depressed wages, reduced opportunity, and
workplace inequality?
Ms. Ohlhausen. So I am very much in favor of enforcing the
antitrust laws and merger guidelines against undue levels of
concentration that could cause impacts on consumer welfare. And
preserving a competitive market also can preserve some of these
other values that you are talking about.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
I would like now to turn to Professor Allensworth and ask
you, what effect would this legislation have on the State
action doctrine, in your judgment?
Ms. Allensworth. So I think that there is a bit of an
ambiguity in the way that the bill is currently drafted. I read
it as attempting to create another option for immunity for
boards, in addition to the State action doctrine that exists.
But there is something especially in the preamble that seems to
suggest that maybe this is an attempt to define active
supervision once and for all.
So the first reading, the one that I think is dominant and
the one that I prefer, is the idea that occupational licensing
is a special problem. And here we have a special solution for
it. There is uncertainty in NC Dental following--there is
uncertainty after NC Dental about what supervision is and about
the State action doctrine. And so you can sort of bypass that
by going to the options laid out in this bill for your
occupational licensing boards.
I think that that is a more natural reading of the bill the
way it is written because State action doctrine applies to all
kinds of State regulation: liquor commissions, municipalities,
regulated utilities. And this bill really says nothing about
how States need to supervise--those entities are subject to the
same two-prong test under State action doctrine involving
supervision. It says nothing about that. And so it would be odd
to read this bill as defining supervision for all areas of
State action doctrine.
But I do think that it may be worth clarifying, if that is
the intent of the drafters, that that is what this bill does.
So, in other words, I think it would leave State action
doctrine as it is.
Mr. Cicilline. And your recommendation is that those
first--the first part of the legislation act provides those two
prongs is sufficient, it is the second part that raises
concerns?
Ms. Allensworth. My hesitation about the judicial review
option?
Mr. Cicilline. Yeah.
Ms. Allensworth. Yeah. That is the one that I think, if
States opt for that, I think we may not see the kind of reform
that the bill is aimed at.
Now, the other question is, is it better than the status
quo? So the status quo is the antitrust liability for boards.
That is case-by-case judicial resolution of these problems too.
So what I am talking about is writing on a blank slate. I like
the idea of giving this option that will really encourage
supervision. I think that is the better way to go.
As to whether or not this bill with its two options,
including the one that I think is a little bit weaker, is
better or worse than what we have, it is a closer call for me.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Would the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Cicilline. Of course.
Mr. Issa. I am intrigued by this. One follow-up question to
Mr. Cicilline's.
So, summarizing, it doesn't go far enough because it leaves
a little too much in the way of loopholes. You would like it to
be tougher on what it takes to qualify for immunity. Is that a
fair statement?
Ms. Allensworth. I think it is possible to characterize the
lawsuit option as a loophole because I worry that courts would
under enforce the kinds of objectives that are laid out in the
bill. So, yes, I think a way to make it tougher is actually
sort of addition by subtraction, is to get rid of that second
lawsuit option. Because I think the real problem with licensing
is who does it. Right now, it is boards that I see as cartels.
Who do I want to do it? The State. I want the State to take
governmental responsibility for the regulation they create.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Mr. Cicilline. So just reclaim my time.
So that I understand your testimony, so your
recommendation, your testimony, is if the bill had those two
components that made it clear, that the State was going to
engage in the supervision, that by itself is preferable to the
bill with the second piece with respect to judicial review?
Ms. Allensworth. That is right.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
We now go to the Chairman of the full Committee, the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Ohlhausen, I would like to get your thoughts
on that, but I will just make it a wider question. And that is,
how would this bill impact your efforts with respect to
occupational licensing both from advocacy and enforcement
perspectives? And do you agree with Professor Allensworth's
suggestion that we remove that provision related to the
options?
Ms. Ohlhausen. I think the bill would give us additional
opportunities for advocacy. As States decided whether to adopt
these provisions and to go through this process that the bill
provides, it would give the FTC an opportunity to weigh in on
whether we thought where they were drawing the lines was good
for consumers.
Regarding our enforcement, I think it depends on whether
the bill is an additional option for States or whether it
defines the field of what is active supervision. With that
being said, I think to have the States think more closely about
what this occupational licensing is doing and whether it is
good for consumers or is it more restrictive than necessary, I
would hope would reduce the incidents of States adopting, or
boards adopting, harmful legislation.
As for the issue of parts on part two of the bill, I don't
actually have an opinion on that. I certainly, appreciate
setting out a process for--a clear process for the States to
follow. I do agree that having a case-by-case of different
judges deciding may give a less clear and consistent answer.
Chairman Goodlatte. Very good. Thank you.
Ms. Allen, you note in your testimony that the RBI Act--by
the way, Mr. Chairman, I like the baseball analogy in your
title of your thing, because baseball itself has an antitrust
exemption.
But the RBI Act places a significant burden on States to
comply. How do the requirements under the Restoring Board
Immunity Act differ from the inherent requirements under North
Carolina Dental or the FTC guidance?
Ms. Allen. In several ways, actually. The active supervisor
currently under North Carolina Dental case law merely has to be
a disinterested State official who looks at what the board did
in a substantive way, not just a procedural way, and determines
whether or not the action that the board took is in keeping
with the enabling statute that the board is operating under.
There is no requirement of using the least restrictive
alternative, there is no requirement that it has to be
efficient, and there is no requirement for regulatory reform.
If you go the judicial route, review route, the burden
shifts quite substantially from the plaintiff to prove that
there was an antitrust violation to the board to defend a
decision that they didn't make. The legislature is the one that
restricted competition. The board was following what the
legislature instructed them to do. So I think it quite
substantially puts a burden on the States that is different and
more than what they have to do now to comply with NC Dental.
Chairman Goodlatte. And, Mr. Johnson, would a Federal
legislative solution be necessary or helpful to address this
issue?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I think it would be. We are in a
situation right now where there is a great deal of uncertainty
as to what active supervision means. And I think that certainly
Ms. Allen has suggested that the bar posed by active
supervision requirement is quite low and that the States can
meet it quite easily. On the other hand, that requirement may
turn out to be much higher, and I think it probably will turn
out to be much higher. But that uncertainty is going to create
costs, it is going to give rise to litigation. And however it
is decided ultimately by the courts may be a good result or a
bad result.
What we have here is an opportunity to eliminate the need
for those costs, to eliminate the need for that litigation, and
to assure off the bat that what is achieved is a good result
and a result that actually advances the cause of occupational
licensing reform. And that is what the bill tries to do.
Chairman Goodlatte. You like this bill. Do you think this
bill should go further? Do you envision other bills that you
would like better? What is your overall take on what needs to
be done to address this creeping regulatory effect of State
licensing which obviously has grown? And I, quite frankly,
think the need for it hasn't been justified by the amount of
growth we have seen.
Mr. Johnson. Well, this is obviously an area where there
are sensitive federalism concerns. This is an area of
regulation that historically has been one that is overseen by
the States. This bill, I think, is sensitive to those concerns
because it proceeds from the sort of foundation of the
antitrust laws, which I think are sort of recognized roles for
the Federal Government.
Could Congress go further and explore other types of
approaches to occupational licensing? I think it certainly
could, and it would be an interesting conversation to have. But
the federalism issues that would then start to arise would be
interesting and substantial and would require a lot of
attention.
Chairman Goodlatte. So you would be happy with this for
now?
Mr. Johnson. Absolutely as a first step.
Chairman Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We now go to the gentleman from, more or less, Oakland,
California, Mr. Swalwell.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Issa.
And I just want to, before we begin, wish well my
colleague, Hank Johnson, and others who were in Irma's path,
their constituents, as well as Mrs. Handel, that we are for
them and will do anything in a united way in Congress to help
them.
So, with that, I wanted to ask Ms. Allen, with respect to
indemnification, it is my understanding that in some States you
are not allowed to indemnify board members for damage liability
associated with antitrust actions in which board members are
specifically named as the antitrust defendant. But my fear is
that this would be a perversion of the antitrust laws if
counsel for an individual seeking a license or an individual
subject to a disciplinary proceeding could contact an
individual board member in such States and then threaten them
with treble damages liability under the North Carolina Dental
case if they did not refrain from acting against that client's
interests.
Should there be a more straight way to remove this threat
of individual damage liability? And, I guess, I am speaking
specifically to the RBI Act and what your thoughts are on that.
And I guess, just thinking--I went to law school, passed the
bar exam, appreciate the great work that the California Bar
Association does. And these are volunteers, the board members,
at least in the law, usually don't get paid, and you just want
to protect against them from being personally liable unless you
can show that they are acting maliciously. So I would be
interested in your thoughts on that.
Ms. Allen. Absolutely. There has been a flurry of lawsuits
that have been filed against boards since the North Carolina
Dental decision. And the majority of those lawsuits have also
sued the individual board members for treble damage liability
under the antitrust laws. And many States--some States are able
to indemnify board members. Many States are not. They are
constitutionally prohibited from indemnifying them over a
certain amount of money, and it is been a problem.
In Florida, the Chairman and a couple of other members of
the podiatry board have resigned because of this. Many other
people in their professions are refusing to serve because of
this problem. And boards can't add active supervision to
themselves. They have to wait till the legislature does it for
them. So the problem does exist.
And I think that one possible solution is to add an analog
to the Local Government Antitrust Act that immunized
municipalities from antitrust damage liability because of
several big judgments that bankrupted some cities and towns.
Mr. Swalwell. Do you fear that if they were not indemnified
from treble damages, that the costs would be passed along
either to the practitioners or--I mean, because I don't know
who would serve without some sort of protection, and that would
require an insurance policy. And someone would have to pay for
it.
Ms. Allen. Right. I mean, the Commonwealth of Virginia has
a risk management plan that requires us to defend them, and it
does immunize them to a certain amount. But antitrust treble
damage liability can quite easily go over the amount of the
risk management plan.
Mr. Swalwell. Now, Chairman Ohlhausen.
Darrell Issa and I are the founders and co-chairs of the
Sharing Economy Caucus. And I was interested in your testimony
about how smartphones have allowed the development of new ways
for consumers to use transportation services. Particularly,
Uber and Lyft are the most widespread platforms. You note that
some jurisdictions have pursued regulatory approaches that
would impede the development of new services, often without
putting forth evidence of a legitimate consumer protection
justification.
Could you share some examples of the services targeted and
the approaches that you have seen used?
Ms. Ohlhausen. So the FTC has filed competition advocacy
comments on some of these concerns. So we filed comments on the
Colorado Public Utilities Commission, District of Columbia
Taxicab Commission, the City Council of Anchorage, and the City
Council of Chicago on allowing these kinds of new forms of
sharing services to exist for consumers. With that being said,
we certainly are also alert to whether there any consumer
protection issues that regulation should address. But opening
it up to competition, certainly, we are in favor of.
Mr. Swalwell. Sure. So are we.
Mr. Issa. If the gentleman would yield?
Mr. Swalwell. I would yield.
Mr. Issa. I liked your line of questioning. I would only
share a question with you. If I heard correctly, according to
Ms. Allen, many States have decided to protect their boards
exactly as they do every employee, millions of employees that
work for States. When they make a decision to have someone do
something on behalf of the government and then decide not to
treat them like employees for the purpose, wouldn't you say
that was a decision that each State makes?
Mr. Swalwell. Sure. And to reclaim my time. I certainly
respect that. And I think what you are looking for is probably
when people go outside the scope of employment, if that is the
relationship that they have. If you go outside the scope of
employment, then you are not covered as a State employee, and
then you probably won't be covered on one of these boards. But
fair point.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. It is a good line of
questioning.
With that, I believe the next in line is the gentlelady
from the air-and-water-torn State of Georgia, Mrs. Handel.
Mrs. Handel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to my colleague from California for your good
wishes for everything in Georgia. We still have quite a number
of people without power, including our own Congressman Collins
here, so----
Mr. Collins. I come with my own power.
Mrs. Handel. He does come with his own power. Believe me, I
know.
Thank you very much to the witnesses for being here.
I am a former secretary of state, and as such, in that
role, I oversaw some 40 licensing boards. So this is, even
though I am new, this is a very interesting piece of
legislation for me.
So one thing I would like to get at is, for Chairman
Ohlhausen, as you sent out the guidance on the active
supervision, what was the response to that, and sort of, has
there been any action taken? Specifically, what have you heard
from secretaries of state that may have these licensing boards
up under them?
Ms. Ohlhausen. So we had a very productive dialogue with
the State AGs and other officials about trying to give them the
guidance that they were seeking post-North Carolina Dental.
So the response has been positive on it. And as for what
the States have done, we are actually conducting a survey right
now to look at what every State who has taken an action, which
States have taken an action, and what they have done in
response to the North Carolina Dental case.
Mrs. Handel. Do you know if secretaries of state have been
rolled into that, or has it just been the attorneys general?
Ms. Ohlhausen. So different States do it differently. Some
AGs, some State legislators----
Mrs. Handel. Okay. Great. I know, for myself, I took a very
active role in what was happening with the licensing boards,
and I will say there are some boards that are really, really
good. And they come at it with the right perspective for what
they are trying to do. And it is true that the boards, they can
only do what they are legislatively directed and instructed to
do.
With that said, some did very much--your point--wander into
what I would call attempts to barrier to entry. And I always
took that very, very seriously.
So, Professor Allensworth, what more do you think needs to
be done in this piece of legislation to make sure that we have
as open and free market possible out there?
Ms. Allensworth. Well, I think the first goal of the
legislation is to increase clarity for States. I think that is
really, really important. Once States know the lay of the land,
as made clear by this statute, then they will be able to
balance the competitive costs of regulations themselves.
I do think that licensing has gone too far. I think that
there are lots of occupations that we license that shouldn't be
licensed at all, and I also think that occupations we do
license, like medicine, get regulated in a way that is
inefficient. And I think that all goes back down to who is
doing that regulation.
I like this bill because it addresses what I think the real
problem is, which is that regulatory infrastructure, if we fix
that, and then we fix the ultimate problem.
So what more does the bill need? I think I will go back to
the comments that I said before. I think it would be stronger
if it didn't have the option of lawsuits because, to me, that
is not restoring governmental regulation here in place of the
cartel. It is putting the cartel--vulnerable to a different
kind of lawsuit and different courts, State courts rather than
Federal courts. To me, it is sort of a step sideways whereas
the first option, what I would call the administrative option,
the active supervision option, actually puts the regulation
back in the hands of the State. And that will result in,
somewhat--it is never going to be perfect. You are going to
have capture. You are going to have regulatory inefficiencies,
but it is going to make it better, in my opinion.
Mrs. Handle. Great. Thank you very much.
To be sure, it is regulation run amuck with some of the
licensing, but then there are those boards, to your point, that
are very much needed to strike that right balance.
So thank you very much. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentlelady.
We now go to the gentlelady from Washington, Ms. Jayapal.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I really want to thank you and our Ranking Member
Cicilline for what I think is a very important hearing. And I
think it has been very reassuring to hear all of the views
across the board, which is what I have heard from my
constituents in reaching out about this bill, but also in my
time in the State senate, where I served on the healthcare
Committee. We dealt a lot with these licensing issues. And I
think, from the labor and social services side, the importance
of licensing, particularly in the health professional--health
arena and around quality of care and standardization of
professions, but also then, on the other side, the studies that
clearly show that too much licensing actually presents enormous
barriers.
And certainly with the population that I have worked very
closely with, immigrant refugee population, we have really had
to balance a lot of these cultural competency issues. So I hope
we continue to have those discussions and the right balance
there, and I appreciate the various perspectives that you have
brought.
Now, Ms. Allensworth, I wanted to ask you about Ms. Allen's
testimony. Ms. Allen argues that our constitutional system
vests plenary authority on States to protect their citizens
from fraudulent or unsafe practices by unqualified
practitioners of vital consumer services, such as medical,
engineering, or legal services.
Are you concerned at all that Federal reforms in this area
might actually disrupt the role of the States in ensuring the
safety of their citizens?
Ms. Allensworth. To me, it is quite the opposite. It is
putting it back in the hands of the States.
The States have decided for various reasons to, in my
opinion, abdicate their responsibility to regulate in this
area. So, while it is true that States have the ability and the
responsibility to regulate in the public interest, they also
cannot, according to our antitrust laws, merely hand over
regulation to self-interested regulators and walk away.
So that is what this--that is what the North Carolina
Dental case is about, and that is what this bill is about.
So I don't think it is an area where the Federal Government
is being too heavy-handed. I think this is totally appropriate.
So Chairman Goodlatte said something about how maybe this
was more effort than it was really worth. And I just wanted to
say I think Federal interest in this is really appropriate. So
we are talking about almost a third of American workers. That
is how many people were covered by unions in the maximum level
of unionization going back decades.
I don't think that we would be debating about whether or
not the Federal Government has a role in regulating how unions
operate. I think it is a totally appropriate thing, and it
covers--I mean, today, unions cover many, many fewer than these
boards cover.
Ms. Jayapal. Well, I mean, that is interesting perspective,
and it leads to the next question I was going to ask you, which
is, in light of the North Carolina Dental case, I mean, does it
in any way minimize the role for the Federal Government,
because one could argue that you do have that case, you do have
regulation that has been set forth, essentially deriving from
that case?
Do you feel that the Federal Government really--why do you
feel that the Federal Government has such a strong role to play
here?
Ms. Allensworth. So the Federal Government back in 1890
created the Sherman Act. And so they are very involved in
regulating competition, going back 120 years ago. In 1942-1943,
I believe it was, they came up with this doctrine of immunity.
And now, to me, this is another piece of legislation in that
line that--1943 was not a piece of legislation. That was----
Ms. Jayapal. Yeah.
Ms. Allensworth [continuing]. To be sure, an interpretation
of the Sherman Act. But I don't think it is displacing the
Court's opinion. I think it is rather taking an opportunity to
come back and say: This is what we mean, at least as far as it
concerns occupational licensing, this sort of specific problem
that has cropped up.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. That makes sense.
Mr. Johnson, Ms. Allen argues in her written testimony that
States are best suited to determine how to best structure their
governments and economics in order to protect their citizens.
How do you respond to that concern?
Mr. Johnson. Well, I think the concern and the reason that
the antitrust law has come into play here is that these
decisions about what to regulate and how are not being made by
the States. They are being made by boards that are charged by
the States with regulating their own industries. And that
brings up huge problems where the members of these industries
are acting as gatekeepers to competition for their own
industry.
Certainly the State legislature lays out a licensing law
where they say, for instance, that dentists have to be
licensed. But then the question becomes, well, does the
practice of dentistry include teeth whitening? And the people
who get to decide that, under the current system, are dentists.
And, of course, in State after State after State, they say:
Well, teeth whitening is dentistry, i.e., there is no health or
safety justification for excluding unlicensed teeth whiteners.
And the only reason is to ensure that dentists can make greater
profits.
So, absolutely, yes, this is an area where there is a role
for the States and for the Federal Government. But the problem
right now is that this is an area where regulation has been
given to----
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you.
Mr. Johnson. Sorry.
Ms. Jayapal. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And, again, I am glad we are having this hearing.
I yield back.
Mrs. Handel [presiding]. Thank you very much.
Let me next recognize the gentleman from Georgia.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate it.
This is an interesting hearing. I think it is one that, as
you first look at it, I think this Committee, this Subcommittee
in particular, has a lot more issues of jurisdiction,
especially, Ms. Ohlhausen, from what we have talked about
before, in not just this arena. I think this is a good opening
to talk about it, but there is a lot more from hearings that we
could have on truly national issues that I think that I would
like to see moving forward here.
I just have some interesting comments. Because being on the
State legislator level, having--the former secretary of state,
this is interesting because you talked about active
supervision. If we define it in this--and the bill I think
takes a stab at that, but several things that have come out
sort of this rubber-stamp authorization, if they do it, and
also this fact of the sort of the antithesis here is the dental
and the teeth whitening, hair braiding.
In Georgia, you can be a hair braider if you have 2 hours
of community--or CLE or business practices, industry trends. I
mean, what does that mean? Reading a magazine? I mean, and what
is the health--why would a State do that? And even my own State
of Georgia does this. But it is interesting.
Where I want to concentrate for a second is, the majority
of these State boards are required by State statute to be
comprised of a majority of currently licensed professionals
active in the very profession they were regulated in. So most
States are doing it this way. It brings to a question; it is
opened up. This is free for all. To determine active
supervision, we have a secretary of state in some instances,
but in the State of Georgia, on the very website, it says: We
do not have any input into the decisions made by these boards.
They are appointed in Georgia by the Governor. Many of the
States have a similar aspect, which puts them under the realm
of executive branch. Attorneys general are the ones, as you
well know, as I, are the ones that take the cases and have to
defend. This is an interesting--I know, in Georgia, they would.
But my question is this: If we roll this back to active
supervision, and we sort of hit at this at many different
levels, my question is: I don't believe we need an office of
anything in most government, State, local, Federal, in
particular. We need a better understanding of what that means.
Does that mean the secretary of state should, in these offices,
if they are under them, actually give administrative support,
that they are the active supervision, or should there be a
change in State law? And then if that is true--and I am making
a long question because I want to hear your answers--how can
Congress or a State legislature be considered active
supervision when most have no idea what goes on, or if they do,
it is only from an outcry?
So, Ms. Ohlhausen, if you will start, and just sort of
everybody from there jump in.
Ms. Allen, I know you have got a position on that but----
Ms. Ohlhausen. Thank you. You put your finger on some very
important factors. And in the FTC's guidance to the States
about what constitutes active supervision, we say the
supervisor has to obtain the information necessary for a proper
evaluation.
We brought a case a number of years ago where there was
someone who just got a price list and shoved it in a drawer.
They never looked at it. Have they looked at the substantive
merits of the action? Did they have a written decision, and do
they have the ability to overturn what the board has done?
So, but it is up to the State to decide where that
authority should lie, whether it is with the attorney general
or whether it is a board, the only thing we say is the
supervisor cannot be a market participant, him or herself.
Mr. Collins. Just a quick yes/no. So, in your answer that
is out there, I have heard basically you say a State
legislature could not provide active supervision.
Ms. Ohlhausen. I think it would be very difficult for a
State legislature----
Mr. Collins. Okay. Although they could make rules and
laws----
Ms. Ohlhausen. Right.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Could change any decision by a
board.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Right.
Mr. Collins. Ms. Allen.
That is interesting because that brings back--that is a
whole different line of questioning, Ms. Allen.
Ms. Allen. I agree with that answer. I don't think the
State legislature can be the active supervisor.
But I think, in Virginia and many other States, all the
health profession boards are under a department of health
profession. All the other nonhealth boards are under a
department of professional occupational regulation.
The directors of those umbrella agencies are State
employees, and they could very easily be the active supervisor
for the boards that are under their umbrella agency.
Mr. Collins. Would they have a veto opinion on those votes?
Ms. Allen. Yes, absolutely. To be active supervision, you
have to be able to approve, deny, or modify a board decision.
And they would have to be--the legislature would have to pass a
statute to enable them to do it, but they should be able to do
those things.
Mr. Collins. That could throw a kink in the cartel world.
Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. I think it is important to understand the act
here gives flexibility to the States to decide where to put the
office of supervision. And then the board--or the act refers to
an office, and they give the impression that there is a
particular structure for that in mind. But the bill really is
functional. And it requires that some part of the State
bureaucracy be charged with supervision, not that it be in
anywhere in particular in the State.
Mr. Collins. Ms. Allensworth, a very quick comment.
Ms. Allensworth. So I see your question, Mr. Collins, as
basically asking, are they going to do their job? Is this
supervisor going to help at all? And I don't have an answer to
that, right?
How well does this government work? You know better than I
do, not perfectly all the time.
Mr. Collins. Well, we could all look at that one.
Well, but I think here is the point here, and I want to
finish up with this, and I think--I appreciate--the comments
have been good here. This actually goes back to a really--from
the new sharing economy to things we don't know about yet.
The concern is, is when it comes to the State legislatures
or to Congress, each of these groups are a voting constituency.
So, when it comes to that that is the active supervision part.
And, look, I think there needs to be some licensing. I
don't think we need as many as we probably have, but there are
definitely some that need to be there.
This question--I appreciate Representative Issa bringing
this up and talking about this from his bill perspective, but I
think one of the things that we need to do here is, what are we
doing to actively participate in the marketplace, not restrict
the marketplace, and find ways that I would like to talk even
further in bigger arenas on this antitrust issue as we go
forward. But I think this goes back to say I am very--I see the
need for this discussion of this legislation, but also it goes
back to--Ms. Allen, your last comment--State legislators need
to take an active role in what they are doing, instead of just
giving carte blanche to a lot of these things, which is,
unfortunately, happens, due to many multitude of reasons.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Issa [presiding]. Thank you.
I would like to hear from Mr. Cicilline. The gentleman is
recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. I would just ask unanimous consent that a
statement entitled ``Occupational Licensing: Regulation and
Competition,'' from a variety of regulatory boards be made part
of the record.
Mr. Issa. Without objection, so ordered.
This material is available at the Committee or on the
Committee Repository at: http://docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/
JU05/20170912/106382/HHRG-115-JU05-20170912-SD003.pdf
Let me do a couple quick closing questions.
Chairman Ohlhausen, you have seen a lot of government, and
you worked with all kinds of agencies--EPA, OSHA, et cetera.
Just for purposes of comparing the Federal Government with the
State of Virginia, the Commonwealth of Virginia: Although the
Federal Government has all kinds of boards and commissions, for
the most part, aren't they advisory, in other words, they lack
the ability to create regulations?
Ms. Ohlhausen. I think that that varies. So, but I agree
that there are a lot of advisory boards that play a role----
Mr. Issa. And so----
Ms. Ohlhausen [continuing]. In the U.S. Government.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. In the executive branch of the
Federal Government--just for purposes of making the record
clear, and I am using you as my fellow Federal officer here for
a moment--when you go on a board or commission, even when it is
advisory, there is a whole slew of ethics protections,
recusals; you have to file almost every one of these positions;
even unpaid has to file a full financial reporting so that the
public has the ability to see if there is a conflict of
interest, right?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Yes.
Mr. Issa. And yet they do not--and we pay money to move
them. Even if they are not being paid, we supervise them. And
yet they don't get to create regulations. For the most part,
the regulations that are created, that Ms. Allen is saying are
burdensome, are created by the Federal taxpayer through their
employees? Isn't that correct, from your experience?
Ms. Ohlhausen. Yes. So the regulations are created through
the appointed or elected official.
Mr. Issa. So, when States decide, instead of having an
advisory board that ultimately the executive branch then,
through an agency it creates or its legislature creates,
creates rulemaking, what they are really doing is using, for
the most part, a volunteer, unpaid group to lower their
economic costs but not, quite frankly, not that they couldn't
have those boards and commissions, including the State bar.
Those could all be advisory with a separate agency of
government employees who would have no conflicts of interest,
who would have all the normal requirements actually creating
the regulations. There is nothing inherently outside of what
States could do if they were willing to pay the tab. Is that
right?
Ms. Ohlhausen. That is right. I think it is up to the
States to choose.
Mr. Issa. Okay.
And so, Professor Allensworth, sort of going to that,
because you have studied both the Federal and the State, is
there something wrong in my thinking that, because Ms. Allen
has very carefully articulated that, although these are
government people--and I have made clear I think in our
conversation--that they are not held by the same set of rules
that government people are because they, obviously, have an
economic interest in the decisions they make--isn't it really a
question of any time you use these outside groups you are
lowering your burden as a State where the Federal Government,
for the most part, does not lower its burden? It has an
equivalent group of people, advisers from industries, but it
doesn't allow them to legislate. It uses federally tax paid
employees--the FCC, the SEC and so on--to actually regulate and
then holds them to a very different standard. Is that a fair
representation? Because I want to set the stage for why we are
thinking that this legislation may be appropriate, and the
Court's decision, looking at these conflicts in the North
Carolina case, was appropriate.
Ms. Allensworth. So I think that is absolutely right. And
so a private association, industry association doesn't enjoy
immunity. They are subject to the Sherman Act. And they can
have an opinion. They can involve themselves in a rulemaking.
We know that they do. And sometimes they can be very
influential on what the Federal Government does.
But that doesn't mean that they ought not to be answerable
for the anticompetitive things that they do when they are not
merely lobbying. And so, if we thought of these boards as
lobbying and taking a position, that then the State listened
to, considered, weighed, and, in their wisdom, accepted or
rejected, that would be a very different circumstance from what
we have now.
Mr. Issa. Let me ask you a follow-up question, Professor.
This part of the bill that I participate in that you seem
to have concerns about, let me ask you as a question in the
alternative, if we struck that altogether and there were no
private right of action and the States had to have active
supervision and then we discovered that they didn't have active
supervision or somebody wanted to contest whether they have
active supervision, you would presume that either the Federal
Trade Commission or some other entity would sue just as they
did in the North Carolina Dental case, right?
Ms. Allensworth. Right. So I think your question is saying
I am not crazy about the legal option, but doesn't it all boil
down to legal option; doesn't it all boil down to courts making
individual decisions in these cases? And I think that that is a
fair point.
Any time you have an issue where somebody has failed to
comply with the statute, that gets worked out, whether or not
they have or haven't typically gets worked out in a court of
law.
I just think that doing it in the first instance through
the courts may be a less efficient way to get the kind of
results this bill is looking for.
Mr. Issa. And I am going to include Ms. Allen, because I
have been talking around you for a moment, but final question
for you and then others: If I were to tell you that my wish is
that no State would choose the second option, that every State
would look and say, ``We've given you a definition of active
supervision, and we really wish you would choose it, but under
the concept of federalism, if you do not do it, rather than
automatically say, `Well, we will wait for a challenge from
perhaps the FTC because you didn't do active supervision,' we
are going to have this other option,'' is there something
inherently wrong with that, presuming that we really do want
everyone to have active supervision, but we know that, out of
50 States, there just might be somebody who doesn't get around
to it?
Ms. Allensworth. So I don't think there is anything
inherently wrong with it, and that has to do with what we have
under the status quo. What we have under the status quo is
ambiguous vulnerability of these boards to Federal antitrust
lawsuits.
And so I see the second option as being maybe as good as
that. And that is something that I was happy to see happen in
2015. So I am not against that. I just think this other one is
superior.
So your hope that everyone takes the superior one I think
is good. I also think they are more likely to take it. The
States are not going to want to hand over control of their
boards to their judiciary. They are probably going to want to
keep it within the executive round.
Mr. Issa. Nobody is going to want to be on a board that is
in that situation, particularly if they are in a State that
doesn't fully indemnify them.
Ms. Allensworth. Well, that is also true.
Mr. Issa. Ms. Allen, your final comments.
Ms. Allen. I think most States actually want active
supervision following North Carolina Dental.
I think the problem is that, even under the current case
law, many States haven't been able to get their legislatures to
pass a bill.
I think this bill respectfully creates even more hurdles
for a State to meet than they do under current case law. And so
I think States are just going to take the option of doing the
cost-benefit analysis and chancing it in court.
Mr. Issa. Well, Mr. Johnson, that leaves it up to you. What
do you think about first option, second option, and so on?
Mr. Johnson. Well, so I do want to speak briefly in favor
of the second option. I think that there are merits to the
first option. I also think there are merits to the second. And
Professor Allensworth alluded very briefly to the concept of
regulatory capture, which is just that, when you have
bureaucrats whose job is to regulate a particular agency, it
often happens that those bureaucrats end up being aligned with
the industry that they regulate. And we see that constantly.
So the plus to an option that puts the responsibility for
supervision in the courts is that courts are far less subject
to regulatory capture because judges are generalists. They
regulate everybody. They don't regulate a particular industry.
So, as a litigator, my perspective is that you often get
better results out of the courts than you do out of the
legislative or--not the legislative, than you do the
administrative process.
I think that perhaps there are different views on that, but
I think one of the----
Mr. Issa. The conservative arguing for the plaintiffs' bar.
Mr. Johnson. Yeah, one of the benefits of the bill though
is it ultimately leaves that choice up to the States. So
perhaps some States choose the administrative option; some
States choose the judicial option. Well, let's see. Maybe some
of them will have better results than the others, and then we
will actually know which is the better way to do it.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I might note that, in a book I wrote
some time ago, I noted that the father and son team that came
aboard the Deepwater Horizon one morning and gave it a clean
bill of health had breakfast with some of their cousins and
then left before that ill-fated rig blew up were probably part
of a captive entity known as the Minerals Management Service.
So it happens. There is no question at all. And you are
right. At least for British Petroleum, it was the private right
of action that caused them to take steps so that it will never
happen again, hopefully.
Chairman, you are the one government person. You filled out
all those financial reporting things. You have lived up to all
those onerous things, and you have done it on a limited salary,
so you get to close.
Ms. Ohlhausen. Thank you so much. And what I would say is
that I think that, to the extent the bill is giving States an
option that will improve their oversight of these boards, I
think it is a very positive development.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Cicilline, any final remarks?
The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I just want to follow up on
Chairman Issa's question.
With respect to the second part of the bill, the judicial
review part, I mean, if in fact the bill had the first
requirement, the active supervision, and a procedure to be sure
that it is being followed, States would either be required to
do that or their board--I mean, that is in order to earn
immunity. So, if they didn't do it, they would expose their
board members to litigation and treble damages, and presumably
that would be enough of an incentive. If you think that the
regulatory role of this board is important, you want to
actually be able to staff the board with individuals.
So I do wonder whether the judicial component will invite
more uncertainty. And to Professor Allensworth's point, maybe
it will be no worse than the current situation in terms of
ambiguity. But having a clear requirement in the legislation
that says, ``You must provide supervision in this way and a
system to ensure it is happening in order to get the immunity,
and if you don't, you don't get the immunity,'' it is sort of
very clear. And isn't that a better system than inviting a
whole judicial review subject to all kinds of hopes, dreams,
and advocacy? Both you, sir, and Professor Allensworth.
Mr. Johnson. I think, from the perspective of the antitrust
laws, either option provides clarity. From the perspective of
the antitrust laws, if the State has satisfied the requirements
of section 5 or the requirements of section 6, either way, the
State is entitled to immunity under the antitrust laws, and
that is kind of case closed.
The sort of uncertainty is, well, if you go with the
bureaucratic administrative option, will it work? If you go
with the judicial option, will that work? And that is sort of
the devil is in the details. It depends on how the States
implement it.
But my prediction would be that the States that go with the
judicial option will actually see better results. Perhaps
Professor Allensworth's prediction is the opposite.
I think that is an interesting experiment. I would rather
see that experiment run than to not give the States the option
to choose.
Ms. Allensworth. I agree, especially with the last couple
things that Mr. Johnson said. We do have different priors on
this as to which works better, but I also think it is an
interesting experiment and maybe would like to see it run.
I would like to add one more comment about the judicial
review option. And here is where my objection to that kind of
dovetails with my objection to the least restrictive
alternative analysis.
So that itself is very uncertain. The least restrictive
alternative sounds great. Can we do the same thing with less
injury to competition? But it is almost never true that the
alternative does the exact same thing as the first thing. And
so this least restrictive alternative analysis is a bit
unwieldy, and it is difficult for courts to do, especially on
an ad hoc kind of basis.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. To be continued.
What I heard today was you would all like legislation;
perhaps some less. But I think, even for Ms. Allen, I didn't
hear that the status quo is delightful in the current
environment.
So, recognizing that I have three who like the legislation,
at least partially, and one who would like legislation but
perhaps not this legislation, I look forward to getting Mr.
Cicilline onto this bill with such modifications as may be
necessary to get his buy-in.
And, with that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:37 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
