- SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATORS: ON THE CUTTING EDGE OF ENERGY SOLUTIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATORS: ON THE CUTTING EDGE OF ENERGY SOLUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ENERGY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 26, 2012

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-066
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-472                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, General Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Scott Tipton................................................     1
Hon. Mark Critz..................................................     2

WITNESSES

Ralph Tommaso, CEO, Head of Business Development. Greenworks
Holdings, Bethlehem, PA........................................     4
Jerry Taylor, President & CEO, MFA Oil Company, Columbia, MO.....     6
Michael McAdams, President, Advanced Biofuels Association,
Washington, DC.................................................     8
Matthew Hughes, Director of Business Development--ETC)
Environmental Tank & Container), JWF Industries, Johnstown, PA.    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ralph Tommaso, CEO, Head of Business Development. Greenworks
Holdings, Bethlehem, PA....................................    25
Jerry Taylor, President & CEO, MFA Oil Company, Columbia, MO.    30
Michael McAdams, President, Advanced Biofuels Association,
Washington, DC.............................................    36
Matthew Hughes, Director of Business Development--ETC)
Environmental Tank & Container), JWF Industries, Johnstown,
PA.........................................................    38
Questions for the Record:
None
Answers for the Record:
None
Additional Materials for the Record:
BioDiesel Written Testimony of Anne Steckel..................    41

SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATORS: ON THE CUTTING EDGE OF ENERGY SOLUTIONS

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Agriculture, Energy and Trade,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Scott Tipton
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Tipton, Bartlett, King, Critz.
Chairman Tipton. The hearing will now come to order. And I
would like to thank each of our witnesses for being with us
here today to take time from their busy schedules. And we do
look forward to your testimony.
Today we are going to examine innovative ways that small
businesses contribute to energy production. Specifically, we
are going to look at advanced biofuels such as cellulosic
ethanol and new innovative technology companies that have
developed to produce energy from previously used materials. We
are also going to look at the role of research and development
in spurring innovative technology.
Today's topic is one of significant importance for our
nation. As we all know, energy is critical to our economy.
Economic prosperity in the United States is closely tied to the
availability of reliable, affordable energy supplies. This is
not a new issue. The way we discuss it, however, has changed.
In recent years we have seen energy prices skyrocket. You only
need to look at the sign at your local service station when you
fill your gas tank or read the bottom-line on your home heating
and fuel bills to see how much more we are paying for energy
now compared to just 10 years ago. This puts tremendous strain
on American families and small businesses. In order for us to
take steps forward, we must reduce our dependence on foreign
sources of energy and develop new homegrown energy solutions
right here in our home communities.
That is why this hearing on innovative energy solutions is
so important. I do not believe that the search for new energy
sources should be a zero sum game when we foster one industry
to the detriment of another. Our economy is driven by energy
and we must take a balanced approach to exploring ways to meet
our energy needs. That means looking for ways to increase
production of everything we need, including oil, natural gas,
and coal, in addition to renewable energy like advanced
biofuels, wind, and solar energy.
As has been shown in almost all industries in the United
States, small businesses can be the catalyst that drives
innovation to new and better technology. New technologies
harness energy that we did not have the capabilities to be able
to utilize before. There are many exciting developments in the
biofuel wind, solar, and hydroelectric industries.
Colorado is a national wind energy leader and has lots of
small businesses who are finding innovative ways to be able to
be successful. One of these Colorado small businesses employs
24 people and is leading the way in direct, dried generator
technology for wind turbines, which I understand will be more
reliable, more efficient, lower rate, and lower cost than
competing technologies and will reduce the cost of energy.
Having said that, businesses in the wind industry are not
immune from the same challenges faced by other businesses, and
one of the biggest complaints that I continue to hear from wind
energy developers is the need for certainty from the federal
government. Vestas, which is a major employer in my district,
has warned that it could lay off as many as 1,600 Colorado
workers and wind project developers have essentially put their
plans on hold until the federal government acts.
Wind is critical to the ``all of the above'' energy
approach. And I believe Congress must provide certainty
necessary so that this industry can continue to have economic
growth and protect American jobs. I will continue to support
these jobs and push for this timely solution. The advancement
of new technologies moves us towards an ``all of the above''
energy policy and greater energy independence that grows our
economy and is able to create American jobs.
Just last week I introduced H.R. 4381, Planning for
American Energy Act of 2012. This legislation represents a true
``all of the above'' energy plan that embraces all of America's
vast energy resources. The bill strengthens our energy security
by requiring the Secretary of the Interior to be able to
develop a strategic plan every four years on how to responsibly
develop our federal onshore energy resources, including oil,
natural gas, coal, wind, solar, hydropower, geothermal, oil,
shale, biomass, and other minerals so that we can meet the
needs of the United States' energy needs. We live in a country
with tremendous natural resources, and firmly believe that we
can responsibly develop alternative sources of fuel along with
our more traditional sources, and I believe that this
legislation will help foster that development.
Again, I would like to thank each of you for taking the
time to be able to be with us here today. I look forward to
hearing your testimony and I now yield to Ranking Member Critz
for his opening statement.
Mr. Critz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
gentlemen, for being here.
In the last year, energy prices have been predictably
unpredictable. Since October, oil prices skyrocketed from $80
per barrel to $110 resulting in higher costs at the pump. With
a gallon of gas near $4, alternative energy sources have again
become critical and in many regards it is small businesses that
are leading the way. Whether it is developing renewable
biofuels or creating innovative technologies, entrepreneurs are
essential to our nation's energy future.
Across the country, small businesses are working to develop
new energy sources and rethink existing fossil fuels. As a
result, these firms have become agents of change in the energy
sector, generating new ideas and the jobs that come with them.
Perhaps another area our small firms are as critical as they
are is in the biodiesel sector. An overwhelming number of its
production facilities are true small businesses, as
approximately 90 percent meet the definition of a small
producer.
Since 2005, the 3.4 billion gallons of biodiesel produced
in the U.S. have displaced an equivalent amount of imported
diesel fuel. Not only does this reduce our dependence on
foreign energy sources and decrease greenhouse gas emissions,
but it also supports nearly 40,000 jobs.
Another area where small firms are playing a key role is in
the development of innovative technologies related to
traditional energy sources. This is clearly evident with regard
to natural gas exploration. Shale gas, in particular, has
created new jobs for local drilling service companies and
regional heavy equipment companies. As they grow, so do the
local economies they are located in, creating demand for
restaurants, hotels, and other service companies.
Today, I am looking forward to hearing how we can support
these businesses. To ensure that progress continues on all of
these fronts, we have to make certain that policies are in
place to support small firms and their research, whether they
are family farms harvesting the raw materials for biodiesel or
their manufacturing partners. It also means continued
investment in research that will ensure traditional fossil
fuels can be used in an environmentally efficient and friendly
manner. Determining the proper mix of these policies is often
challenging, and that is why today's hearing is so timely.
I am also looking forward to understanding what barriers
these innovative companies are facing, as well as determining
if government should play a role or simply get out of the way.
In some energy sectors government action has been useful, while
in others it may have been less so.
In this regard, small business challenges are our
challenges, and ensuring that they continue to play a pivotal
role in the energy industry is vital. The reality is that the
more domestic options we have for energy, the better for
everyone. With all of these alternatives on the table, the U.S.
is better positioned to reduce its dependence on foreign oil
over the long term.
Today it could be biodiesel and ethanol, natural gas, and
soon clean coal. No one has a crystal ball and our energy needs
will surely grow, so it is essential that we diversify our
energy supply as much as possible.
Entrepreneurs remain at the forefront of these changes, not
only as consumers but as researchers, developers, and
innovators. This role is natural for them, and I look forward
to hearing about the inroads they are making in this critical
area during today's hearing.
Again, I thank you for being here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Tipton. Well, thank you. And I would like to take
a moment to be able to explain our timing lights for you. You
will each receive five minutes to be able to deliver your
testimony and the light will start out as green. When you have
one minute remaining the light will turn yellow, and finally it
will turn red at the end of your five minutes and you will be
escorted out if you exceed that. I am kidding. We will
certainly let you wrap up your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF RALPH TOMMASO, CEO, GREENWORKS HOLDINGS, LLC;
JERRY TAYLOR, PRESIDENT AND CEO, MFA OIL COMPANY; MICHAEL
McADAMS, PRESIDENT, ADVANCED BIOFUELS ASSOCIATION; MATT HUGHES,
BUSINESS DIRECTOR DEVELOPMENT, ENVIRONMENTAL TANK AND
CONTAINER, JWF INDUSTRIES

Chairman Tipton. So I would like to start out introducing
Mr. Ralph Tommaso. He is our first witness. He is CEO of
Greenworks Holdings, LLC, in Windgap, Pennsylvania. After
graduating from the New York University, Ralph began his career
in the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and later as a restaurateur.
When he saw what was to become of the waste that was generated
at the restaurant, he researched and developed a better way to
be able to utilize that waste and created Environmental Energy
Recycling Corporation. EERC, a member company of Greenworks
Holdings, LLC, gathers biological waste, fat, oils, and greases
from the food industry and transforms it into clean burning
biofuels to promote a healthier environment and to be able to
promote America's energy independence. Last year, EERC combined
with a similar company in Lehigh Valley, Smarter Fuels, and
created Greenworks, LLC. Thank you for being here, Mr. Tommaso,
and if you would like to give your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RALPH TOMMASO

Mr. Tommaso. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Tipton,
Ranking Member Critz, and other distinguished members of the
Committee. Thank you for the privilege to address you guys
today.
My name is Ralph Tommaso and I am the CEO and co-founder of
Greenworks Holdings. My partner, Dave Dunham and I are very
proud of what we have built. A little over a year ago we had 30
employees primarily in Pennsylvania, and today we have 153
employees in the Northeast and the Southeast. When Dave and I
each began our companies in 2005, we set out to change the way
fat, oils, and grease wastes were used in this country. We
envisioned waste being diverted from the animal feed industry
and into clean burning energy to fuel America's economy.
In 2004, I read a study produced by the University of
Georgia which proved that cooking oils and animal fats were
superior fuels to Number 4 and Number 6 oils when used in
industrial heating applications. Moreover, the emissions were
low with waste greases when compared to Number 2 fuel oil,
especially with regards to sulfur and CO
2
emissions.
The study results motivated us to continue to refine our
process, and by 2006 we were selling our recycled vegetable oil
and biofuel based to two New York City skyscrapers. Our biofuel
products are approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency under their renewable fuel standard.
Our growth is dependent on feed stocks that we procure. The
thought that the United States consumes over 18.5 million
barrels of oil per day is daunting to an industry as new as
ours. In 2010, we found an uncommon source. Millions of gallons
of degraded fats and oils in solid form, or what we like to
call the biofuel equivalent of the Canadian tar sands. Catfish
Processing Facilities design and build football field-size
retention ponds to collect and process their wastewater. This
water generated when the plant is washed and sanitized daily
catches all the small pieces of fats and solids that are left
over in the filleting process. Over a period of years, this fat
accumulates on the surface of the ponds.
Upon a long, competitive battle with other biofuel and
rendering companies we were awarded 100 percent of the bids for
this accumulated fat or a total of 10 ponds with up to 60
million gallons of regenerating feed stock, kind of a gift that
keeps on giving. And that was the easy part. And now we came to
the intensive process of extracting the fats and oils and
turning them into one of our usable finished fuels.
What we did next reminds me of one of those final tables at
the World Poker Tour where the guy goes all-in with a pair of
sixes. Not only did we need to put together the logistics and
the colossal excavating equipment necessary to harvest the
ponds, but we built two plants, one in Alabama and one in
Mississippi to process all that material locally. Each plant
was designed to process 20 million gallons per year from
material that was the consistency of dirt. Using heat,
pressure, and mechanical separation--these were technologies
that we adapted from our other plants, as well as some tricks
that we learned from the petroleum--we were able to produce a
biofuel that has superior performance characteristics to
current industrial heating oils. Leveraging our plants and
employees, we also recently began collecting used cooking oil
from the area restaurants as well, signing up 250 new accounts
in our first month and paying them for a waste product that
they used to pay somebody to take away.
By teaming up with the catfish industry, our efforts have
revitalized two southern towns with double-digit unemployment.
Greenworks has provided over $4 million to the construction
trade during the last six months and hundreds of jobs have been
saved in the catfish industry through our harvesting of the
oil. We have brought hope to a depressed area that was starving
for work and thirsty to get behind an industry that sustains
itself over the long term.
We deal with ever-changing regulations around our product
and its applications which cause us concern not only for the
success of our company but for the people that believe in us.
In an effort to participate in the regulatory and legislative
process, we have members of the Advanced Biofuel Association
led by Mike McAdams to my right, and are represented directly
by Connie Lawson. The RFS2 program was written with just
transportation and home heating oil in mind. We recommend that
it be expanded so that such biofuels like ours may be used in
manufacturing and large-scale heating as well. Manufacturing
industries use petroleum products and many facilities need to
reduce their emissions given new EPA regulations. Biofuels
represent a potentially cost effective way for the
manufacturing industry to reduce harmful emissions, thus saving
manufacturing jobs while simultaneously creating and preserving
jobs in the biofuel industry.
I thank you for this opportunity to share our ideas and
innovative efforts at Greenworks Holdings.
Chairman Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Tommaso.
Next up is Jerry Taylor, president and CEO of MFA Oil
Company and co-founder of MFA Oil Biomass, which is
headquartered in Columbia, Missouri. The goal of MFA Oil
Biomass is to create a vertically integrated renewable energy
supply chain by combining MFA Oil's knowledge of the energy
industry in markets with farming knowledge with its cooperative
members. A native of Omaha, Nebraska, Jerry received a bachelor
of science in marketing from the University of Missouri in
1969. After serving with the U.S. Army, he spent six years in
the banking and brokerage business. He then returned to
Missouri as the owner/manager of a chain of convenience stores.
Jerry joined MFA Oil in 1982 and served in several capacities
before being named president in 2003.
Welcome to the Subcommittee, Mr. Taylor. And I look forward
to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JERRY TAYLOR

Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Chairman Tipton and Ranking Member
Critz and the members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
invitation to testify today.
I am Jerry Taylor, president and CEO of MFA Oil Company, a
farmer-owned energy cooperative in Missouri with 40,000
members. MFA Oil supplies fuels, lubricants, and propane to
customers in seven Midwestern states.
Our cooperative has a long history in leading renewable
fuels innovation. Starting in the 1960s, MFA Oil produced
gasohol. Most recently in the early 2000s, we ventured into the
biodiesel production, and in 2008, we began writing the next
chapter of our renewable energy story, Biomass.
In 2011, we took a major step forward and partnered with
Aloterra Energy to form MFA Oil Biomass, a separate small
business with the mission of leading the cooperative into this
new, renewable energy field. Critical to this, as with anything
we do, was to gain farmer trust and support. To ease their
concerns and gain commitment, we realized that we needed to
become experts in each area of our own supply chain. We are
utilizing our existing knowledge in farming, energy, and
commodities to form a vertically integrated renewable energy
supply chain. The vertically integrated system provides farmers
an energy crop source, unique harvesting and planting equipment
for the crop's rhizomes, special harvesting services for the
mature crop, processing technology and marketing services to
get the best return for the farmers and the cooperative.
A key to success in any business is flexibility to respond
to changing markets, so for us a versatile feed stock was
critical. Miscanthus giganteus meets that need, not just as a
viable feed stock but one with incredible potential. Miscanthus
is a perennial grass that is noninvasive, drought and pest
resistant, and needs less fertilizer than food crops. This
translates into less runoff into the water system. The target
farm is margin or underproductive land that is not used for row
crop production.
At 10 to 15 tons per acre, Miscanthus more than doubles its
nearest competitor in tonnage. Each ton contains about a
million and a half BTUs, which means at full maturity each
project area can produce enough energy to power 65,000 homes or
1.6 million barrels of renewable liquid fuels each year. One
hundred seventy five farm families have dedicated acres to this
new energy crop, and we anticipate this number will grow to
over 1,600 as our projects scale up to maturity at 50,000 acres
per region. In liquid fuel language, this would create a 20-
year reserve of 93 million barrels of liquid fuel.
To avoid betting the farm on an unproven technology, we are
focused on existing markets and technology, such as solid fuel
pellets. We have developed a biomass furnace company and
heating systems with 100 in operation today. Our future plans
entail building biorefineries inside our biomass reserve areas
that make multiple higher value products that each replace part
of the barrel of oil. This allows a conservative approach
instead of betting our future on the success of a specific
conversion technology. Beyond the quickly developing liquid
fuel and bio-based chemical markets, we are implementing a
model using Miscanthus to assist small towns across the U.S. in
complying with EPA, wastewater discharge measurements, as well
as helping to reclaim mining lands.
It is hard to articulate just how difficult it was and
still is to educate farmers on a strange new plant called
Miscanthus giganteus. This was not an attempt to plant a known
crop in a new industry but an unknown crop in a nonexistent
industry. Add to that a crop that at the time was too expensive
to plant and it was being planted by hand. And we are asking
farmers to spend capital without a return on investment as the
crop matures.
However, I believe our success thus far had a lot to do
with the fact that we are a farmer-owned cooperative. As a
cooperative, we are able to work hand-in-hand with producers,
as valued trusted business partners, allowing farmers to boost
their earnings from the marketplace and diversity their income
streams. Our farmer owners see incredible opportunities as this
endeavor takes off. They recognize the potential to offer rural
communities permanent manufacturing jobs. A new cash crop for
farmers, a local source for green heating, renewable liquid
fuel sources, bio-based chemicals, green building materials,
water treatment systems, soil reclamation systems, and consumer
packaging.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to testify today and
I will be glad to receive any questions.
Chairman Tipton. Thank you so much, Mr. Taylor. I
appreciate that.
Our next witness is Michael McAdams, president of Advanced
Biofuels Association. Under his leadership, the ABFA is going
to become an active partner with leaders in Washington as they
work to transform our nation's energy policy by creating long-
term renewable solutions that will create jobs and strengthen
our energy security. Mr. McAdams has testified before Congress
and the executive agencies and participates In a number of
advanced biofuel forms across the country. He holds a
bachelor's degree from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, and a J.D. from American University's Washington
College of Law. Thank you for being with us today, Mr. McAdams.
I look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL McADAMS

Mr. McAdams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Tipton,
Ranking Member Critz. Congratulations.
Congressman Bartlett. I am honored to be with you this
morning and proud to report to this Committee and to the
Congress that America's domestic advanced biofuels industry has
moved from the beaker to the barrel, all in record time. And
like most part of our nation's economy small business and
American ingenuity are proving to the engine driving our
success. The Advanced Biofuels Association represents over 40
of our nation's and world's leading advanced biofuels and
advanced feed stock producers. Our members range in size from
large household names to small and medium-sized companies.
Since our inception, the association has advocated for a
level playing field.
When it comes to public policies specifically calling for
technology neutrality, feed stock neutrality, as well as
parenting in the form of any government support. Washington
should not be in the business of picking winners and losers.
Many of our members specifically fit within the definitions of
a small business found under the current law. In fact, I am
delighted to be appearing with one of our members on the panel
day. Mr. Ralph Tommaso of Greenworks Holdings, a company who is
delivering renewable advanced gallons today.
The association represents a wide range of technology
platforms from Synthetic biology and hydroprocessing to
gasification to name just a few.
Our members are working on developing a wide range of feed
stocks. Some are planning Giant Miscanthus, sugar beets, and
creating cellulosic sugars from woods, grasses, and municipal
solid waste while others are planning new forms of trees and
growing algae to produce agricultural grade oils for refining.
The challenge for all companies large and small is to build and
deploy first of kind, no innovative technologies, which produce
these new advanced biofuels. In order to be successful, these
small business owners must manage the technology scale-up risk,
the volatility of commodity prices, and the certainty of
regulatory policy.
Before we discuss policy, let me start today by sharing
some of the biggest successes we have occurred over the last
year. The Air Force has flown the F-16 Thunderbirds on a
mixture of advanced biofuels. And the Navy has tested the
advanced biofuels and ships and vehicles. The commercial sector
has flown the first cross-country flight on a blend of
renewable jet fuel.
We have one member, Dynamic Fuels, producing a million
gallons of renewable net and renewable diesel a week and have
five members who have gone public. In addition, Colorado member
companies, are preparing to deploy their innovative
technologies this year. Gevo will produce an isobutanol, a
drop-in fungible fuel. They will commission its 18 million
gallon plant in June in Luverne, Minnesota, while Sundrop Fuels
is on target to break ground to build a 50 million gallon
cellulosic gasoline plant in Louisiana. As you can see from our
membership base, there are significant opportunities to create
jobs in rural American, both from the growing of the feed
stocks to the deployment of the plants.
To your point on innovation, we are seeing new fuels that
can be blended in new ways with existing products; the
opportunity to make new bioproducts and the possibility to grow
new feed stocks which are more sustainable and more productive
than the existing options. These hold the ability to create an
entire new set of opportunities for farmers and land owners.
Mr. Chairman, turning to policy, as you recognized in
calling this hearing, there are significant numbers of small
business people involved in this sector. Several of our members
welcome the opportunity to participate in various small
business administrative programs which we call for matching
funds and leveraging. One member company has been able to
leverage the pre-engineering cost with a matching contribution
in assisting in the building of a plant in Florida. That is a
$150 million plant that is going up.
Unfortunately, other companies have been unable to utilize
the Small Business Administration's funding options as they
have utilized large partners who are supported by venture
capital organizations of scale. I have been told this prevents
them from being able to access most of the funds available.
Earlier I spoke about regulatory certainty. Nothing more
important to small business owners and innovators than a
consistent long-term policy frame from which to build a
business. For our sector, the single most important component
is the renewable fuel standard passed overwhelmingly in 2007 by
a bipartisan Congress and signed into law by President Bush.
Although it is not perfect, it is fundamentally important that
the Congress continue to send a strong bipartisan signal of
support if we wish to continue the remarkable progress and
growth of an advanced biofuels industry.
As for tax policy, it has been a mixed bag at best. Many of
the existing provisions have already expired and some are
crafted in such a manner that they are not helpful to small
business or create an uneven playing field across the entire
sector. As you know, all of these are complicated by the
current record of renewable and have been on a piecemeal basis
for a number of years. This simply does not provide certainty
on which to build a business.
I want to thank you for allowing me to be here, Mr.
Chairman, and I look forward to answering any of your
questions.
Chairman Tipton. I would now like to yield to Mr. Critz to
be able to introduce our final witness.
Mr. Critz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Matthew Hughes is the director of business development for
Environmental Tank and Container, a subsidiary of JWF
Industries in Johnstown. It manufactures frac tanks, mud tanks,
flowback tanks, and impoundments for oil and gas companies. It
now employs 450. Is that right?
Mr. Hughes. No. Eighty.
Mr. Critz. Eighty. Okay. Eighty individuals and occupies a
total of 800,000 square feet of manufacturing space. It is part
of JWF Industries, which has humble roots as a two-man
operation run out of a garage and now has successfully grown
into a company with six locations, five of which are located in
Johnstown. Oh, I see. It is 450 employees across all companies;
I gotcha.
Mr. Hughes. Correct.
Mr. Critz. Recently, this success was noted by PA Business
Central, which recognized it as a top 100 organization. Matt,
welcome, and I look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MATT HUGHES

Mr. Hughes. Chairman Tipton, Ranking Member Critz, and
members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. My name is Matthew Hughes. I am the director of
business development with Environmental Tank and Container.
Going forward I will refer to our company as ETC.
I would like to start off by saying that our CEO, William
Polacek, would like to apologize for not being able to attend
today's hearing.
Located in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, ETC occupies a 160,000
square foot building currently shared with our subcontractor,
United Industrial. This property was originally a World War II
era munitions factory, later transformed into a railcar
factory, and now houses our operations. Officially opening just
over 11 months ago, ETC, like many small business start-ups in
the oil and gas industry, owes its existence to shale energy.
Each time you come across a success story like ETC's which was
born in the shale boom, you will find many other companies like
United Industrial that are getting a second chance at life.
United, once tied exclusively to the commercial fabrication
market, fell victim to the economic downturn of 2008 and was
forced into bankruptcy. Shale energy blew life back into the
almost shuttered plant which had three workers in May of 2011,
and was up to 80 by year's end. Employing everything from
engineers and welders, project managers, and sales people.
Shale energy is a rapidly changing industrial with plenty
of room for growth. Back in 2006, our president and CEO,
William Polacek, investigated business opportunities within the
Marcella shale. It felt like there may be opportunities down
the road but did not see a good fit at the time. Like many good
entrepreneurs, he believed his hunch and kept his eye on the
young industry waiting for his opportunity. It came in 2010
when some of the larger exploration and production companies
announced that they were converting their Marcellus operations
into a closed-loop system. The new protocol changed the method
used for containing drilling waste and also outlined best
practices for onsite water storage. Both initiatives created
the demand for portable steel storage containers, and because
the ETC was a nimble, small business, it was able to quickly
respond to those needs. ETC answered the needs when the market
asked for reliable, durable, frac tanks that were leak-free and
capable of withstanding the rough terrain in cold winters in
Pennsylvania. ETC answered the need when drilling contractors
had to store all on-site drilling fluids in tanks instead of
earth and land pits. ETC answered the need when drillers,
already slowed down by a multitude of time-consuming permitting
procedures, asked for a portable above-ground water
impoundments that did not require soil disturbance permits. And
we are proud to say that we are answering the call again, this
time in the design and development of onsite treatment
equipment that reduces the amount of frac fluid that is hauled
offsite for disposal.
While ETC can be credited for some innovation in our
industry, we must also give credit to our customers, many of
which are independent owner-operators of oil field service
companies, equipment rental firms, and engineering groups. They
were first to see the need and come to us with their ideas. By
virtue of opening our doors, we have created a means for many
others to spur innovation and growth. Mr. Polacek always
reminds us that we will be building things a year from now that
people have not invented yet.
Recently, most businesses that served the natural gas
portion of the shale industry are facing a common obstacle. The
price of natural gas is now too low relative to what it cost to
extract it. When you visit a natural gas well pad, attend an
industry trade show, or speak with customers about future
orders, the same concern arises. How will this industry
continue to grow and prosper if the price of natural gas stays
as low as it is? And what is frustrating to us as small
businesses is that we cannot fix that issue with our hard work,
innovation, and resolve. The fix lies in creating and mandating
demand.
In closing, I ask the members of the Subcommittee to be
mindful of a the young start-up companies, the once bankrupt
businesses that are rising from the ashes, and the multitude of
small businesses that rely on shale energy for their
livelihoods, and to consider looking into what you can do as
policymakers to help increase the demand for natural gas as a
cleaner fuel option for our energy sector and a cleaner fuel
option for our transportation sector.
Chairman Tipton, Ranking Member Critz, and members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for working together in a bipartisan
manner to help small businesses succeed, help fuel job growth,
and to help our nation become more energy independent. Thank
you.
Chairman Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Hughes. I appreciate you
all staying within the time. We would not really have dragged
you out. So, but we do appreciate that.
Mr. Tommaso, we will move on to questions now and I would
like to start with you. A common theme across all industries
that we hear about in this Committee is regulatory certainty
and general confusion put forth in the form of government
regulation. Can you talk a little bit about the regulatory
process in your industry as well as the process on how some of
these new fuels are categorized by the EPA?
Mr. Tommaso. Sure. The first thing, when we started in
2005, that was first when the biodiesel subsidy came out where
it was a 50 percent per gallon production credit for biodiesel
made from second use oils and a dollar for the virgin oils. And
in any new industry, as it builds traction you are building the
customer on a one-off basis and the way Mr. Taylor talked about
building the trust with the farmers, we build the trust with
our customers that this fuel is going to be here when we make
the conversions to switch over from petroleum to biofuels. The
uncertainty and the changes in the policy affect us because as
we produce this fuel based on certain circumstances and certain
economics, when they go away we have to go away or either
subsidize--basically fund those subsidies until or if they do
come back. And that ends up causing a lot of disruption to us.
Supply chains, supply flows, and we have a large logistics arm.
Five million gallons worth of storage, 60 tank cars that drive
around the country on a daily basis. So when all of a sudden
those subsidies go away and those customers are looking for
product to be priced competitive and the economics change
overnight the way they have done since 2006 on and off, it does
affect us very drastically.
Chairman Tipton. How does the EPA categorize the fuels you
produce?
Mr. Tommaso. Currently, we are classified as an advanced
biofuel, a D5 RIN over the--since the program's inception in
July of 2010. The rules changed twice and again reclassifying
us twice and changing the value of our RIN. And again, this has
also caused a big disruption to our market.
Chairman Tipton. So changing oils, when the EPA does that--
--
Mr. Tommaso. No good.
Chairman Tipton [continuing]. That is hurting your ability
to be able to grow the business?
Mr. Tommaso. Absolutely.
Chairman Tipton. You need some certainty in there.
I am curious as to the role that the federal government's
research and development efforts have on your business. What is
that community like in terms of the R&D and does it work in
partnership with small businesses?
Mr. Tommaso. We have had very little experience with state-
run R&D or government-run R&D programs. We do a lot of all the
R&D ourselves. We did employ Penn State to do a private study
for us, as well as we have chemical engineers that we employ
that used to work in the petroleum industry that came on with a
lot of industry secrets that helped us to make a better fuel.
Chairman Tipton. How about you, Mr. Taylor? Are you using
state and federal government R&D?
Mr. Taylor. Yes, we are.
Chairman Tipton. Okay. Mr. McAdams.
Mr. McAdams. A lot of my members are.
Chairman Tipton. Okay, great.
Mr. Tommaso, I am intrigued a little bit by the work that
you are doing with these catfish hatcheries, to be able to skim
off the fat that is there. Where does an idea like that come
from?
Mr. Tommaso. Oh, that was interesting. We had some sales
guy that came out from Louisiana that had access to one pond
and he was very undercapitalized, did not know the technology,
and did not have a market for the product but had an inside
track and saw it and went to the plant owner and told them
about its possibility but did not have the means to extract it.
And then when interest started to develop over this one pond,
we were the only ones that had the ability to harvest it,
process it, and actually find a market for it. So that is when
we sent a team down there to develop that market and bid on all
those other 12 ponds. And we did some experimenting. At first
we pulled loads off the pond in a very crude manner, trucked
them back to Pennsylvania, processed them down in Pennsylvania,
and then sold them back to Texas into the Houston field market.
And then from there we developed the whole business development
of going down there and going after all the 12 plants.
Chairman Tipton. Great example of American
entrepreneurialism. You did not have a bureaucrat out of
Washington, D.C. come down and say we have a great idea. This
actually came out from the working area.
Mr. Tommaso. Yes. There was a mechanical contracting
company that went out of business a couple of days before we
got down there and there were 60 guys ready to start manning
excavating equipment, trucks, welding. It was an excellent
opportunity.
Chairman Tipton. Terrific.
Mr. Taylor, can you explain a little bit about the
differences of creating biofuels for transportation and
biofuels for electrical generation?
Mr. Taylor. As far as biomass is concerned?
Chairman Tipton. Right.
Mr. Taylor. The difference, at least the approach that we
have taken, is to produce the biomass is sort of the first
thing we had to do. And we're actually creating a number of
paths with relationships both towards cellulosic, which would
take the crop in some form or fashion into their process or
densifying it into pellets, but more of almost a biomass, kind
of a bio refinery. Some of it could be building products and
other things but those channels we see as--we have a multiple
of channels that we are putting in play to be able to maximize
the value of the crop, which is the number one thing as a
farmer-owned cooperative we are trying to do. Does that answer
your question?
Chairman Tipton. Yes, I think that gets to it. And just
kind of going back to the catfish, because we have heard of
being able to take French fry oil and be able to operate a
vehicle, are you doing some experimenting with that? You
mentioned using it for heating.
Mr. Tommaso. I originally came out of the restaurant
business in New York City where there is a large heating oil--
indusrial heating oil number 4 and number 6 market. My partner,
Dave Dunham, started in the trucking industry. He actually
started collecting used cooking oil and converting his father's
tractor trailers to run on vegetable oil to lower the gas. In
the long term, running raw vegetable oils in transportation is
not a viable option. We developed the market to run large
industrial applications, power plants, universities, as well as
district heating plants to run on our fuels.
Mr. McAdams. Mr. Chairman, if I could come back and kind of
tie that question with your first question. I am going to get
in the weeds just a second because I think it makes the point
that both of these gentlemen are trying to make. So, for
instance, if he tries to use a hardwood to make pellets or to
make biopower, he has no problem. But if we go into the
transportation fuels industry and we want to build a half a
billion dollar cellulosic plant and make a drop-in renewable
jet fuel from wood, the definitions under the RFS are
incredibly prescriptive. If Ralph wants to take his catfish
oil, he has to have a determination from the EPA that
specifically says it is a waste.
Now, this is a problem. This is a term of art, waste. What
is a waste? Well, waste is something that has no value. So as I
try to certify fuels on behalf of my 43 different members,
every single feed stock has to go under the RFS and be
determined whether it is certified under the law, which means
many of his feed stocks have had to be singly submitted for
their greenhouse gas reductions, the only law in America that
regulates greenhouses gases for each of the four categories.
And if the EPA does not determine that his molecule is a pure
hydrocarbon molecule, then he is not a D$ RIN; he is a D5 RIN.
And the difference is a buck. Now, that is a big difference.
So the devil is in the details here. And in defense of the
EPA, the statute was prescriptive in some way when we
originally wrote it in 2007, and that is because candidly the
incumbent industry had been around longer and people understood
it. I am not criticizing the incumbent industry, but as we move
forward, one of the challenges for our association and for all
the guys sitting at this table is to have a level playing field
so all of these different molecules can come in and lower the
cost for the American driving consumer, whether it is diesel,
jet, or gasoline. And we still have impediments in the
regulatory structure that we are working on today. And I am
hoping that we can get some of these rules through R&D, such as
the heating oil rule that would expand the market for Ralph, or
the commingling rule that would allow the Colorado butanol
company to deploy his fuel which he cannot now. Those are the
kinds of things I think that you are trying to drive it.
Chairman Tipton. I appreciate those comments.
Mr. Taylor, in regards to some of the federal research and
development efforts, are they being focused in the right areas?
Mr. Taylor. The areas that we have participated in are very
specific. The state of Missouri through a small business rural,
small business grants was a study, for example, done on which
energy crop would be the best for Missouri. We were the lead on
that study. Miscanthus was the chosen crop and we have had two
studies since that point. So we have utilized three different
studies sponsored by the State of Missouri Small Business
Administration.
Chairman Tipton. Good. Mr. McAdams, there seems to be
pretty rapid breakthrough in technology in a variety of
different fields that are out there. You were just speaking to
it a bit but could you estimate where most of these innovations
have come from? I think you spoke to it just a second ago.
Mr. McAdams. The private sector.
Chairman Tipton. It is all the private sector?
Mr. McAdams. It is private sector. Now, I will say I was
the keynote speaker at NREL this year. Very talented group
where the government has a good facility and a consortium they
built at the Department of Energy to try to help lower the cost
of testing different enzymatic reactions. And that has been
helpful. I think there are 38 members of the consortium. But a
lot of this is privately financed. And a lot of these guys have
been at it for five years. What I am really proud to say is
when the private sector focuses on innovation and they are
trying to make a dollar at it, they do it real quickly and they
do it economically efficient. And so that is why it is so
important that a framework like the RFS or a tax code if you
choose to have one is neutral and lets a level playing field so
we can raise the capital to actually fund the targeted R&D that
each of these technologies need.
Chairman Tipton. Going back to your previous comments,
would you be recommending that Congress play a more vigorous
role in terms of oversight of the EPA in terms of having common
sense regulations that are coming into play?
Mr. McAdams. I think it is always a good conversation that
the executive agencies have with the U.S. Congress. Over my
tenure in Washington I found that the dialogue actually helps
focus the mind and that it brings an opportunity to really ask
questions. Sometimes in the legislative process we do not have
the time to get into some of the weeds and what we have done
constitutionally is we have delegated a lot of these specific
decisions to the agencies. And I think it is really important
that Congress have a very vigorous and active role in making
sure that the statutes, their content and their intent is met.
And I like that dialogue personally. So I would encourage you
to do that and I think there are a lot of opportunities to
expedite the deployment of these technologies through that
dialogue.
Chairman Tipton. The renewable fuel standard has been set
at 36 billion gallons of biofuels to be inserted into the
transportation fuel pool by 2022. Is that a realistic goal?
Mr. McAdams. I think that it was a very optimistic stretch
target. And so what we see is the flexibility that was built
into the statute. I commend the Congress for the flexibility
they built in with the off ramps. What you have in terms of
specific application now of the statute is you saw, for
instance, the cellulosic pool number was lowered over 90
percent in 2011. The pool was also lowered over 90 percent in
2012, and they are getting ready to make a recommendation in
2013. This has been an incredibly difficult economic market and
the economic market did not match up with the stretch targets
that were put in the statute. So I now have many members that
are planning to bring to market. We are really beginning to see
some of the cellulosic sector come in and try to meet these
mandates. What EPA has allowed to do is to gift some of those
gallons into the advanced pool. A big question on whether they
can gift it into the biomass-based diesel pool. I agree with
the National Biodiesel Board that moving forward there is a
great opportunity to raise the billion gallon ceiling on the
biomass-based diesel pool. We could probably do upwards of two
billion gallons between now and 2022. And if that is backing
out foreign oil, I think everybody from the executive branch
and the legislative branch ought to look at that and what
opportunities you have to kind of move some of these buckets
around.
Chairman Tipton. Mr. Tommaso, Mr. Taylor, do you have any
comments on that?
Mr. Taylor. I do, if I may, Mr. Chairman. I think there is
another piece to it as far as some of the environment we have
been in over the last few years. We have been refining, oil
refining since 1939. We know the commodity pretty well. This
economic vacuum over the last three or four years was also
accompanied by crude oil reaching a high in July 2008 at $147
and hitting somewhere in the low 30s by the summer of 2009,
gutted most, if not any desire to be in renewable and risk your
own money. This belief now, one of the reasons--we are an 83-
year-old organization--our belief and the reason we have
entered it is because we believe that generally global BTU
prices had gone to another level in general and consequently,
lowered the bar, so to speak, for renewables; hence, we have
entered it. It is, I think, paramount to let programs work. Now
the environment is correct. If we come out of the sort of
economic vacuum we have been in, global prices are up and
likely to stay. It gives now the right environment if time is
lent. And that includes the BCAP programs for biomass, which we
implemented very successfully. It is a very good program. We
believe our model is almost the poster child for success in
that. It helped a farmer get over the hump while we made the
investment in environmental assessments, equipment, processes,
plants, all of those types of things. All of those things are
now in play because of those two things--a recovering economy
and a higher fuel of global BTU products. Let the programs
work.
Chairman Tipton. Mr. Hughes, I do not want to leave you
out. Can you describe the new technology that is in frac tanks
and elaborate on how these banks can mitigate some of the fears
and risks associated with fracking?
Mr. Hughes. Yes, sir. I know for a fact that our facility,
when we manufacture our tanks we do not differentiate on
quality. Some of the same gentlemen that are welding on
military vehicles are also welding on these tanks. So we
practice the utmost integrity when we are working on them.
I think one of the bigger parts that needs to be understood
is the oil and gas operators have implemented pretty much their
own best practices, self implementing them, and have gotten
away from a lot of the in-ground impoundments and have moved
over to hard side portable tanks, which makes it a lot easier
to manage the fluid through all courses of the operation.
Chairman Tipton. You may well be aware in the West we have
plenty of natural gas. We definitely need the jobs. As you
know, we need to do it in a responsible way to be able to
achieve that. With pricing that we have, we have got a real
challenge. Do you see a pathway to be able to make the
production of natural gas literally more viable in this
country?
Mr. Hughes. Well, as you know, in our section as Mr. Critz
knows, the majority of the Marcellus sits over a dry gas and we
are moving more west towards where there are fluids that come
up with the actual dry gas. Most of these operators need
probably about 500 barrels of fluids that come up with their
gas production per day in order to offset the very low prices
that are in place right now for the dry gas. But as far as a
path, I believe that we need to really focus on base loading
our energy sector to be able to use that gas to generate
electricity. And I know that is what a lot of the larger oil
and gas companies, Exxon for one, is forecasting out to 2030,
that the majority of increase for natural gas will come from
electric generation.
Chairman Tipton. You know, you may not have seen it, it
just came out in headlines this morning where an EPA official
apologizes for they call it crucify oil companies. Is that
going to give some pause? Because it does need to be all of the
above. We need all of these energy sources. Are we seeing an
overreach again by the EPA?
Mr. Hughes. I would say yes, sir.
Chairman Tipton. Great. I concur. I would now like to yield
to Mr. Critz for his questions.
Mr. Critz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the Chairman
ended with you, Matt, we will start with you, and it is a
pretty straightforward question I have. The innovation taking
place in the gas industry has had a profound impact on
Pennsylvania. Can you talk about how Bill Polacek and ETC are
able to seize on these opportunities? What is it that you saw
and how is it that you got into this business so quickly? I am
thrilled to hear the Chairman talk about the gas that is in
Colorado, because they need your tanks, too, but that is
another conversation.
Mr. Hughes. We will be visiting them soon.
Mr. Critz. But if you would, just walk through the process
of how you ended up here.
Mr. Hughes. Sure. We are a contract metal fabricator. Mr.
Polacek has been in business since 1987. He started in a two-
car garage and now employs close to 450 people. And our main
facility, JWF Industries occupies just a little under a million
square feet. Mr. Polacek is very entrepreneurial and did, as I
mentioned earlier, keep his eye on this business. And when it
first started there was not very much opportunity for metal
fabrication. They dug a lot of pits. They lined them. They
stored their water in the pits. They stored their drill
cuttings in the pits. They stored their drill mud in the pits.
Those have been highly--well, I do not want to say highly
regulated but they have self-policed themselves, realized what
they had to do in order to make things good and in order to
proceed forward with the drilling operations and minimize the
amount of environmental impact. When they imposed those, that
is when we got involved and that is when Bill actually was able
to seize the opportunity.
We are what we consider a mid-range producer. Most of the
companies that we compete against are down in the Texas-
Louisiana area and they produce in very high volumes. What we
saw in the market was an opportunity to produce a very good
quality product at a medium volume and then answer the needs to
the innovations that are required in order to keep growing this
business. So we had several companies come to us and ask us if
we could customize a particular tank, tweak it, or actually
help them design it to be more functional for what they do.
And as I mentioned, we are actually getting involved with
one particular company. It was a great story. A very young
engineer walked into our office and had a good idea regarding
water clarification system in order to clean the residual frac
fluid onsite which eliminates the amount of transportation,
eliminates the amount of trucking, and also it eliminates the
amount of water that is needed to begin the subsequential
fracking processes. And it is that kind of innovation that we
were open to. So that is basically what we are very well known
for in the industry is our ability to adapt the innovation and
be able to be flexible enough to work with some of the smaller
companies.
Mr. Critz. You made me think of a company you need to talk
to, but that is for another conversation. I remember talking
with Bill, too, about the quality. You mentioned that your
welders are doing military applications but they are also doing
these tanks and that has also been part of your success; these
tanks are top notch and there is no failure in any of these
weld joints. Is that correct?
Mr. Hughes. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Critz. Okay. Aquatech. Remember Aquatech?
Mr. Tommaso, I am absolutely astounded, baffled, interested
in this catfish pond. I guess it's reclamation; I do not even
know what you would call it. You say it is a football field
size pond that has--I was looking through my paper because I
was not sure if I heard it correctly--is the material that you
want 3 to 10 feet deep or are the ponds 3 to 10 feet deep?
Mr. Tommaso. No, the ponds are 100 feet wide by 300 feet
long by 30 feet deep.
Mr. Critz. Thirty feet deep. Okay.
Mr. Tommaso. And as they are sanitizing and washing down
the plants every day they are using about three million gallons
of water of which about two percent is fats and solids. Every
day. So all that goes into this pond. The solids flow to the
bottom, the water stays in the middle, and the fats rise to the
surface. And over the course of approximately three years you
have a cap on these ponds of 3 to 10 feet deep.
Mr. Critz. That is amazing. I am just trying to envision a
football field with 10 feet worth of fat.
Mr. Tommaso. When that salesman came to me with a jar of
this fat and the odor was horrendous and it was a sight to see,
and he was showing us pictures, it did not do it justice until
you flew down there and were standing in front of this pond.
Mr. Critz. That is amazing. Now, have--you never been on
that show ``Dirtiest Jobs''?
Mr. Tommaso. No.
Mr. Critz. I was listening to your testimony, and it really
threw me because of the massive size of this thing. But the one
question I do have for you is whether converting used fryer oil
to biofuels is an old-fashioned process? Someone has to collect
the oil from restaurants. How challenging is it to manage the
collection process and keep your costs at a level that you are
actually making money on this?
Mr. Tommaso. We had the benefit of starting in other
industries, so we came without any bad habits and we started
with technology. And we currently have over 40 trucks that go
out every day to restaurants. We collect from about 17,000
restaurants in 12 states. And we use UPS logistics. We use
satellite technology. We use tablets in the trucks. We have
live data knowing how much is in each truck, what the volume
is. And we use this same technology that companies like UPS and
Federal Express do to get this piece of paper across the
country overnight for $12.
Mr. Critz. Okay. All right.
Mr. Tommaso. But is a massive undertaking.
Mr. Critz. Well, restaurants are dotted all over the place,
so it must be massive just managing it.
Mr. Tommaso. That is why these ponds are easy.
Mr. Critz. Yes, I guess once you have your delivery route
or your pickup route it is just a route. It is just a truck
route. Okay.
Mr. Taylor, you work with nearly 200 family farms and you
anticipate scaling up to 1,500. Now, agriculture is still the
number one industry in Pennsylvania, and there are a lot of
small family farms. What are some of the benefits and
challenges you face in working with so many of these family-
owned farms?
Mr. Taylor. The MFA Biomass, which we own 60 percent and
Aloterra owns 40 percent. Aloterra really brought the
Miscanthus expertise, feed stock, and a number of other
expertise. What we bring to the table is logistics. We are the
seventh largest propane retailer in the country and we've
started several companies.
Mr. Critz. And you do a sort of exchange; is that correct?
You deliver propane and pick up the stuff that you need? Or is
that not part of it?
Mr. Taylor. No. What we have done, just to give you an
example, a real life example, southwest Missouri, it is big
chicken poultry country. They have a group of growers. The
average grower might have six houses, might use 20,000 gallons
of propane in a year to heat those houses at $1.60 per gallon
approximately. Now that grower grows 15 acres on his farm of
Miscanthus with a number of growers. We built a processing
plant in the center to pick that up and pelletize it with our
delivery trucks. We take it back and put it into the feed bin.
We have a system for feeding it into the furnaces which we
build now in southern Missouri. We build those furnaces. We
have over 100 locations now. And his cost, we essentially can
guarantee him a cost, the equivalent cost of about 80 to 90
cents a gallon of propane. About half of what he is paying now.
And obviously a very small delta with energy input because all
you are doing is harvesting it once a year. So it is truly the
economic effect. And that farm, that means approximately close
to $20,000. And that is significant. The bottom-line effect
turns out to be about $400 an acre net profit improvement if
they use Miscanthus.
Mr. Critz. Well, you said you are on the logistics side? So
my next question was about the Department of Agriculture's
biomass crop assistance program, and I think it has been
important to the growth of your industry. Can you discuss where
it would be if this funding source had not been available?
Mr. Taylor. Yes, I can. I call it prospectus. I think in
the sovereign world we call it the ruling or whatever it is
when BCAP came out. In the opening paragraph, when I read this
the opening paragraph said we have the chicken and the egg
problem. Farmers will not grow it because they do not even know
the equipment to handle it; plants will not locate in the
places because nobody is growing it. It was a chicken and an
egg problem. What we witnessed first-hand with BCAP was an
absolute resolution of that chicken and an egg problem. When we
received BCAP funding for approximately 13,000 acres, our first
13,000 acres, and we are now just finishing up that planting
process, there were a number of things we had to do. Most
people that are in the rhizome business or the Miscanthus
business want rhizomes as high as possible. We want costs as
low as possible. So what we had to do is spend a year
multiplying the rhizomes or a couple or three years.
Multiplying the rhizomes to get the costs down per acre from
$1,400. In our BCAP program we are at $750. This year on the
2012 budget we hope to be at $550. We hope in another year we
will have driven that down to $300 an acre to establish that.
That would have been impossible without BCAP funding the
bridge, getting the bridge for the farmer. Because the money
did not come to us. The money goes to the farmer to plant the
crop. It takes three years for it to mature, massive tonnage.
So you have rhizome costs coming down.
On the other hand you have got to have time to develop the
logistics. Two years ago all the rhizomes were planted with
people on the backs of the wagons dropping rhizomes down
chutes. MFAO Biomass has partnered with an English company. We
are now making the planters in Kansas. Twenty-four of them are
now off the line which we have purchased and are in fields
planting plants. Four-wheel planter, five miles an hour, that
is 40 acres a day per planter. That is doable and we think we
can now grow when they grow so we are up to--we are going to be
pushing 80. Keep in mind the industry just two years ago was at
five acres a day with four people on a planter. So this is so
new trying to work out those systems to get the efficiency--not
just efficiencies--to ward out any system that will work is
happening because BCAP was available.
The important thing with BCAP is it does not take just one
year. The funding is critical to bridge the people that have
already started on that path to get them to year two or three
as it was originally designed, in three years to be able to let
these things play out. Our game plan is absolutely to be on our
own the fourth year. We needed three years of help from BCAP.
We went from $280 million or whatever it was down to $17
million this year. And who knows. It is critical, we think, to
bridge that gap for the farmer because it is an unknown entity
at this point. We now have broken that chicken and egg problem
because of BCAP.
Mr. Critz. Mr. McAdams, did you want to weigh in?
Mr. McAdams. I just want to say it is one of the top
priorities of the association. We represent Freedom, which is a
giant Miscanthus grower out of Georgia. We are hoping to see
them plant----
Mr. Critz. We represent Freedom, too.
Mr. McAdams. That you do. They are looking at trying to do
30,000 acres. They are currently right now working with some
folks. They actually have helped Aloterra in terms of their
planting. Congressman Kingston was pivotal last year in putting
some level of funding, 17 million, into the process for the
BCAP program. I am not real optimistic in the House Farm Bill
process but we are hoping this morning over in the Senate Farm
Bill that they will restore a higher level of funding. It is
key for us to have certified feed stocks, which these would be
available to make the gallons. And it is a chicken and egg
problem. I think he laid it out beautifully.
Mr. Critz. You have in your testimony, and I want to circle
back around to something called Miscanthus giganteus, which is
I think what we are talking about. Back in my part of the world
there are people talking about something called switchgrass as
a feed stock. What are you describing, and is switchgrass
something that is in a temperate zone? I saw where you can grow
this Miscanthus giganteus in a wide range of areas. So can you
explain to me exactly what that is?
Mr. McAdams. Sure. Well, let me say that the administration
put together a biomass council to look at where you have
various feed stocks available to support an advanced biofuels
industry. And the conclusion of that was you could grow
different feed stocks in different areas and it was not a one
size fits all model. And so one of the great things about giant
Miscanthus is you can grow this in subgrow crop land. So kind
of loamy soils that you would not grow corn or cotton or
anything else on. So you can take unproductive land and you can
turn that into a real high-yield crop on a per acre basis. If
you look in Oklahoma, switchgrass was a natural field grass in
Oklahoma. If you look in Colorado, you have got a lot of beetle
kill. So if we could get the definitions right in terms of what
woods we could use, my, what a tremendous opportunity you would
have to deploy cellulosic plants in Colorado.
So I think this is one of the areas as we look moving
forward, this is one of the areas we could probably do a little
better fine tuning, particularly regulatorily as we move
forward.
Mr. Taylor. We use a specific clone called the Illinois
clone, which is a sterile plant. It has no seeds. It is
noninvasive. Because we are farmers, we understand our rows or
any number of other plants that have been invasive, we felt
that was a critical thing, to be noninvasive. So it is a
sterile, nonseeded plant. We had to prove that in our EA under
NEPA when we did that. One of the reasons that crop is number
one is its tonnage. One of the reasons it was not done is
because you are planting with rhizomes. And now that we have
solved a pretty good share of the problems with the handling of
the rhizomes, propagating, digging them up and doing it, that
cost is what has come down significantly.
Mr. Critz. Good. Mr. McAdams, you testified or in your
testimony you discussed the benefits but also the challenges
with using SBA investment programs. How important is equity
investment and venture capital to the future of renewable
fuels?
Mr. McAdams. Well, obviously, it is very important. Let me
just start there. But let me say it depends on where the
company is in its cycle. So if I am a new company coming into
the market for the first time, probably the VC world is pretty
important. And again, if you look at some of the more
successful, more known companies in this space, they came out
of the VC industry. Some of the smaller ones that are not at
that stage, I think the Small Business Administration could
really help them specifically in the SBIR programs, some of the
research and develop monies. I was really delighted to get the
example for this hearing today about the pre-engineering cost.
This is a guy with less than 10 employees that has a very novel
technology that they are trying to deploy in Florida, and that
helped him leverage what is about to be a $150 million
facility. The loan was $3.5 million. It came out of the state
program from the 2010 funding out of SBA.
So I think it is a combination of things. And it really
depends on what is the size of the company. Obviously,
companies like DuPont have a different way to finance things
than Ralph Tommaso. So I see them all in all sizes and again,
it is not one size fits all.
Mr. Critz. Well, you mentioned something earlier about D4
and D5, and you are talking a different language to me. So at
some point I want you to come in and talk to my staff about
what that is so that I have a better understanding of it.
Mr. McAdams. I would be delighted to do that.
Mr. Critz. And just one closing comment. It is great to
hear all of this because our subcommittee is Ag and Energy, so
it is really interesting to hear everything that is going on. I
was at a Steel Caucus hearing in Pittsburgh last week and we
were talking about the price of natural gas. It is $2.20, $2.30
right now, but the natural gas industry says that once the LNG
plants are up along the border and we start exporting, then it
is probably going to hit about $5 to $6 a cubic foot. And that
is the sweet spot for them. It is the dry gas, and you are
right, we are sitting on a lot of dry gas, but are getting to
this wet gas area now. So that is the figure that I am keeping
in my head, because certainly we want manufacturing and
everything going on.
So with that, I want to mention that the Chairman came to
Pittsburgh with me last week, and he is taking credit for my
big victory on Tuesday. As long as he continues to be nice, I
will give him all the credit he wants.
Chairman Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Critz. I would now like to
recognize Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses for your testimony. There have been a lot of things
illuminated here in this discussion and testimony and the Q&A
afterwards.
I think there is a place to go that we ought to examine
from a public policy standpoint and it caught my interest when
I see Mr. McAdams's testimony on the F-16s. I will tell it as I
know it and then ask you to respond accordingly. I happen to be
in a position where some of this information comes into my ears
and it does not get published and I will tell it this way. The
Pentagon decided that they wanted to have by my narrative, an
F18 that they would fly at mach 1 and do so on biofuels. And so
in order to create the biofuels necessary for the bio jet fuel,
a 50/50 blend, biodiesel and regular jet fuel, they did not
want to apparently take a few thousand gallons from a regular
biodiesel producer but instead went to Pennsylvania to raise
some algae in the dark that came from the bottom of the ocean
where the sun does not penetrate in tanks with an individual
there that had the skills and ability to do that. And then they
needed to feed it something, so they found some condemned sugar
from sugarcane in Louisiana, took it to Pennsylvania, fed it to
the algae, looked around to see how we extrude the biodiesel
out of this algae. Well, let us send it to Iowa. And we extrude
the biodiesel. And they did that, shipped it out to Edwards Air
Force Base, put it in an F-16 and flew it at mach 1.
Now, it seems to me there would be a lot of gyrations to go
through and it appears that they wanted to avoid the criticism
of food versus fuel. As I listened to the testimony here and
the Q&A, I have not heard that come up. I am concerned that
that could be a significant barrier within the mind of the
administration. If the Pentagon itself could go to such great
lengths to accomplish something that would have been done much
easier in a far less period of time.
Mr. McAdams, do you have any experience with that? Do you
have a comment on that?
Mr. McAdams. I am very aware of the certification process
in the military. I have been working very closely as an
association head on behalf of my members with the military, the
Air Force, and the Navy. We are incredibly supportive of the
MOU that was released last year that calls for funding, the
$510 million program between the Department of Energy, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, and the Department of Defense.
Mr. King. Are they wasting money trying to avoid the food
versus fuel argument?
Mr. McAdams. I would say our association supports a
technology and feed stock neutral approach. I would be
delighted to share with you the letter that we gave to Senator
McCain on this subject about three weeks ago in reference to
his questions to our association on how that matter went down.
Mr. King. Is it your understanding that it went down any
differently than I described it?
Mr. McAdams. I am not sure I know that example. They
recently did a 450,000 gallon purchase. That also involved an
algae company.
Mr. King. You used the express feed stock neutral.
Mr. McAdams. Well, when I used the expression feed stock
neutral, what I am talking about is if you scope a specific
solicitation and you require something specifically, that is
not feed stock neutral. And so what you have a propensity to do
is you try to pick a feed stock winner. Right? And so our
association has been feed stock neutral since the beginning.
What you are talking about was a specific REMAT to use a
percentage of algae in a specifically made jet fuel.
And let me just correct you on one thing with all due
respect, sir. You cannot use biodiesel to make jet. Biodiesel
has oxygen in it. It is 11 percent oxygen. So when you make jet
fuel you are to use a hydrocarbon only. Jet fuel is the most
narrowly prescriptive fuel to come out of the oil industry or
coming out of the renewable industry. So it is a very tightly
confined spec.
Mr. King. Is it possible to process the biodiesel so that
you can use it?
Mr. McAdams. You can take----
Mr. King. And is it more cost effective than the method I
described?
Mr. McAdams. You can take the feed stock, right, and you
could take Ralphs catfish oil or you could take white greases
or brown greases. And depending on the technology you use,
which is generally hydro processing an isomerisation. You can
make a jet fuel out of renewable. You can also take oils out of
algae and process it into a jet fuel. The cost of the range of
feed stocks varies. They are not all the same cost. I think
that is the point.
Mr. King. I think it would be substantially higher than the
method that I described.
Mr. McAdams. I think that is probably correct.
Mr. King. Thank you. There is more to be drilled into here.
But I wanted to turn to Mr. Tommaso before I ran out of
time because you intrigued me with 10 feet of catfish fat on a
100 by 300 foot area. I do not know, 1,000, 1,100 cubic yards
of fat. That is a lot of fat. And I did not think of catfish as
being fat. And this is intriguing to me that we have 30 percent
of our young people who are obese, even to the point where the
former secretary of defense said it was a national security
issue. And if we can process and we are all innovators here so
if we can process--this is a bit of a facetious question, you
can see it coming--but if we can process catfish fat into
energy, biodiesel, for example, has anybody given any thought
of how you convert all that extra human weight that the First
Lady is trying to reduce into something that could be useful
energy?
Mr. Tommaso. I see a movie on that. No, there is a lot of
fat. The catfish industry is shrinking, number one, due to the
changing tastes of the consumers trying to reduce their fat as
well as cheaper exports coming out of Southeast Asia. So every
catfish plant is trying to grab a bigger piece of the shrinking
pie. So that industry is in dire straits.
Mr. King. It is true that we had a surgeon in California
that was collecting human fat and converting it into biodiesel
and burning it in his car and someone thought there was an
ethical problem with that. I did not. I thought it was a pretty
good utilization of human energy.
So my clock has run out. I thank all the witnesses and I
yield back the rest of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Tipton. Thank you, Mr. King.
Again, I would like to thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony and input today. Very interesting when we are hearing
comments of starting in a garage. We just held a jobs fair down
in Alamos, Colorado. A young man was describing some work that
he is doing on a fuel cell and interesting just watching and
observing. Around the room there was some skepticism, and
others that were very intrigued, could not help but bring to
mind a guy named Steve Jobs who did pretty well with Apple
starting out in his garage. And I think these are American
energy solutions that we need to be pursuing.
So energy production is vital for the nation's economic and
national security, and in most industries in the U.S., small
businesses are the catalyst that drives innovation in new and
better technology, new technology that harnesses energy that we
did not have the capabilities to be able to use before. There
are many exciting developments in biofuel--wind, solar, and
hydroelectric industries, and new technology development not
only moves us toward that ``all of the above'' energy policy
and greater energy independence but also grows our economy and
jobs.
This has been a very interesting hearing. I think the
catfish fat probably took the cake. And we do look forward to
following these advancements in the coming months and working
with my colleagues to be able to expand energy production in
the United States. It is that important for us.
I ask unanimous consent that members have five legislative
days to be able to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without any objection, so ordered. And the
hearing is now adjourned. Thank you again.
[Whereupon, at 11:19 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


