- PRO-GROWTH TAX POLICY: WHY SMALL BUSINESSES NEED INDIVIDUAL TAX REFORM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PRO-GROWTH TAX POLICY: WHY SMALL BUSINESSES NEED INDIVIDUAL TAX REFORM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, TAX AND CAPITAL ACCESS

of the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
NOVEMBER 3, 2011

__________

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-043
Available via the GPO Website: http://www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-957                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
ROBERT SCHILLING, Illinois
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
JANICE HAHN, California
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Walsh, Hon. Joe..................................................     1
Schrader, Hon. Kurt..............................................     2

WITNESSES

Robert J. Carroll, Principal, Qualitative Economics and
Statistics Group, Ernst and Young LLP, Washington, DC..........     4
Gary Marowske, President, Flame Furnace, Warren, Michigan........     6
William R. Smith, Chief Executive Officer, Termax Corporation,
Lake Zurich, IL................................................     8
Stephen Capp, President and CEO, Laserage Technology Corporation,
Waukegan, IL...................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Robert J. Carroll, Principal, Qualitative Economics and
Statistics Group, Ernst and Young LLP, Washington, DC......    23
Gary Marowske, President, Flame Furnace, Warren, Michigan,...    35
William R. Smith, Chief Executive Officer, Termax
Corporation, Lake Zurich, IL...............................    41
Stephen Capp, President and CEO, Laserage Technology
Corporation, Waukegan, IL..................................    47
Additional Materials for the Record:
NRA Statement for the Record.................................    54
Open Mic Statements for the Record...........................    63

PRO-GROWTH TAX POLICY: WHY SMALL BUSINESSES NEED INDIVIDUAL TAX REFORM

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Economic Growth,
Tax and Capital Access,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Joe Walsh [chairman
of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Walsh, Chabot, Mulvaney, Hanna,
Schilling, Schrader, and Chu.
Chairman Walsh. Welcome. Good morning, everyone. I call
this hearing to order.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying today. We
appreciate your participation. I will begin with a brief
opening statement. But again, welcome and thanks for coming to
this Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital Access
hearing on Pro-Growth Tax Policy.
The news today for small business owners is not good. The
economic recovery is weak. Small businesses are still
struggling. Credit remains tight and forecasts indicate weak
hiring will continue. Washington, which should be making job
creation easier, is instead creating more hurdles with the
constant threats of higher taxes, excessive regulations, and
our unsustainable debt. It seems that no one has a bigger
target on his back than the small business owner.
As Congress turns its attention to tax reform, the budget
deficit, and pro-growth policies, today this Subcommittee will
focus on the importance of tax reform to small businesses.
Specifically, we will examine the need for individual tax
reform for pass-through organizations--those that pass through
their income and tax liability and pay taxes on their owner's
individual tax returns rather than on a corporate return.
According to a recent study by Ernst & Young, about 95
percent of businesses, and over 80 percent of small businesses,
are organized as pass-throughs. These companies, such as LLCs,
partnerships, S corps, and sole proprietorships, represent 54
percent of all business activity and employ 54 percent of the
private sector workforce. Our local small business, not the
government, will create the jobs and pull us out of this
recession. The Internal Revenue Service's national taxpayer
advocate has said that the most serious problem facing
taxpayers is the complexity of the tax code and the need for
reform. Studies have shown that the cost of tax compliance for
small business is 67 percent higher than for larger entities.
Pass-throughs are becoming more prevalent. Between 1986 and
2005 their number more than doubled, while the number of C
corporations declined. Enacting policies that will keep pass-
through entities taxes low will help small businesses to spur
our economy. It is especially important that we consider
revamping the tax code in a way that generates jobs and
economic growth. Common sense tax and regulatory reform for
small businesses will help us do just that.
I recently introduced legislation, H.R. 2945, to index the
capital gains tax to inflation. Americans should not have to
pay capital gains tax on an asset purchased 20 years ago and
sold today but increased in value only due to inflation. Making
this simple change would allow small business owners to create
jobs and grow the economy.
Today we will hear from an economist and small business
owners about why individual tax reform for these pass-through
entities, and not just corporate tax reform, must be a
fundamental part of tax reform.
Finally, I must say a word about President Obama's Jobs
Plan. In August 2009, the president said the last thing you
want to do is to raise taxes in the middle of a recession. But
yet that is what he has proposed. Small business owners know
that you cannot raise taxes and expect employers to create jobs
especially in a recession. But let us listen to our nation's
best job creators and consider policies that will truly
jumpstart hiring and lead to long-term economic growth.
Again, thank you to our witnesses for participating today.
I look forward to hearing input on how we can reform the tax
code so our small businesses are able to expand, create jobs,
and help our economy grow.
I now yield happily to our Ranking Member Schrader for his
opening statement.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for being here today. Some of you have come quite a long
way and I appreciate it.
I agree with the chair. Entrepreneurs today face many, many
challenges when they are starting a business. I, myself, am a
veterinarian, 35 years, small business, private enterprise.
Labor, access to capital, just a myriad of different problems,
marketing, the whole nine yards. But one of the most important
decisions you all make at any point in time is how you organize
yourself regarding your tax structure. How you want to operate
as a business.
Today we are going to listen to the experts in the field,
if you will, by boots on the ground, about how to--what is the
best way to operate non-corporate business entities which most
small business fall under? A lot of the discussion we have had
to date has been about corporate tax reform, which I strongly
support but corporate tax reform in and of itself would leave
most small businesses behind. And a lot of us have operated as
sole proprietors. I have been a sole proprietor, I have been a
partnership, and I have been an LLC. And a lot of the
discussions that I am hearing now would not really help me, or
you, or most Americans out there that are the real job creators
at the small business level.
So I really appreciate that you are having this hearing on
pass-through entities so we can raise America's consciousness
about what really goes on. And I have had many a tax statements
at the end of the year that showed I was making $200- to
$300,000 and all I know is I was taking $60,000 home in cash at
the end of the day. And a lot of my stuff was going back into
the business and the statement did not mirror what was actually
going on. So I really am looking forward to your comments
about, you know, what really is going on here.
The majority of small businesses use the pass-through
structure. It offers the best opportunity for reinvesting
savings back in the business and hiring employees. That is how
you hire people. You make that investment. Small business non-
corporate entities actually employ over 50 percent of the total
work force and report over a third of the business receipts
that are out there. So we are an important force, I think, in
America's economic recovery and economic development at the end
of the day.
So we have to really look at these unique challenges. I am
very concerned on the super committee that there has been a lot
of talk about tax reform. Some of my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle have embraced the corporate without embracing
the actual pass-through entities. Comprehensive tax reform is
the way I think to bridge the differences between democrats and
republicans. And so I am real pleased that my chair has held
this hearing today because this is an area where we can
actually have agreement. And frankly, by having this hearing
and listening to you we can push the super committee to do the
right thing and consider comprehensive tax reform that could
lower all our rates, get rid of all these tax deductions, many
of which do not benefit us compared to some of our bigger
corporate entities, and actually get more money on the table at
the end of the day to buy down our debt. That is I think the
confidence that America has in not just Congress but our
corporate and non-corporate business community to actually be
competitive in the global environment hinges on, I think, to
comprehensive tax reform.
People are looking for guidance. People are looking for
someone to step up to the plate and make the big decisions that
make us think that jeez, we actually have an opportunity to
compete in this global economy. We can kick China's and India's
butt instead of the opposite happening at this point in time.
And a lot of American small businesses are the ones that are
going to be doing that.
So with that I want to thank you all for being here and I
yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Ranking Member Schrader. This is
so nice. We probably could have written each other's opening
statements.
If Subcommittee members have an opening statement prepared,
I ask that it be submitted for the record. To our witnesses,
you will each have five minutes to deliver your testimony. The
light will start out as green. When you have one minute
remaining the light will turn yellow. Finally, it will turn red
at the end of your five minutes. And depending on what I think
about your testimony--just kidding.

STATEMENTS OF ROBERT J. CARROLL, PRINCIPAL, ERNST & YOUNG, LLP;
GARY MAROWSKE, PRESIDENT, FLAME FURNACE, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF
OF AIR CONDITIONING CONTRACTORS OF AMERICA; WILLIAM R. SMITH,
PRESIDENT AND CEO, TERMAX CORPORATION, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF
PRECISION METAL FORMING ASSOCIATION; STEPHEN CAPP, PRESIDENT
AND CEO, LASERAGE TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF
OF THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS

Chairman Walsh. Our first witness is Robert Carroll. Mr.
Carroll is a principal with Ernst & Young, LLP's qualitative
economics and statistics group. He is an advisor to public and
private tax clients on federal tax policy, including revenue
and economic effects. He received his B.S. from the State
University of New York at Albany and his Ph.D. in Economics
from Syracuse University.
Welcome, Mr. Carroll. You have five minutes to present your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. CARROLL

Mr. Carroll. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Walsh,
Ranking Member Schrader, distinguished members of the
Subcommittee. I thank you for the opportunity to testify today
regarding the taxation of flow-through businesses and tax
reform.
I have had the opportunity to consider the taxation of
flow-through businesses from a number of different perspectives
inside and outside of government in the context of broad reform
of the code and more narrow reform of the business tax system.
Earlier this year I analyzed the economic footprint of the
flow-through sector on behalf of the S corporation Association,
and I have been working with various private sector clients to
evaluate and understand various aspects of tax reform.
Today, I would like to share my perspectives and provide
some results from the study on the flow-through sector we
prepared earlier this year. Flow-through businesses, S
corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, and
sole proprietorships play an important role in the U.S.
economy. The vast majority of businesses in the United States
have chosen to organize as flow-through businesses.
Today, flow-through businesses comprise more than 90
percent of all business entities, employ 54 percent of the
private sector workforce, and report 36 percent of all business
receipts. Individual owners of flow-through businesses report
54 percent of all business net income. These individual owners
also pay 44 percent of business taxes when filing their
individual tax returns. The flow-through business form provides
firms with flexibility in how they organize and structure
operations. Businesses can choose between several different
organizational forms which may better match their management
needs and capital requirements. With the increasing prominence
of flow-through businesses, it is important to carefully
consider how the flow-through form fits into the U.S. tax
system and how any particular tax reform might affect this
sector.
Flow-through businesses are subject to a single level of
tax on the income earned and allocated to their owners. Thus,
it is the tax rates faced by individual owners of flow-through
businesses that affect decision-making and the economic health
of these businesses. In contrast, the income of C corporations
is subject to two levels of tax. First, when income is earned
at the corporate level and again when the income is paid out to
shareholders in the form of dividends or retained and later
realized by shareholders as capital gains. Hence the phrase the
double tax on corporate profits.
The double tax affects a number of important economic
decisions. First, by increasing the cost of capital it
discourages investment and thus, economic growth and job
creation. Second, it leads to a bias in firms' financing
decisions between the use of debt and equity. Third, it
distorts the allocation of capital within the economy. The
flow-through form provides an important benefit to the economy
by reducing these economically harmful effects of the double
tax.
There is a growing consensus for the need to lower the
corporate income tax rate. The United States has the second
highest statutory corporate income tax rate, second only to
Japan. The U.S. corporate income tax rate is also high relative
to several other measures. In today's global economy, the high
U.S. corporate tax rate, combined with other features of the
corporate income tax, make it more difficult for the U.S. to
attract investment and also may be adversely affecting workers'
wages.
With the substantial evidence that the U.S. corporate rate
and tax system is out of step internationally, corporate tax
reform is an important component of an overall approach to
improving the current tax system. But the focus on corporate
tax reform has also drawn attention to how flow-through
businesses might be affected by such a reform. As with any such
endeavor, it is important to keep in mind the potential for
undesirable side effects. Corporate reform that eliminates
business tax expenditures would have the unintended impact of
raising the taxes of businesses organized using the flow-
through form without offering the benefit of the lower
corporate tax rate. Flow-through businesses would lose the
benefit of widely used and longstanding provisions such as
accelerated depreciation, the production activities or
manufacturing deduction, and the charitable giving deduction.
In total, flow-through businesses use about 23 percent of
the roughly 120 billion in annual business tax expenditures.
Flow-through businesses are a large part of the U.S. business
sector and important contributors to the economic vitality of
the United States. As tax reform progresses, it is important to
understand and consider all of these issues with an eye towards
bringing about the tax reform that is most conclusive to
increased growth and job creation. The path towards tax reform
will need to take into account many features of our tax system
and strike a balance between a number of sometimes conflicting
and competing objectives.
This Subcommittee should be commended for holding this
hearing to better understand the role the flow-through sector
plays in the U.S. economy. Thank you, and I would be pleased to
address any questions the Subcommittee may have.
[The statement of Mr. Carroll follows on page 23.]
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Carroll.
I now yield to Ranking Member Schrader for the purpose of
introducing our next witness.
Mr. Schrader. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my
pleasure to introduce Gary Marowske, president of Flame Furnace
in Warren, Michigan. You have come a long way.
His company was founded in 1949. Still in business. That is
a great thing. Currently has 70 employees. Hopefully more in
the near future. And Flame Furnace is one of the leading HVAC
residential services in the Detroit Metro area. So welcome to
our Committee.

STATEMENT OF GARY MAROWSKE

Mr. Marowske. Thank you. And thank you, Chairman Walsh. And
again, Ranking Member Schrader.
I will flip through my comments. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify before you here this morning.
Again, my name is Gary Marowske and I am the president of
Flame Heating and Cooling, Plumbing, Electrical in Warren,
Michigan. We supply services in heating, cooling, plumbing, and
indoor air quality equipment throughout southeastern Michigan.
Like a lot of small businesses in the HVAC industry, Flame is a
family-owned company started in 1949 by my father, Bob
Marowske, from a humble beginning. We have been blessed and
grown steadily and today we employ--it is actually about 75
now. We screwed up on what we gave you--workers. We have a
fleet of more than 60 vehicles and have installed over 75,000
comfort systems over the last 60 years.
I am a proud member of the Air Conditioning Contractors of
America of where I am the chairman of the Government Relations
Committee. The ACCA's member companies epitomize the spirit and
entrepreneurship of America's small businesses. Nearly three-
fourths of ACCA member companies have fewer than 25 employees
and 92 percent have fewer than 100 employees. Most start out
with technical skills, a truck, and the American dream as they
are going to create their own business.
It is my honor and privilege to give voice to the small
business contractors of the heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, refrigeration industry on the ongoing and much
needed debate about tax reform. The contribution of small
businesses to our economy is often overlooked, but companies
like mine employ 70 percent of the American workforce and are
the chief source of new jobs in an economic recovery. I
wholeheartedly agree that tax reform must address the
individual rates because of their impact on small businesses.
Not everyone understands that sole proprietors, partnerships,
and S corps shareholders pay taxes on business income through
individual tax rates.
Flame Furnace is organized as an S corp, as are most of the
small businesses in the specialty construction trades, in part
because it protects the owners and shareholders from business
liabilities and debts. And on the debt part, 95 percent of all
small businesses owners must also personally guarantee all bank
debt, vehicle leases, office equipment, et cetera. And it also
facilitates as a sub-S and easy transfer of ownership through
stock, through family members, or whomever you would like to
pass it on.
Changes to the individual tax rates have a direct impact on
pass-through entities, so Congress should be very careful
before enacting any tax reform proposals that tinker with the
individual tax rates. In 2009, only 7 percent of federal tax
revenue came from the income taxes paid directly by C corps,
what most people assume a corporation to be. Individual income
tax revenue, including net from all the pass-through businesses
was 44 percent of the federal tax revenue in 2009.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to say exactly how much came
from income tax on the pass-through companies.
As you contemplate changes to individual rates and the
corporate and international tax codes, I want to take this
opportunity to point out that America's small businesses are
looking for a simple, rational, permanent tax code that will
encourage prosperity and foster job creation. The tax code is a
powerful tool that can affect individual corporate behaviors in
a way that advanced beneficial public policies, like allowing
homeowners to take a deduction on their mortgage interest,
permitting small businesses, such as my company to use enhanced
Section 179 expensing limits and bonus depreciation. These
incentives work, and my company and thousands of ACCA companies
have used them to buy new trucks, office equipment, other
investments.
An example is the Homeowner's 25C Residential Energy
Efficiency Tax Credit for installing qualified high-efficiency
furnaces, boilers, air conditioners, et cetera. The 25C tax
credits are easy to take advantage of and they do not favor the
wealthy according to IRS statistics. Fully, 93 percent of tax
credit claims under 25C and 25D for solar, geo, wind, and
photovoltaic properties were made by taxpayers who have an
adjusted gross income of no more than $200,000, which is
indicative of a middle class tax.
The 25C tax credits highlight how a simple tax incentive
can help individuals and small businesses create an economic
benefit. Americans spent more than $25 billion on energy
improvements to their homes that qualified for the tax credits.
Now, consider the National Association of Homebuilders that
estimates every $100,000 in remodeling expenditures generates
1.11 new jobs. Congress needs to extend the 25C tax credits
beyond their expiration at the end of this year, restore the
tax value to 1,500 as my associations. My personal opinion is
if we want to drive individual behavior, save energy, create
economic activity, we ought to raise the credit to 5,000 and
you will see more than a payback on that.
Another important change to the tax code would be to bring
the depreciation schedules for HVACR equipment and other
building components more in line with reality. According to the
tax code, commercial HVACR equipment must be depreciated over
39 years. And if any of you own a building, you know that the
air conditioner does not last 39 years. This would include
doctors' offices, home small businesses, car dealerships. That
type of building this would apply to.
Let me close by saying the small business community needs
certainty. We have all applauded the repeal of the Form 1099
filing provision in April. We are hopeful that the Senate can
pass and repeal the 3 percent withholding tax on government
contracts, but the effort to pass these two small business
priorities highlights the piecemeal and short-term approach
Congress has taken with regard to the tax code.
Last year extended more than 60 tax incentives that
benefitted individuals and small businesses just two weeks
before they were set to expire and that makes it tough for
planning for a small business for advertising, marketing.
Included in the bill were a temporary extension of the Bush tax
cuts, short-term estate tax reduction, and short-term extension
of bonus depreciation and modification to Section 179 expensing
rules, a one-year extension of the alternative minimum tax
patch, and a temporary extension of the residential energy tax
credits described above.
While extension of these tax incentives is greatly
appreciated, the timing and nature of their extension make it
very difficult for businesses to make business decisions.
America's small business owners are crippled and worried about
what may or may not happen next year. By sending the right
signals to America's small businesses, Congress can eliminate
the fear of the unknown and I can assure you American small
businesses will rise up and create new jobs.
With that I conclude my comments, and I will be happy to
answer any questions. Thank you again for the opportunity to
testify. I hope I did not put you to sleep.
[The statement of Mr. Marowske follows on page 35.]
Chairman Walsh. Not even close. Thank you, Mr. Marowske.
Let us keep our Midwest vent going here. Mr. Carroll, you
are from Ohio, right?
Mr. Carroll. I am actually originally from New York.
Chairman Walsh. Oh, okay. All right. Close enough.
Let us turn to Illinois. Our next witness is William R.
Smith. Mr. Smith is president and CEO of Termax Corporation in
Lake Zurich, Illinois, which I have the honor to represent.
Termax is a small family manufacturing and engineering company
specializing in metal and plastic fasteners. Mr. Smith is
testifying on behalf, as well, of the Precision Metal Forming
Association.
Welcome, sir. You have five minutes. Thanks.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM R. SMITH

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Walsh, Ranking Member
Schrader, members of the Committee. Thanks for the opportunity
to be here today.
My name is William Smith. I am the president and CEO of
Termax based on Lake Zurich, Illinois. We are members of the
Precision Metal Forming Association that has about 1,000 member
companies representing $113 billion in precision metal products
in that industry. About two-thirds of our member companies are
structured as subchapter S corps or similar pass-throughs, as
is Termax Corp. The industry average is about 50 employees per
business, most of which are family-owned like ours.
My father founded the company in 1971, and in 1998, my
brother and I took over the operations where we have seen the
company grow to about 250 employees and we hold over 60
patents. Now, while primarily servicing the automotive
industry, our company manufactures clips and fasteners for many
industries, including appliances, lighting, toys, construction,
automotive, and we are the number one exporter of parts in the
world for these sorts of things.
Now, before taking over the family business in '98, I
worked as a CPA, certified public accountant, for roughly 20
years, also a small business, giving me a unique perspective to
understand both the production and finance sides of
manufacturing in America. In my experience as a CPA, the vast
majority of manufacturers are structured as S corporations,
LLCs, and partnerships, or other pass-through entities.
Everybody has statistics. Our statistics showed that 50 percent
of all private employers are structured this way, and among the
PMA member companies we know that 64 percent are also pass-
through entities.
We are structured this way because we are family-owned. We
have a limited number of shareholders and owners who are often
our siblings and increasingly our children and grandchildren.
It just makes sense. Manufacturers like us pay our income taxes
at the individual rate. We claim deductions and credits at that
personal level. This means that the financial and manufacturing
success of our employees and businesses are directly tied to
that of the business owners. The Smith Family.
The majority of manufacturers leave most of the money in
the business, directly reinvesting in our employees,
facilities, and equipment. And this is really the important
point there. We are getting taxed on monies that we never see.
It is just being held there. Now, due to our current U.S. tax
code, we are taxed on income we do not take out of the company
but leave in the business to reinvest. This means we have fewer
resources to put towards hiring, training, and buying new
machines. In my experience, smaller manufacturers, based on
wage and K-1 income, pay 36 percent in taxes. They distribute
18 percent to owners and reinvest 46 percent in the business.
And that is conservative. We, at Termax, we distribute 10
percent to the owners. The rest is either used for taxes or
reinvestment. So the more money that goes into taxes, the less
that is reinvested for our employees and machinery.
These funds are taxed at the current 35 percent individual
rate, set to increase to 39.6 percent. If statutory rates
increase by nearly 5 percent as scheduled, business owners have
to take it out of the pie somewhere, either from the owners'
families, or from the reinvestment in the employees and
company, usually both. Tax increases result in reduced cash
flow in the business, causing a major unintended ripple effect,
limiting access to capital.
Banking and other lending requirements have toughened,
forcing most owners to leave retained earnings in the business
for the sole purpose of meeting collateral requirements. The
current system penalizes and taxes business owners who leave
money in the business for reinvestment, resulting in reduced
ability to secure loans. Therefore, increased tax liability
means less money in the business, which will restrict the
ability of a small business to access timely and sufficient
credit to purchase machines, expand their facilities, hire new
employees. This is particularly true for a pass-through entity
like ours, who is taxed regardless of the actual distribution
made to the owner.
This is clearly a politically charged issue. But from the
standpoint of the small business owner we must do what we can
to reduce our effective tax rate so we can increase our
investment in new technologies and people to remain globally
competitive. Over the last few years Termax has seen our
American competitors decrease to just two from approximately
eight, while our foreign competitors have increased
dramatically, four to five times what they were previously.
This is where tax deduction credits come in as the only
tool we have to reduce our effective tax rate and give us an
incentive to take action at that time. All manufacturing
companies claim deductions and credits, from the R&D credits to
bonus depreciation. Our company expects to spend $1.5 million
in 2011 on R&D just to develop new technologies for the
automotive and construction industries. This is why removing
deductions credits such as the Section 199 deduction for all
businesses will increase the effective tax rate burden on all S
corporations and pass-throughs.
So some have asked why S corporations simply do not convert
to becoming your traditional C corporation. First, the costs
associated with the conversion are astronomical, especially for
a small business. Another reason is due to the family-owned
structure of the business. When an owner passes a company down
to the next generation there is a much greater tax liability in
a C corp. This is akin to the family farm being sold to pay
taxes.
If you ask them, most manufacturers want stability
simplification of globally competitive effective rates. A prime
example is the alternate minimum tax, the forerunner of the
current millionaire's tax that is being discussed. As a
business owner, the most important questions are what is my
total federal, state, and tax liability? What is left over for
me to invest and grow my business and create jobs?
Thanks for the opportunity. Sorry it took a little long.
[The statement of Mr. Smith follows on page 41.]
Chairman Walsh. No, thank you very much.
Our last witness is Stephen Capp. Mr. Capp is president and
CEO of Laserage Technology Corporation of Waukegan, Illinois,
which I am also honored to represent. Laserage specializes in
custom laser services for diverse material applications. Mr.
Capp is testifying on behalf of the National Federation of
Independent Business. Welcome, sir. You, as well, have five
minutes to present your testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN CAPP

Mr. Capp. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Walsh, Ranking
Member Schrader, and members of the Subcommittee.
My name is Steve Capp. I am the president and CEO of
Laserage Technology Corporation. I am pleased to be here as a
small business owner and member of the National Federation of
Business (NFIB), the nation's leading small business advocacy
organization, to discuss the impact of federal income taxation
on Laserage.
My father and I started Laserage in 1979. Now we are based
in Waukegan, Illinois. When we started Laserage, we were a tiny
contract manufacturer with one laser. Over 32 years we have
added 135 employees and 65 lasers. We specialize in laser
processing materials for the medical device industry, but we
also work with the electronics, LED, aerospace, and other
industries. Currently, we export about 50 percent of the
product that we manufacture.
Like many small business owners, taxes are a major concern
for us. In fact, 4 of the top 10 issues in the latest NFIB
Problems and Priorities Surveys are tax issues, particularly,
tax rates and complexity. Small business owners are encouraged
that Congress is considering tax reform, but reform must
recognize the issues impacting small businesses and pass-
throughs.
First, I want to discuss why a business like mine chose a
pass-through entity. An owner chooses a pass-through business
structure for a variety of reasons, generally because of
liability protection or tax efficiency. Laserage is a pass-
through business, an S corporation. Not unlike a lot of closely
owned businesses, we were originally organized as a C corp.
Ending the double taxation of our profits and gains as a C corp
was our primary reason for converting into an S corp. Simply
put, double taxation of our shareholders' profits and gains
made their investment in our company less attractive.
Frequently, business sales of closely held businesses are
structured as asset sales, unlike sales of public companies
which are usually stock sales. As a C corp, an asset sale would
first be taxed at the corporate level and then a second time
when the after-tax proceeds are distributed to the
shareholders. As an S corp and an asset sale, the sale only
faces one layer of taxation at the shareholder level.
Obviously, the single layer of tax makes the investment in our
company more attractive. While the conversion adds complexity,
this was a good decision for our company, and we urge that the
S corporation pass-through structure continue to be supported
by Congress.
Second, as a pass-through business, individual tax rates
are especially important. As an S corporation, we pay tax on
our business income at the individual level. Keeping these
rates low is important to keeping my company competitive. Over
the last few years, my company's operating costs have increased
steadily. My company has been getting strong pressure from some
of our largest customers to begin production in a low cost
country. To this point we have successfully resisted taking
that action by remaining price competitive without resulting to
leaving the United States, primarily by adopting what is known
as lean manufacturing techniques and improving the efficiency
of our production methods.
But there are limits to what productivity enhancements can
accomplish. And we anticipate that at some point we will have
to establish some offshore production capacity or lose very
significant customers. If federal tax rates increase, that will
simply add to the pressure on us to move some of our
manufacturing offshore. For this reason, mindful that all of
the current individual income tax rates are set to expire at
the end of this year, I encourage Congress to keep tax rates
low for all small business owners.
Third, tax reform must recognize the issue impacting pass-
throughs and small businesses. Much of the debate surrounding
tax reform is focused on eliminating deductions and closing
loopholes to reduce taxes. If that is the path for tax reform,
Congress should keep some basic principles in mind pertaining
to first, the tax rate; second, encouraging capital investment;
and third, reducing complexity and compliance costs.
First, rates must be kept similar to pass-throughs and C
corps. The current tax rates for pass-throughs are similar to C
corps. If the rates were to go down for C corps but remain
unchanged or go up for my S corp, it would put Laserage at a
distinct disadvantage.
Second, tax policies do affect capital investments. Let me
explain. As a manufacturer, I operate a capital-intensive
business. Last year we purchased $1.1 million in capital
equipment, and this year we will purchase another $850,000 of
equipment. We were able to use accelerated depreciation for
these costs, and it absolutely influenced our capital
investment program. We simply could not have afforded this
level of capital investments without these benefits. In
addition, as a manufacturer we rely on Section 199 domestic
production deductions. Losing these deductions and credits
without corresponding relief will also place our company at a
disadvantage.
Finally, one simple step that Congress can take is to
simplify the tax code and make permanent expiring provisions.
Last year, Laserage's income tax return, technically an
information return, was 416 pages long. Apart from costing an
enormous amount of internal accounting personnel time and
efforts, Laserage was forced to pay an outside auditing firm
$9,100 in professional fees to prepare the tax filing. My own
return, which includes my share of Laserage's S corporation
taxable income, was 28 pages and cost me $2,500 to prepare. We
should not have to spend so much time and incur so much expense
for tax compliance. It is not good for us, it is not good for
the economy, and it is not good for Uncle Sam.
In conclusion, tax reform can be an effective tool for
economic growth but must include small business and pass-
throughs. The majority of private sector employees, 54 percent,
work for pass-through businesses. Small businesses in
particular account for a vast majority of new jobs. The
Congress has the opportunity to reform our complicated tax code
but you must make sure to do it right. Tax reform must add the
concerns of both pass-throughs and corporate businesses.
Thank you for this opportunity to appear before this
Committee on these important issues, and I look forward to any
questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Capp follows on page 47.]
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Capp, and thanks
to all of the witnesses for our testimony.
Let me begin our questioning with sort of a broad issue
that each of you touched upon, and I would like it if you could
give me sort of your broad overview.
Generally speaking, would a system with lower marginal
rates and a much broader tax base be preferable to pass-through
entities than what we have now with a code with its numerous
rates and deductions? Generally speaking, would that sort of
move be preferable?
Let us start with Mr. Carroll and work our way down.
Mr. Carroll. Generally, that approach, a lower rate, a
broader base follows in the tradition of the 1986 Tax Reform
Act. Economists will tell you that the welfare loss or
efficiency cost of the tax system is related to the square of
the tax rate as opposed to just the tax rate, so high marginal
rates are particularly harmful from an economic perspective. So
that is, I think, an important consideration. Lower tax rates
are usually beneficial from an economic perspective.
In the area of flow-throughs, high tax rates, high
individual tax rates have been found to adversely affect
investment decisions, hiring decisions, and the growth of small
businesses. So that is clearly a consideration. In evaluating a
broad tax reform, I think one needs to really look at the
effects of the broad reform on job creation and economic growth
and where low tax rates will, I think, be generally conducive
to that goal.
Chairman Walsh. Mr. Marowske, in general, a move toward
lower marginal rates, a broader base, and in general getting
rid of a lot of these deductions, is that preferable?
Mr. Marowske. Oh, I would say most definitely. You know, by
basically sharing the wealth and spreading it over and reducing
the rates you are going to put more capital back into the
market. You are going to have more investment. You are going to
have much more activity. And you will see a definite growth. I
do not know all the numbers like Ernst & Young off the top of
my head but anything you can do to reduce the rate and then
spread the tax base around is going to be nothing but positive
on our whole economy.
Chairman Walsh. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. I think it depends. A company that is highly
capital intensive, such as our two companies are going to have,
if you take away the deductions that relate specifically to
capital investment--machinery, that sort of thing--those are
going to have a very negative effect, a bigger effect on a
manufacturing company than they would on a restaurant or a
service industry. So I think it needs careful consideration on
both sides.
Chairman Walsh. Mr. Capp.
Mr. Capp. I agree with Mr. Smith. You have to be careful
what you do. Obviously, I think overall it is a good thing. But
those tax deductions and credits, there is a purpose for giving
incentives to, especially in capital intensive businesses like
ours to invest and reinvest in our company and create more
jobs. So you know, within reason, I think, as long as they are
carefully considered, I think the answer to that is yes.
Chairman Walsh. Last quick question from me and how about a
brief answer from each of you? Tax reform is being bantered
about up here as we all know and probably will continue to be.
If you were in front of the super committee right now and you
could weigh in, when it comes to this issue, tax reform and
specifically how it impacts pass-through entities, what is one
word of caution or one word of advocacy--what would you
advocate for if you had a moment or two in front of the super
committee? Let us start with Mr. Capp and then quickly work our
way down.
Mr. Capp. I would say lower taxes and also certainty. There
are a lot of things that we are not doing because we are not
sure what the tax code is going to be. I mean, lower taxes and
put some certainty in it so we know what we have to do and
where we have to go.
Chairman Walsh. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Well, as I stated in my testimony, I agree with
Mr. Capp here. The problem we have is uncertainty. We would
like for years and years of consistency. We can compete with
anybody in the world if we know where things are going to be.
But because of the state of flux that our tax code has been in
for years it creates very big disincentives for companies like
ours.
Mr. Marowske. As I said in my testimony also is the same
thing, is the uncertainty, not being able to plan, not knowing
what is going to happen. You are doing one thing one year, one
thing the next year. Frankly, I am a national sales tax--my
personal opinion is, you know, it is fair and it is even and it
allows the capital to stay within the companies.
Chairman Walsh. Mr. Carroll, conclude. What is one specific
tax reform you might advocate for when it comes to these pass-
through entities?
Mr. Carroll. I think I would have some difficulty
advocating a specific reform. I would think that one would want
to take a very broad view. In addition to the certainty, also a
stable tax system that will not change--that is going to
provide some certainty over a period of time. One of the things
that did happen in the '86 Act is the tax system changed fairly
quickly several years after the '86 Act. It in a sense
unraveled with some important risk to the tax base--even though
the '86 Tax Reform Act lowered rates and broadened the base,
the tax base was narrowed and tax rates went back up.
The other thing I would think that they should carefully
consider is trying to avoid unintended consequences. There are
a lot of interrelationships in the tax system as well as the
economy and trying to avoid unintended consequences, and I
think that would be a very useful objective.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. Let me now turn to my California
colleagues, Congresswoman Chu.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Carroll, I am interested in your opinion as an
economist. If we do tax reform we want to make sure that we do
it right so that it is effective, helps the U.S. economy, and
will create jobs. And there was new data from the U.S.
Department of Treasury that shows that the ownership of these
larger pass-throughs, in particular subchapter S corporations,
is highly concentrated amongst wealthy taxpayers. If we are
trying to help small businesses, is a high-end rate tax cut the
best strategy? And how can we ensure that we are hitting the
right set of small business owners that really need the tax
relief?
Mr. Carroll. I think one needs to take a very broad review
on tax reform and really consider the interrelationships. One
of the problems I think that exist in our current tax code is
the double tax on corporate profits and the idea that the
corporate tax is basically a second layer of tax on equity
finance investment that distorts a number of very important
economic decisions. And it raises the cost of capital on
investment generally. It leads to the misallocation of capital
by creating a wedge between investment and the corporate and
the non-corporate sector. It accentuates or increases--it leads
to a tax bias for debt finance resulting in greater leverage of
firms, which is problematic in periods, particularly
problematic in periods of economic distress, economic
weaknesses. Companies that are more highly leveraged may have
more difficulty.
So I think the double tax is a very, very significant
issue. And so if one is looking for--I think it is very
important to, when one is thinking about the pass-through
sector and flow-throughs, that is a vehicle, a way in which
businesses are able to avoid the adverse effects of the double
tax and it is very, very helpful to the economy. So rather than
trying to push more firms into the double tax I think one needs
to kind of look at it the other way and think about how relief
from the double tax can be expanded.
Most other developed nations have explicitly provided
relief from the double tax by either providing relief at the
shareholder level or at the company level. In the U.S., it is
only recently, since the beginning of the last decade in 2003
through the lower rates and dividends and gains that we
provided some relief. But even with that relief we are still at
the high end of the overall tax on corporate dividends and
capital gains combined with the corporate level tax.
Ms. Chu. But I guess my question really is would it be
beneficial equally to all strata of business owners?
Mr. Carroll. Again, I think one needs to--one needs to
really think about what is going to be most conducive to job
creation and economic growth. And I think the more equal
treatment between the two sectors would probably be very
helpful.
Ms. Chu. The report also mentions that some pass-throughs
are passive holding companies in which there are no
entrepreneurial activity. These companies do not hire any
employees. And many are sole proprietors and independent
contractors. But on the other hand there are pass-throughs like
the small businesses that have testified here today that are,
indeed, doing entrepreneurial work and hiring people. So how
could we refine the tax strategy so that we really emphasize
the job creators?
Mr. Carroll. Yeah, I guess I would go back again to the
double tax. I really see the double tax as a significant
problem, the high corporate tax rate and trying to address that
issue. Rather than trying to expand the scope of the double tax
by perhaps subjecting--a lot of the debate is really focused--
this part of the debate is focused on where do you draw the
line between the corporate sector and the non-corporate sector?
I think because of the harmful effects of the double tax, the
way in which it raises the cost of capital, increases the bias
for debt finance, drives a wedge between the two sectors,
redrawing the line so more economic activity is subject to the
double tax I think is problematic.
Ms. Chu. Let me ask about the Joint Committee on Taxation
analysis, which showed that the proposal to reduce the
corporate tax rate to 25 percent could require some pretty
hefty repeals of the tax expenditures that encourage job
creation. How would the repeal of some of these job creation
tax expenditures impact small businesses?
Mr. Carroll. Well, I think weighing the benefits of
corporate rate reduction base broadening, one has to be very
careful. I agree with the sentiments of Mr. Smith and Mr. Capp
in terms of talking about some of the capital intensive
provisions. I think one has to go through each tax expenditure,
each special tax provision and really think about and weigh the
positive benefits that those provisions provide to the economy,
provisions like accelerator deprecation, like the R&D credit,
many other provisions. All of these provisions were put into
the code by the Congress with good intentions with the notion
that they were providing some economic benefit to the tax code.
And there are significant economic benefits from a lower
corporate tax rate, but I think one has to weigh that very
carefully.
Ms. Chu. In fact, Mr. Marowske, you talked about the fact
that you have, of course, a lot of equipment in your air
conditioning business. And how important are certain tax cuts
to your business? Which tax credits would be most critical to
your business and other small businesses like yours?
Mr. Marowske. We are not nearly as capital intensive as Mr.
Capp or Mr. Smith's company. We do not have large investments
in machinery. Ours is mostly vehicles. For us, you know, it
used to be the investment tax credit, which was a great thing
for purchasing vehicles and machinery. If I remember there was
a 10 percent credit on the purchase of equipment. That was back
in the 70s and 80s.
In our industry, incentives on training and human resources
issues would be a tremendous advantage because we are very
labor intensive in the service industry. We have basically no
minimal capital investment.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. Let me now turn to a fellow
Illinois, Congressman Bobby Schilling.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Capp, I also started out my small company with a C
corporation, and for the exact same reasons changed over to an
S corp. But, you know, coming from Illinois, we just took the
largest tax increase--individual tax increase, state taxes in
the history of the state. Corporate tax rates also went up and,
you know, I find it very interesting that some folks around
believe that higher taxes are going to actually help
unemployment and then also help the revenue funds of states or
the country per se. But in Illinois, for example, since the
largest tax increase in the history of the state happened, we
have already lost over 89,000 jobs in Illinois.
So, you know, the thing that is nice about being small
business folks is that we get it. And with us starting up our
business, one of the fears that I have is that a lot of the
small businesses, including myself, had I not been able to put
that money back in to my business and invest into it, I do not
know if I would have made it.
And my fear is that as we continue to want to tax the job
creators, you know, it is going to be a problem for the guy who
is sitting in his garage trying to figure out how to get this
thing off the ground. You know, and what are we doing to our
Steve Jobs guys? I mean, look at Apple Computer. I mean, it is
just amazing the process. And one of the things that is very
scary to me--I am fresh in. I came straight from the restaurant
business to Washington, D.C. And a lot of times in Washington
we tend not to look at the unintended consequences. In business
we are forced to look at--if I am going to, you know, make an
investment into my business I look at 10 years as to how this
is going to either adversely--how it is going to affect our
business.
So I think that that is something that is very, very
important. And I think when we do any type of tax reforms we do
have to be careful because we see a difference here between the
two businesses. You know, he is buying vehicles and you are
buying a lot of equipment for inside, so I think that it is one
of those where you come in with the scalpel. You be very
careful on how you do it because the write-off of the equipment
is pretty imperative. But at the same time I think the key
thing that I am hearing here is basically, you know, give us a
little leeway here. And I think it is great and I give all of
you credit for coming here today because I think that if we
were to listen to the small businesses, or as I call them the
final 3 feet, the people that are actually putting people to
work. Sorry for the rant.
But what I wanted to do is just, Mr. Capp, when you talked
about the '01 tax breaks, can you tell me a little bit more
specifically how that affected your business?
Mr. Capp. Specifically, the '01 tax breaks?
Mr. Schilling. Yeah. Like what was different from prior to
'01? How it helped you?
Mr. Capp. I think, you know, it allowed us to take a look
at equipment and other things and really, you know, gave us
more incentive to push, you know, equipment or money back into
the business to grow the business and buy the equipment that we
needed to create the jobs was the primary thing.
Mr. Schilling. Okay. You know, I guess this is kind of a
pretty simple question. I think I already know the answer and I
am just going to kind of roll right down the line here. Do you
believe that more regulation from the federal government and
higher taxes is going to help you create more jobs?
Mr. Capp. The answer to that is absolutely not. We have so
many people in our company now. At least part of their job is
dealing with regulation and it seems to be getting more and
more and more. And when I got people that I am paying to deal
with regulation, they are not doing productive things, making
the business grow or focusing on customers, things like that.
So the answer to that, absolutely.
Mr. Smith. Well, obviously. I mean, it is a no-brainer
answer. We also have--we ended up hiring an OSHA-compliance
staff person just to make sure that we are in compliance with
OSHA. Now, that is outside of the scope of this process but
obviously it hurts. If you think about it, tax accountants are
really just--the whole tax code is a full employment act for
accountants.
Mr. Schilling. That individual that you hired, what is the
cost to your company on that, sir?
Mr. Smith. About $60,000 a year.
Mr. Schilling. Sixty thousand, but we created a job. Is
that correct?
Mr. Smith. That is right.
Mr. Marowske. Your question kind of is, hi, I am from the
government. I am here to help you?
Mr. Schilling. Yeah.
Mr. Marowske. I would definitely--I would not be in favor
nor anybody in our industry.
Mr. Carroll. The only thing I think I would comment on is
one could think of a lot of the regulations as in effect are
imposing in some form additional taxes, additional expenses,
additional time spent by entrepreneurs on complying with those
regulations. So that is kind of a way of thinking about
holistically the regulatory and tax environment as there are
two sides of a similar coin.
Mr. Schilling. Very good. Thank you for your time,
Chairman.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Schilling. Let me now turn
to Congressman Hanna from New York.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Marowske, do you--you mentioned tax credits to
homeowners to help them incentivize them. Do you think to
improve the insulation of their homes or upgrade their heating
systems or air conditioning, do you think that drives the
decision to its ultimate conclusion?
Mr. Marowske. Most definitely. Most definitely. You will
see in your state you have some great utility incentives for
people to--we call it home performance. Insulate windows, duct
system, ceiling, many different things. And you have got some
huge incentives via your utilities in New York State. But New
York State probably is doing the best of any of your 50 states
in that. My state of Michigan, it is a mishmash and a mess.
Mr. Hanna. Do any of you gentlemen, Mr. Capp, Mr. Smith,
Mr. Marowske know--Mr. Carroll may know in a broader way--what
is your effective rate? I mean, we all know the actual rate
that you pay or that is listed in the tax code but does anybody
have an idea what your effective rate is after all the
depreciation, tax credits, accelerated depreciation, et cetera?
Mr. Capp. I do not think you can hold me to this but the
last time I calculated it, it was about 27, 28 percent.
Mr. Smith. For us, actually, the PMA, our association has
created quite a comprehensive tax template for those things. I
do not know if you have had a chance to review it or if you
have seen this. Our particular company, including local and
state taxes, is 35 percent right now. So that is what affects
me and our company.
Mr. Hanna. But that is not your--that is not your actual
rate that you pay after all the----
Mr. Smith. No, but again, that is after our base case,
where we are right now, is it turns out to be 35 percent of the
total dollars that are going into that. The actual federal
taxes are approximately 27.7 percent.
Mr. Hanna. Okay. So, Marowske, do you have any idea?
Mr. Marowske. Honestly, I do not know. I would be taking a
stab in the dark.
Mr. Hanna. Mr. Carroll, what do you think it is for all the
people you handle?
Mr. Carroll. I do not prepare tax returns. I am an
economist and I tend to work on tax policy issues so I have the
virtue, I suppose, of not working on actual tax returns. I
guess I would observe there are really different ways of
thinking about tax rates. One could think of an average tax
rate. One could think of an effective tax rate. One could think
of a marginal effective tax rate that would take into account
different features of the tax code in different ways. A
favorite concept that is often used by economists to think
about investment decisions, allocation of investment, the
amount of investment in the economy is the marginal effective
tax rate that would take into account not only the top line
individual or corporate tax rate but also take into account the
value of accelerated depreciation and investor level taxes on
capital gains to indicate the variance of tax rates across
different types of economic activities.
Mr. Hanna. Do you think that advantage is given to capital
investment for equipment, for example, with Mr. Smith? Do you
think that they are pitted against someone who is less capital
intensive than, say, Mr. Marowske's business which is mostly
labor?
Mr. Carroll. Yeah, I think there can be a fair amount of
unevenness of tax rates across different economic activities,
different industries, different sectors, companies that invest
in particular assets versus others. There is a fair amount of
unevenness and, yeah, that is certainly a consideration
Mr. Hanna. So does that suggest to you that Mr. Marowske
may be paying a disproportionate share based on the total
volume of dollars he does compared with--
Mr. Carroll. Yeah. I think one has to come back to, again,
the value of the specific tax preferences. If one, for example,
were to think that a provision like the R&D credit provided
some significant spillover effects to the broader economy or
one thought that incentives for some of the renewables--
alternative fuels, solar, geothermal and so on--were providing
spillover effects to the overall economy, then one might be
able to justify the unevenness.
You know, I think it was a couple of years ago that
Congress had considered requiring the Joint Committee on
Taxation to do a cost benefit analysis of each of the tax
expenditures in the Internal Revenue Code with the notion of
evaluating on a cost benefit basis whether those provisions
were providing sufficient value to the economy to justify their
presence in the code.
Mr. Hanna. But then--my time is up. Thank you, Chairman.
You said that, Mr. Capp, you were encouraged to invest in
capital equipment because of the accelerated depreciation. Do
you think, I mean, this is--do you think that you would not
have done it otherwise? I mean, is that what I can infer from
that?
Mr. Capp. I think it is more a question of timing, when we
would have done it. With the uncertainty of what the next
year's tax code was going to be, we accelerated purchasing
equipment that we probably would have pushed out and bought in
a more timely manner for us.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Hanna. Let me now turn to
Congressman Chabot from Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for being
a little bit late. And if my questions have already been asked,
I also apologize for that. I have got three different hearings
going on at the same time and I am trying to bounce around and
make all of them.
Chairman Walsh. That is no excuse.
Mr. Chabot. I know. Sorry, Joe.
But in any event, mine are going to be kind of broad. When
I first came up here back in the revolution, back in '94, Newt
Gingrich's Contract with America, all that, there was some real
serious talk about really reforming. We are talking about that
now and we have got this super committee and are they going too
long? You know, what is going to happen? But there were two
competing philosophies. You basically had the Dick Armey
philosophy, which was the flat tax and you can basically do
your taxes on a postcard and send it in, although nowadays, you
know, we do not do anything through the mail so we would
probably e-mail it in or something on something even smaller.
But that was sort of one philosophy.
And then you had Billy Tauzin and Bill Archer, who was the
chairman of the Ways and Means Committee at the time, who
wanted to go for a consumption tax or a sales tax and get rid
of the IRS altogether and get rid of income taxes altogether.
And then we now have, you know, maybe a hybrid plan that
one of the Republican presidential candidates has put forward,
the infamous or wonderful or whatever you think about it, the
9-9-9 Plan. And there are various versions. But I would just
like to see, and perhaps Mr. Carroll, we could make this, you
know, you are with a very large and prestigious accounting firm
and if we went to one of those other things it would probably
make it less likely that folks like those folks over there and
a lot of other folks might need accountants and attorneys and
things to figure all this stuff out. Maybe not. But at least in
theory.
So I would just like to throw it open for anybody who wants
to take this on. And I have got about three minutes, so if you
each want to take, you know, a little less than a minute and
just go down the line. Maybe we will start with Mr. Capp down
there.
Mr. Capp. I am not entirely clear what you are looking for
here.
Mr. Chabot. Just basically what are the--would you prefer
to have a flat tax? Would you prefer to have a national
consumption or sales tax? Would you prefer a hybrid where we
have both? Both are low right now but could potentially be
jacked up down the road somewhere. Or do you think we ought to
keep the stupid mess we have right now?
Mr. Capp. I guess I tend to lean more towards a flatter
tax. I know that there are a lot of other ones out there like
sales tax and things like that. I think they have to be weighed
very carefully when it comes to us as small business people,
seeing to it that it does not disrupt the job creation at the
small business level. So it could be really any one of those
depending on exactly how it is approached and how it is
actually executed.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. You know, honestly, I do not care. What I care
about is just consistency. And I do not think it is going to
matter on a long run basis for a business like ours in any way.
Of any approach that is taken I would like a 10-year or a 20-
year or a more--change after--for a period of time. That is
really all I care about.
Mr. Chabot. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Marowske.
Mr. Marowske. You know, any one of them, as Mr. Capp
mentioned, needs consideration, and whatever you do it needs to
be, again, consistent and it needs to be fair. My gut reaction,
as I mentioned a little earlier, is I like the national sales
tax or consumption tax. If you have more money, earn more
money, you are going to spend more money. And you are going to
pay a higher level of tax but there are other, you know,
drawbacks on that. People that are at minimum wage levels, you
know, you have got to come up with something for that. So it
needs some thought and some thinking. But it needs to be
consistent, fair, and long term.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Mr. Carroll, if you want to----
Mr. Carroll. Yeah. A couple of thoughts on the choices--the
flat tax, the sales tax, a potential hybrid--you know, one
thing I would say is I would agree with the sentiments that a
tax system that is predictable, provides some certainty, and
that is stable would be particularly helpful. We currently have
a tax code where 25 percent of the income tax will sunset at
the end of 2012, so that creates a lot of uncertainty for
people such as those who are sitting at the table with me. That
makes it difficult, I think, to make business decisions and
other decisions.
Another comment I would make is the flat tax and the sales
tax are both--are really very related. They are at least first
cousins, if not second cousins. One of the characteristics both
of those taxes share is fundamentally they do not tax the
return to savings and investment. Both the sales tax and the
flat tax are types of consumption taxes. And then I would go on
to say that our current tax system is really a hybrid of some
of these. We have features in our current tax code that make
our tax code a bit more like a consumption tax through
accelerated depreciation, through other expensing provisions,
through 401(k)s, IRAs, defined benefit plans on the household
side. Those provisions all reduce the tax on the return to
savings and investment and the idea behind a consumption tax,
one of the reasons a lot of economists like consumption taxes,
is that by not taxing or taxing less the return to savings and
investment, they are conducive to economic growth. But you do
need to balance those systems from a distributional
perspective. When you do not tax the return to savings and
investment, where savings and investment is received primarily
or disproportionately by higher income households, one needs to
think about the distributional consequences of going in that
direction. So those are a few observations I think are worth
bringing up.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I have been
informed I have yet a fourth meeting out in the hallway so I
will have to take off. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. Thank you. Let me turn to
Congressman Mulvaney. He is all good. Okay.
Let me close and just revisit one quick question. I am
going to ask you each for a yes or no answer. How does that
sound? Understand that under the President's Jobs Plan, taxes
on capital gains are going to increase. And if we let the '01
and '03 tax rates expire, that will increase your taxes. Will
tax increases like those help you purchase more equipment,
create jobs, and will it grow the economy? Yes or no.
Mr. Capp. No.
Mr. Smith. No.
Chairman Walsh. That was difficult.
Mr. Marowske. No.
Chairman Walsh. Mr. Carroll.
Mr. Carroll. I guess I would have to say no.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. And thank you all for
participating today. The Subcommittee will continue to closely
follow these issues related to tax reform.
Following the hearing we will be sending a letter to the
Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction, which will have a
critical role in determining this tax policy and reducing the
deficit. And we will relay the concerns that have been
expressed by the witnesses today.
I also ask unanimous consent that the comments of several
small business owners regarding the importance of individual
tax reform, which were submitted through the Committee's
website ``Open Mike,'' be admitted to the record. Without
objection, so ordered.
Finally, I ask unanimous consent that members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
Where is my gavel? Let me now bang this. And without
objection, the hearing is now adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:10 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


