- PLANNING FOR THE DEATH TAX: CAN SMALL BUSINESS SURVIVE?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PLANNING FOR THE DEATH TAX: CAN SMALL BUSINESS SURVIVE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, TAX AND CAPITAL ACCESS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 31, 2012

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-069
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-475                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, General Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Joe Walsh..................................................     1
Hon. Kurt Schrader..............................................     2

WITNESSES

Neil D. Katz, Managing Partner, Katz, Bernstein & Katz, LLP,
Syosset, NY....................................................     4
Karen Madonia, Chief Financial Officer, Illco, Inc., Aurora, IL..     6
Michael G. Flesher, Owner, Taylor Rental Center, Vestal, NY......     8
Thala Taperman Rolnick, Owner, Thala T. Rolnick, CPA, PLLC,
Phoenix, AZ....................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Neil D. Katz, Managing Partner, Katz, Bernstein & Katz, LLP,
Syosset, NY................................................    25
Karen Madonia, Chief Financial Officer, Illco, Inc., Aurora,
IL.........................................................    31
Michael G. Flesher, Owner, Taylor Rental Center, Vestal, NY..    36
Thala Taperman Rolnick, Owner, Thala T. Rolnick, CPA, PLLC,
Phoenix, AZ................................................    92
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Materials for the Record:
Associated Builders and Contractors, Inc. Letter for the
Record.....................................................   101
Statement of the American Farm Bureau Federation.............   102
Written Statement of Scott Ramminger, President of the
American Wholesale Marketers Association...................   104
Prepared Statement of American Trucking Associations.........   107
National Newspaper Associations Letter for the Record........   110
Testimony of Food Marketing Institute Submitted for the
Record.....................................................   113
International Sign Association Letter for the Record.........   115
Marine Retailers Association of the Americas Statement for
the Record.................................................   116
National Federation of Independent Business Statement for the
Record.....................................................   118
Statement of the National Funeral Directors Association......   121
The Mason Contractors Association of America Statement for
the Record.................................................   125
National Grocers Association Statement for the Record........   129
National Roofing Contractors Association Letter for the
Record.....................................................   131
National Telecommunications Cooperative Association Statement
for the Record.............................................   133
Statement of Jack Fitzgerald, Founder, Americans Standing for
Simplification of the Estate Tax...........................   136
National Automobile Dealers Association Testimony for the
Record.....................................................   140
Financial Executives International Statement for the Record..   141

PLANNING FOR THE DEATH TAX: CAN SMALL BUSINESS SURVIVE?

THURSDAY, MAY 31, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Economic Growth,
Tax and Capital Access,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Joe Walsh (chairman
of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Walsh, Chabot, King, Hanna,
Schilling, Bartlett, Schrader, Clarke.
Chairman Walsh. Good morning and welcome. The hearing will
come to order. I apologize to everyone at the outset. I have
had a nasty head cold for a couple days. So if I sound like I
am in a tunnel, I apologize.
I want to thank our distinguished panel of witnesses who
have taken the time to be here today. Special thanks to Karen
Madonia, who hails from the Eighth Congressional District of
Illinois. We look forward to all of your testimony. I will
begin with some brief comments.
Benjamin Franklin is believed to have written, ``In this
world, nothing can be certain but death and taxes.'' Now, it
seems, nothing is certain but uncertainty. For many years,
death and taxes have gone together in the United States, but
the structure and rates of those taxes have varied greatly. For
family-owned small businesses and farms, estate taxes are a
significant concern.
Is it not enough for them to worry about new and higher
taxes, compliance with the health care law, additional
regulations, accessing capital, and simply staying afloat while
they are alive? But these small business owners must also try
to blunt the impact of estate taxes following their demise.
If Congress fails to act by the end of this year, the
current federal estate tax law will revert to significantly
higher pre-2001 levels. And that is not including any estate
taxes imposed by states.
Many small companies have non-liquid assets--capital that
is tied up in real property, machinery and equipment--so their
heirs do not have cash to pay the estate taxes. Often,
businesses must be sold--even at ``fire sale'' prices--so this
estate tax can be paid. In fact, a Joint Economic Committee
study found that, prior to 2001, the estate tax reduced capital
formation by about $847 billion. Capital that must be paid in
estate tax is capital that is not available to be invested back
into the business, to create jobs, or to grow the economy.
Today, we will hear about the effects of the estate tax on
small business owners. We very much look forward to this
testimony.
I now yield to our ranking member for his opening remarks.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For many starting a successful business or a farm,
actually, seeing it grow is the American dream. After all, the
goal of most of these entrepreneurs is to build an estate that
they can pass on to the next generation, carry on the family
dream. But for many who have spent their whole lives building
an enterprise, continuing that legacy tends to be very
problematic given the estate tax.
For many family businesses, the estate tax is a major
hurdle to overcome--very technical, very complex. Playing
around such intricacies is expensive, time consuming, things
that most small business folks do not have time or the money
for at the end of the day. Additionally, it just adds anxiety.
You have to constantly update your financial plan because of
what we do or do not do here in the United States Congress.
And while the Estate Tax Reform was enacted in 2001, and
allowed entrepreneurs to focus on growing their ventures, the
reforms were only temporary. In 2010, we were able to give some
estate tax relief but again, very temporary, just for two
years. With the existing law expiring, as the chair pointed out
at the end of the year, reduced exemption limits will take
effect subjecting many, many more small businesses and farmers
to the estate tax. So providing relief for thousands of small
firms and farms is critical to continuing the recovery.
However, we must be cautious how we do that because we do have
a debt deficit issue that we are also concerned about.
As our economy continues its recovery, we must do
everything possible to help small business job creators. We
cannot do so at the expense of future generations. So today's
hearing will assess the implications of the estate tax on small
firms and farms and examine what the future of this law holds
for them. Some are calling for a complete repeal of the estate
tax; others suggest that Congress freeze the estate tax
provisions in their current form. Nevertheless, one thing is
clear; we need a permanent solution. So I look forward to
hearing from each and every one of you what you think that
might be.
Small businesses face enough hurdles to succeed without the
estate tax. Protecting the family business so it can flourish
is critical to creating American jobs and the future of this
country. And by crafting an estate tax that works for small
firms and farms, we can empower entrepreneurs to do what they
do best, which is create jobs. So I look forward to hearing
from each and every one. And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Congressman Schrader.
If it is okay with you, Congressman King has to dash off to
a meeting in a second and requested the ability to make an
opening state.
Mr. Schrader. Sure.
Chairman Walsh. Congressman King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Chairman, I very
much appreciate you holding this hearing today. I think it is
important that we have this discussion and I appreciate the
witnesses a great deal.
I would like to start this out with a little piece of a
narrative. And that was just a few years ago I received a phone
call in an evening from an individual whom I knew to be one of
several siblings in a well-to-do family not that far from where
I live. And he started out with this: ``Congressman, I drew the
short straw and I am the one that has to call you. Our mother
is in the hospital and we are making a decision on whether to
put her on life support and I would like to know whether
Congress is going to do something to fix the death tax.''
Ladies and gentlemen, it is cruel and diabolical to put
families through this and make death also a taxing decision.
And it is cruel and diabolical to tap into the accumulation of
the American dream. If we can tax it when they earn the income,
we can find ways in our states especially to tax it when they
spend it, we do not need to tax it if they accumulate it.
And I, as a founder of a construction business back in
1975, started out with a negative net worth and built a little
bit of capital. Now, I have transitioned that into, well, one
of my sons at a minimum, who has demonstrated to me that it is
not just intergenerational capital that we develop, but we also
accumulate intergenerational knowledge. You build a knowledge
base within the family. They learned things at age 10 that I
did not learn until I was 40, and that foundation of this--this
is how you tie together the American dream. The American Dream
is tied together. People come here to the United States to
access the American dream. They are raised to access the
American dream. The pillars of American exceptionalism are tied
together to paint the foundation for the American dream. And
what does the federal government do but go in and grab it at
each transfer of the generations. And why do you build that?
Why do people go to work after say age 50 or 55 if they are
able to take care of themselves for the rest of their life? Why
do they continue to work and succeed if the government is going
to take the proceeds of that wealth?
And so this death tax, this estate tax that we are dealing
with here today, it is a tax directly on the American dream. It
takes the capital out, the formation out of the family. For
example, a family farm. Just think of a family farm that over
two or three or four generations has accumulated maybe 1,500
acres and set up a green light distribution system, storage
system, and feed lots and pastures and all those things that go
together to make a unit, and then that unit is broken up to pay
the taxes and the entire family business is destroyed because
what? Because of the political element in this country and in
this Congress called class envy. We should cheer the people
that are able to achieve and succeed in the American dream and
understand that we want to encourage more of that--more capital
formation, more wealth formation, more family businesses where
you have the accumulation of intergenerational capital and the
accumulation of intergenerational knowledge.
That is my message today, and I hope I can hear the
witnesses' testimony. And I am hopeful that we will be able to
move forward and one day see the end to this tax on the
American dream called the estate tax.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Congressman King.
If other Subcommittee members have an opening statement
prepared, I ask that they be submitted for the record.

STATEMENTS OF NEIL D. KATZ, MANAGING PARTNER, KATZ, BERNSTEIN &
KATZ, LLP; KAREN MADONIA, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, ILLCO, INC.,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF HEATING, AIR-CONDITIONING, AND
REFRIGERATION DISTRIBUTORS INTERNATIONAL; MICHAEL G. FLESHER,
OWNER, TAYLOR RENTAL CENTER; THALA TAPERMAN ROLNICK, OWNER,
THALA T. ROLNICK, CPA, PLLC.

Chairman Walsh. To our witnesses, you will each have five
minutes to deliver your testimony. Do your best to adhere to
that time limit.
We will begin with our first witness, Neil Katz, who is
managing partner of the law firm of Katz, Bernstein & Katz, in
Syosset, New York. He specializes in federal and state income
tax issues and matters affecting corporate partnership, estate,
and gift taxation. Not only are his clients small business
owners, but he is part owner of a small business himself. He
practices law with his father.
Welcome, Mr. Katz. You have five minutes to present your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF NEIL D. KATZ

Mr. Katz. Good morning, Chairman Walsh, Ranking Member
Schrader, and members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to address you today, and I thank you for taking
time to learn about the difficulties faced by closely-held
business owners as a result of the imposition of the estate tax
on the business that they have worked tirelessly to create and
grow.
Your hearing memorandum states in its conclusion that there
is not a great deal of credible evidence about the effect of
the estate tax on small businesses. While there may not be a
significant number of empirical studies on this issue, the
business owners who will testify today and the millions of
small business owners across our country who are struggling
with this issue are all the credible evidence that you should
need.
Closely held businesses are an integral part of local
economies throughout the country. Business owners spend their
entire lives investing time, effort, and capital into making a
business a success. Many of them would like nothing more than
to be able to pass the fruits of their labor and capital onto
the next generation. However, as business owners age, the
complexities of owning and running a closely held business
often become overshadowed by the burden of the estate tax
looming on the horizon.
The issues faced by business owners and their families
start long before death with the necessity of seeking out
professionals to assist with planning to attempt to reduce the
exposure that the heirs will face. This planning does not come
without a price. To design and implement an estate plan can
cost an individual anywhere from $5,000 to $50,000 or more. The
plan may call for the transfer of interest in the business to
future generations. Often, this decision is one that the owner
may not be prepared emotionally or economically to make at that
time. During the planning process, business owners are forced
to familiarize themselves with the concept of estate tax
valuation, and the families need to become prepared for the
expediency with which estate taxes must generally be paid.
Estate tax value is a concept that accountants, attorneys,
legislators, and the Treasury Department have struggled with
for decades. There is no clear definition in the statute, and
the only guidance we are given is the hypothetical willing
buyer, willing seller language of the regulations. Tax experts
often differ on the meaning of these rules, and to business
owners this is often impossible to comprehend.
The real value of a closely held business is often tied
directly to the owners. Ask most business owners what their
business is worth in the market and they will say, ``Without
me, the business is worth nothing.''
Where estate tax valuation differs from reality, it only
makes the burden on the business owner and their family even
greater. When I was younger I started collecting baseball cards
and today I still have much of that collection in my basement.
Whenever I am asked why I do not throw out the baseball card
collection I say that it is because it is worth a lot of money.
To that my wife inevitably responds, ``It is actually not worth
anything unless you sell it.''
To most small business owners, the same principle applies.
To them, the only value of the business is the check that they
get to take home each week. However, the estate tax valuation
concepts force an imposition of a tax as if the business were
sold.
Further complicating matters is the requirement that the
estate tax be paid within nine months of death. While
extensions are available, they are often short-term solutions
to a long-term problem. Even Internal Revenue Code Section
6166, the most significant estate tax extension, has its
problems. Most businesses do not have the cash reserves or cash
flow available to make the payments that are required in the
timeframe, and many businesses do not qualify for this relief.
Planners with us often recommend that a business owner
acquire life insurance to provide liquidity to pay the ultimate
estate tax that will be due. This creates an added expense to
the business. Depending upon the amount of insurance that is
required, the premiums can run tens of thousands of dollars
annually if the owner is even insurable.
Businesses today are operating on very tight margins.
Adding the burden of estate tax to the cash flow of the
business can make continuing the operation of the business
impracticable. The new owner of the business can often not
afford to pay taxes and still have money to pay business
expenses and make a profit. Most individuals do not see working
to solely pay off an estate tax obligation as the definition of
the American dream. There is no benefit to a beneficiary if the
assets that they inherit provide them with nothing other than
the opportunity to work with no expectation of income. There
needs to be some incentive for the owner.
As a final point, more than anything, what the small
business owner needs is some clarity and certainty in the law.
The constant changes in the estate tax law over the past 12
years, coupled with the uncertainty of the future rules is
unworkable. Congress needs to once and for all establish rules
that business owners can be assured will survive.
Since the enactment of ETR in 2001, we have been operating
in an impossible environment. The chaos of 2010, which again
stands before us on January 1, 2013, cannot be repeated.
Business owners and all taxpayers need and deserve certainty.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak today. I am
happy to answer any questions the members may have.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Katz.
Our next witness is Karen Madonia. Ms. Madonia is chief
financial officer of Illco, Inc., a family-owned distributor of
refrigeration, heating, air-conditioning PVF, plumbing, and
hydronic supplies in Aurora, Illinois. She currently serves as
co-chair of the Government Affairs Committee of the Heating,
Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration Distributors International.
She is testifying today on their behalf.
Welcome. You have five minutes to present your testimony.

STATEMENT OF KAREN MADONIA

Ms. Madonia. Chairman Walsh, Ranking Member Schrader, and
members of the Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and
Capital Access. My name is Karen Madonia and I am the chief
financial officer and next generation of Illco, Inc., a
Chicago-area distributor of heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, and refrigeration equipment, parts and supplies.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to talk about the
estate tax and its effect on the many small family businesses
which make up the United States' economy. This is an issue that
is very close to my heart as my family is in the midst of our
own generational transfer.
As background, Illco was a very small company when my
father purchased it back in 1973. At that time, my dad was only
32 years old, with a wife, three daughters, and a mortgage, but
he knew he wanted something more than just a job. He wanted to
use his passion to create something permanent, to be in control
of his own destiny. With help from my grandfather, my dad
decided to take a risk and go into business for himself.
In those early years, he worked every job at the company,
and my mom filled in wherever needed. My dad worked seven days
a week, 10 to 12 hours a day, but his passion for the industry,
his commitment to his employees, and his drive to grow his
company empowered him to push forward. And 40 years later, he
has a business that employs over 90 people in three states and
generates almost $40 million in revenue.
My sisters and I grew up understanding that if we wanted to
be successful, we had to work hard and stay focused on our
goals, and we carry that ethic with us every day as we work
alongside our dad.
While I take great pride in my dad's story, I realize that
it is not necessarily unique. There are thousands of families
that have similar histories--families who have decided to risk
everything to pursue the American dream. Like my dad, they want
to create something that lasts, that can be passed down to
their kids and grandkids. I am speaking today about my own
family's experience, but I know that all family business owners
have the same issue--how do I pass this business on to future
generations without losing some or all of it to the IRS in the
form of estate taxes?
Each spring I come to Washington with our trade
association, HARDI, to talk to our representatives and senators
about the issues that are important to my company and our
industry. Every year, estate tax is my top priority and I
appreciate this Committee's interest in this issue. Far too
often, small business owners feel that there is a lack of
understanding about this tax and its impact on job creators.
The reality is that we are not talking about passing on bank
accounts with million dollar balances. These are businesses
where most of the net worth is tied up in inventory, equipment,
and real estate. In the case of Illco, we carry an inventory
valued at $10,000,000, and accounts receivable of about
$5,000,000.
Our inventory has to be high. We provide vital heating,
air-conditioning, and refrigeration parts and supplies to
hospitals, schools, nursing homes, and grocery stores. When the
refrigeration system in a grocery store goes down, it needs to
be repaired within hours or the food is lost. When the air-
conditioning system in a hospital does not work, patients
cannot be properly cared for until air is circulating again.
The products that we sell must be on-hand in order to
facilitate quick repairs and replacements, which means that we
have to carry a heavy inventory.
We also own five buildings and operate a fleet of 26
trucks. After paying our taxes and making our annual profit
sharing contribution, the income that is left is put right back
into the company so we can continue to carry an extensive
inventory, extend payment terms to our customers, and maintain
our fleet and our buildings.
If something happened to my dad, we would literally have to
sell parts of the company in order to pay the estate tax. That
would likely mean shutting down branches, laying off workers,
or liquidating inventory. Even worse, it could mean having to
sell the entire company just to be able to pay a tax bill that
only occurred because an owner died.
Over the last few years, my dad has spent countless hours
and entirely too much money trying to navigate the estate
planning waters. Instead of focusing on growing his business,
he has had to strategize about how to pass his company onto his
kids without having to dismantle it. And if that is not enough
of a challenge, he has had to do it within an ever-changing tax
landscape. We have gone from an exemption of $2 million and a
tax rate of 45 percent in 2008, to an exemption of $3.5 million
and a tax rate of 45 percent in 2009, to a full estate tax
repeal in 2010, to an exemption of $5 million and a tax rate of
35 percent in 2011 and 2012. In 2013, the exemption is
scheduled to fall back to a million dollars with a tax rate of
55 percent. How can anyone formulate an estate plan if the
rules are changing every year?
In the business world, we need to think beyond the current
year if we want our companies to thrive. We are typically
looking 5 to 10 years out in our strategic plans, trying to
move all the pieces on the board to better our chances for
growth and prosperity. That is very difficult to do even in the
best circumstances, but it is nearly impossible when Washington
keeps changing the rules.
The estate tax places an immense burden on small business
owners by taxing them for creating and growing a business that
outlasts them. In my opinion, it is a fundamentally flawed tax
that discourages entrepreneurship, and it should be totally
repealed. Absent that, I would ask that Congress consider
maintaining the current personal exemption and gift and estate
tax rates, and equally important, establish a more permanent
solution to the estate tax issue.
Small business owners take tremendous risk at great
personal sacrifice and they truly are the backbone of the
American economy. They should be appreciated and encouraged.
Allowing the estate tax exemption to fall back to a million
dollars and the rate to climb to 55 percent would absolutely
devastate a great number of families who are currently working
on generational transfers.
I respectfully urge you to carefully consider all the
ramifications of estate tax policy and establish a long-term
solution that will allow for generational transfers of family
businesses. And I thank you for allowing me to put a more
personal perspective on the issue for you.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Ms. Madonia.
I now yield to Mr. Hanna, who will introduce our next
witness.
Mr. Hanna. Hello, Mr. Flesher. How are you today?
Our next witness is Mike Flesher. Mr. Flesher is president
of the American Rental Association. Mike Flesher was born and
raised in the southern tier of New York. I have the privilege
of representing many communities there. He operates two Taylor
Rental Center franchises in upstate New York, truly family-
owned businesses. They provide taxes and opportunity and jobs
in those communities. Last week, I had the opportunity to visit
his business in Vestal, New York, to discuss the impact of
taxes and his ability to hire and grow and plan.
Welcome, Mr. Flesher. You have five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL G. FLESHER

Mr. Flesher. Thank you, Chairman Walsh and Ranking Member
Schrader. And thank you, Representative Hanna, for that
generous introduction.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I am Mike
Flesher, president of Taylor Rental in Vestal, New York, and
president of the American Rental Association. I am here today
to testify on the effects of the federal estate tax on small
businesses.
Taylor Rental is a small, family-owned business, with two
locations in Vestal and Ithaca, New York. Taylor Rental is a
typical rental business. We employ 16 full-time and four part-
time employees and up to 15 seasonal employees. ARA has
approximately 4,000 members in the United States, and the
overwhelming majority of them are businesses just like mine. We
rent equipment and tools to contractors and homeowners, and we
rent party and event equipment to individuals and corporate
clients.
ARA supports a permanent extension of current estate tax
law, which allows a $5 million per person exemption indexed for
inflation, and a 35 percent rate on the remaining assets in the
estate. Current law also provides for a stepped up basis on
assets in the estate. It is critical for Congress to pass a
permanent extension so that small businesses have the certainty
we need to plan for the future. We are concerned about the
federal estate tax reverting to the $1 million per person
exemption and 55 percent rate that existed in 2000.
My testimony shows the number of rental business locations
and the economic impact of the rental industry for each state
represented by a member of the Small Business Committee
illustrating how ubiquitous the equipment rental industry is
throughout the United States. According to IHS Global Insight,
the equipment rental industry in the U.S. will generate $31.2
billion this year and $49.8 billion by 2016. The industry is
currently growing four times faster than the U.S. GDP. Much of
this growth is from the expansion of small businesses within
the industry.
What does it take to generate billions of dollars in rental
revenue? It takes capital, and a lot of it. Collectively, ARA
members have billions of dollars invested in the equipment our
customers want and need. An 80- by 160-foot tent that gives a
young couple the dream wedding they always wanted costs me
$60,000. Taylor Rental has hundreds of tents that range from
$1,000 to $60,000 each. Other equipment, like small Bobcat
loaders cost $34,000, and aerial work platforms can cost
$50,000 to $100,000. Larger equipment, like track excavators,
can cost well over $150,000 per unit.
Equipment rental companies make ongoing capital investments
to survive and grow because customers demand the latest and
best equipment. When you rent a car you do not usually get a
1990 Buick; you get a new car with low mileage. The same is
true in the equipment rental industry. My customers do not
equipment. They want new equipment, and I must invest in that
equipment to satisfy my customers. U.S. equipment rental
companies are investing $10 billion in new equipment this year
and almost $20 billion annually by 2015.
Along with the billions invested in equipment, we own real
estate and buildings that house our rental stores and
equipment. Many small equipment rental businesses have
substantial, but illiquid assets.
This is precisely why ARA is concerned about the
possibility that the current estate tax law will expire on
December 31, 2012, and revert to 2000 levels. If the estate tax
reverts to 2000 levels, my estate would be severely impacted.
Sixteen good people, who have given our company many years of
good service, may no longer have a job. The businesses that
sold products and services to our company could lose a good
customer, but foremost, the economic security of my family will
be uncertain.
Mr. Chairman, there is a lot of rhetoric about how the
estate tax really only affects rich people. I do not consider
myself or my family rich. For the past 43 years I have gone to
work every day to earn a living. I have invested my resources
in a company that has grown and been successful despite some
tough times recently. My estate is my company. I do not have
assets that can easily be liquidated to pay estate taxes. My
company will have to be sold.
Reverting to a policy that was outdated 12 years ago would,
in my opinion, be a disaster for many small business owners
like me, and the number one goal that I have worked for will be
in jeopardy--to provide financial security for my family. In
addition, the current situation makes business planning almost
impossible. We need certainty on the estate tax, and we need it
now.
Let me be clear. ARA would eliminate the federal estate
tax. It is a tax on capital, pure and simple. However, the need
for certainty on this issue has led us to a position of
supporting a permanent extension of current law. We believe the
current $5 million exemption with a 35 percent rate and stepped
up basis is a policy that will help sustain small businesses
for years to come.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That concludes my statement. I
will be happy to answer any questions you may have.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Flesher. I now yield to
Ranking Member Schrader, who will introduce our final witness.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to introduce Thala Rolnick, certified
public accountant, with offices in Arizona. Her practice
concentrates on tax planning and compliance for high net worth
individuals, partnerships, and closely-held businesses. Ms.
Rolnick also chairs the IRS Liaison Committee and serves as a
member of the Board of Directors for Valley Estate Planners.
Thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF THALA TAPERMAN ROLNICK

Ms. Rolnick. Thank you. Chairman Walsh and Ranking Member
Schrader, thank you for inviting me. As has been said, I have
been practicing in Phoenix, Arizona, dealing with estate issues
for the last 16 years.
The estate tax has been with us since the early Egyptians
in 700 B.C. first initiated it. The first U.S. estate tax dates
back to 1797.
Those in favor say it is an effective tool to raise needed
revenue and to prevent the concentration of wealth and power in
a few families. Others believe it discourages capital
accumulation and curbs national economic growth.
The question with us today is ``can a small business
survive the estate tax?'' And the answer is ``it depends.'' The
estate tax has been a moving target since 2002, when the amount
that could pass estate tax free first increased from $600,000
per person to the current $5,120,000 per person. At the end of
this year, it will drop back to $1 million unless Congress
acts. The exclusion amount enacted will determine how many
businesses are actually affected.
In 2010, when the exclusion amount was $3.5 million,
according to IRS statistics, 4,425 small business owners'
estates paid some sort of estate tax. This is approximately .02
percent of all business owners, yet the total estate tax
collected was over $69 billion. At a $5 million exclusion, even
fewer businesses will be subject to the tax. If Congress allows
the exclusion to revert back to $1 million, based on 2002
numbers, almost 26,000 small businesses will be subject to the
tax every year and now it becomes a small business issue.
When the current estate law was passed in 2010, it
attempted to reduce the need for some of the more complex
estate planning techniques. It tried to make the exclusion
amount more of a family amount by allowing for portability.
While the idea was admirable, the legislation is flawed in
many ways. First, it only applies to the estate tax and not to
the Generation Skipping Tax. So if I want to leave assets to my
grandchildren, they will be taxed. Second, to be eligible, the
estate must file an estate tax return Form 706. This is very
complex and takes a lot of time and energy. The statute of
limitations then remains open on this for the life of the
surviving spouse. That could be 5, 10, or even 15 years, long
after any documentation for how the values were determined are
gone. If the surviving spouse remarries, the inherited
additional exclusion may be lost. Finally, if the inherited
assets increase in value, the surviving spouse's estate may be
subject to estate tax that would not have been subject to
estate tax had those assets been placed in an irrevocable trust
at the time of the first death.
The current code provides favorable provisions for small
businesses. Section 2032A provides that land used in a business
or a farm can be valued at its current use rather than its
highest value. If the land stops being used in this way or sold
within 10 years, the additional estate tax is assessed. Section
6166 allows the estate to pay a portion of their estate tax
attributable to a farm or closely-held business over a 15 year
period if the value is greater than 35 percent of the estate.
Section 2057 is currently obsolete but if the estate tax
reverts back to $1 million it will become active again. It
provides an additional exemption to small business owners but
the calculation cannot be done prior to death and therefore,
cannot be relied on during estate planning stages.
In addition to the items identified, a number of important
estate issues will also expire and I have those listed in my
written testimony. Most business owners are very resourceful
and find ways to resolve business issues, but when they do not
know what to plan for, planning becomes impossible. There can
be no planning until we have some permanence.
Therefore, I recommend enactment of a permanent estate and
gift tax with an exclusion someplace between 3.5 million and 5
million adjusted for inflation along with step up in basis.
Permanently rejoin the gift and estate tax.
Make portability permanent, but also correct the existing
statute to allow a surviving spouse to accumulate up to a full
second exclusion. Allow portability for Generation Skipping
Tax. Change the statute of limitations for these returns to
three years. Recommend the IRS develop a simple Form 706.
Preserve reasonable valuation discounts for operating
businesses where the death of an owner truly reduces the value
of the business.
Pass a simpler, easier provision to provide small
businesses with an additional exclusion. My recommendation is
in my written testimony.
Pay for these provisions by restoring progressivity to the
estate tax at levels above the exclusion amount.
Reform the Grantor Retained Annuity Trust (GRAT) provisions
to disallow excess discounts where the trust holds primarily
liquid assets.
Thank you for your time, and I would be glad to answer any
questions.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Ms. Rolnick. I appreciate your
testimony.
I will begin with a couple questions and then I want to
hear from the rest of the Committee.
This issue of the estate tax is probably an issue that I
hear of and about when I am back home probably as much, if not
more, than any other issue. I spend a lot of time, as many
members of Congress do, speaking to small business owners and
this is always top of mind with them.
Why is that? Well, because they feel it. There is a real
negative impact. Mr. Flesher, you said it. I am going to borrow
that line from you. ``My estate is my company.'' Bingo. I hear
that constantly. So this is a tax that directly impacts small
business owners.
The other reason though why I think this tax is such a big
tax with people back home is just philosophically it makes
people scratch their heads. Look, we are taxed when we make
money. We are taxed when we grow businesses. We are taxed when
we buy things. We are taxed when we invest. When we die? Just
the thought that when we die, Ms. Madonia, when your dad works
his tail off for 30 to 40 years to grow a business, why? Why
does the government get to put their hands on any of that
money.
I think it is the broader philosophical question that
annoys a lot of people, even people who are not impacted by
this tax. I hear that constantly. The amount of money that the
government raises with this tax is not a large amount, but the
headaches that we put people through to do it is just amazing
to me.
Can anybody answer that question? Just philosophically,
what is the rational for this tax? And like everything in
Washington, we get right down into the Xs and the Os. Well, we
can improve it. We need to extend it by five years, drop the
exemption down to here, maybe--I do not even want to play that
game. I will not with my questioning. Why do we even have this
tax? Can anybody make the case on principle that it is a good
thing for the government to take money from you when you die?
Does anybody want to take a stab at that? Mr. Katz, you know
you are itching to answer.
Mr. Katz. I am not sure that I can necessarily answer it
philosophically but I think that I can at least give some
insight as to the historical perspective of it. I think when
the estate tax was first enacted there was a tremendous sense
of needing it for redistribution of wealth; for avoiding some
of the accumulation, the mass accumulation of wealth by some of
the larger land-owning and wealth-owning families in the
country. And I think to some extent the estate tax has survived
all of these years, not based upon its economic impact upon the
tax coffers, if you will, but it has survived based upon the
theory that there needs to be some way to move wealth from
those that continue to accumulate it to those other.
Chairman Walsh. Why? Why?
Mr. Katz. I think to some extent it is the same reason why
there is larger income tax rates on people who earn more money.
It is the same theory that, you know, goes back years and years
of trying to move money down to fund social projects, to be
able to have funds available to help those who have not, for
whatever reason, been able to help themselves. And I think to
some extent the estate tax has the same impact as the
progressive income tax.
Chairman Walsh. Well, I think you are right. And I think
the reason this resonates with people is because of when it
occurs. I mean, that is basically the basis for most taxes in
this country. But this really hits a number of intersections
because you are talking about something so personal, so
intimate. A family's death, a business owner's death, and at
that moment here comes the hand of government in to grab
something.
Ms. Rolnick, is there any just overarching justification?
Anything you want to add?
Ms. Rolnick. I basically agree with Mr. Katz. Basically, it
was set up to go ahead and prevent certain families from
accumulating the most amount of wealth and the most amount of
power. And therefore, going ahead and allowing two classes of
people--those with and those without.
Chairman Walsh. So the world now has changed because now we
are at a point where Ms. Madonia said--and how poignant is
this--if something happened to my dad we would have to sell the
business. How in God's name have we gotten to that point in
this country? Maybe with the best of intentions we have this
thing called the death tax where you have to look a member of
Congress in the face and say if something happens to your dad
you are going to have to sell your business. How is that a good
thing? How is that a good thing?
And so is the answer, Mr. Flesher and Ms. Madonia--I will
let you two chime in here--is the answer to tinker with it so
that maybe your dad, maybe your family does not have to pay
that consequence--tinker with it, improve it? Or has the world
changed that now so impacts small business owners that we
should just get rid of it? Mr. Flesher.
Mr. Flesher. Well, I support a full repeal. I have paid
income tax over the life of my equipment and I have paid state
sales tax to the state every time I run a piece of equipment.
We have been taxed over and over again on the life of that
equipment and my entire business. I do not believe we should be
taxed again.
We support the current bill because we think that is a
possibility. And we think that would help the majority of our
members in ARA.
Chairman Walsh. Ms. Madonia, what is your thought or
recommendation there?
Ms. Madonia. I guess I would just share a story. I have a
nephew. Our family business is my parents, my sisters. We have
a next generation of eight grandkids, and one of those
grandkids said at one point--we talk a lot about this in our
family--and one of them said to my dad, ``Why would I want to
do this? Why would I want to start my own business? Why would I
want to work really hard like you have if it is just going to
be taken away from me when I am done? Why not just be another
guy? Why not just work for somebody else?
And that is really sad. This is the United States of
America. It is the land of opportunity. It is where people can
have a dream and turn it into reality. And to discourage that
in any way, and I think the estate tax is a major
discouragement to that, I just think it is fundamentally wrong.
Chairman Walsh. Well, and you are right in that studies
would buttress your argument. The estate tax has a major
negative impact on entrepreneurial activity. And again, that
just makes sense. If you are going to, again, work your tail
off year after year to grow a business and then as you all
said, you need to begin to play this game, Mr. Katz, where
every year you have got to spend money to figure out how, when
the ultimate happens, you can, as much as possible, pass money
down to your kids and your family, you have to spend resources
to try to do that. That is mindboggling to me.
I will end there and turn to Ranking Member Schrader for
his questions.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One alternative I will point out is you sell your business
that you built over time. That is what I ended up doing. A
small businessman. I had a small veterinary practice and either
I was not home enough or did not view my kids enough with a
faith in veterinary medicine. They were not interested in
following so I ended up selling mine. And it was my retirement
as many of you have talked about, either through an estate
planning technique or, as in my case, resell it. But that is
another thought for the younger generation so he is not totally
discouraged with being an entrepreneur at the end of the day.
Great testimony. And one of the takeaways I have from this,
Mr. Chair, is it is a little similar to what we had in the last
Congress when we talked about the estate tax. While many, if
not everyone at the dais would probably want to repeal the
estate tax if at all possible, we are facing deficit issues
trying to balance our own checkbook here, believe it or not,
the United States government. It is encouraging to hear that
the values that were enacted in 2010, albeit temporary, were of
value to your different constituencies. Could Mr. Flesher, Ms.
Madonia, Mr. Katz talk about, real quick, about the $5 million,
$10 million, the stepped up basis, and the 35 percent? In terms
of the number of businesses like yours you think, you know, you
said majority, Mr. Flesher, is at 60 percent, 50 percent? Just
guessing. I understand.
Mr. Flesher. We think in our case the $5 million would
cover a very high percentage of our members. Maybe 90 to 95
percent. The majority of our members are in the $500 to $3
million range. But, of course, being indexed, that would help
those businesses continue to grow.
If it reverted back, that is a hard, you know, we have
revenue numbers but we do not know their value. So it is hard
to say what that number would be.
Mr. Schrader. How about Ms. Madonia, if we kept at least
the current area?
Ms. Madonia. Well, I think part of the equation also has to
be that that $5 million is not just the value of your business;
that is the value--that is your value. So now you are talking
about somebody's profit sharing and 401(k) that they have
accumulated over the course of time. You are talking about
their house. All of that has to fall in that $5 million. So
again, I think it is a fundamentally flawed tax that should be
repealed all together. Is $5 million more workable than $3.5
million or a million? Absolutely. But it is still not as much
as you think it is when you have got a small business and then
you have got your retirement savings and your house and any
other assets you have accumulated.
Mr. Schrader. Sure. Mr. Katz.
Mr. Katz. Being from the metropolitan New York area, I
think things are slightly different and slightly skewed in my
view. People who live in my area, you take the businesses that
they have and add the value of those businesses to the value of
their homes and the value of the other assets that we need to
accumulate in order to be able to afford to live in the area
that we live in. Although $5 million is certainly helpful,
there is still going to be a large number of people that are
going to be subject to the continued estate tax, which is why I
think that moving more towards some of the discussion that Ms.
Rolnick talked about earlier in her testimony relating to some
special exemptions for small businesses to try to remove the
value of some or all of the small business out of the
computation of the estate tax would be helpful. If we had a $5
million exemption to cover home and personal savings and
401(k)s and all of those types of things and then on top of
that----
Mr. Schrader. It is my understanding actually that the
401(k)s and the homes are already deductible from the estate
tax.
Mr. Katz. No.
Mr. Schrader. They are included?
Mr. Katz. They are absolutely included.
Mr. Schrader. That is good to know.
Mr. Katz. So if we had that exemption to cover those assets
and then an additional exemption to cover part or all of the
value of a closely held business, I think to that extent we
would be able to solve some of the problems.
Mr. Flesher talked about his estate being his business. If
you have multiple exemptions or an exemption just for that
business, he is not going to have the problems that he is
facing right now.
Mr. Schrader. So to follow up then, Ms. Rolnick gave some
great recommendations which I really appreciate at the end of
her testimony in written form and alluded to them in her oral
discussion. Have you guys had a chance to read those at all? I,
for one, Mr. Chairman, would be interested in your comments. We
can make sure you have access to her testimony because it
covers a lot of the things that Mr. Katz, Ms. Madonia, and Mr.
Flesher are talking about. It might be things we would want to
recommend to our Finance Committee folks, our Ways and Means
folks, to look at as we get down to crunch time, at some point,
hopefully before Armageddon sets in and we actually do some
things with our tax code that are absolutely critical, even
beyond the estate tax itself.
So with that I guess I will yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Schrader.
I now turn to Mr. Hanna from New York.
Mr. Hanna. Mr. Katz, you and I both live in New York. I
know the answer to this but I want to hear you say it. What is
the lifetime exemption for New York?
Mr. Katz. The lifetime exemption, it is a combination
lifetime and death time exemption, is $1 million.
Mr. Hanna. Right. What is the marginal rate on that for a
deceased in a family?
Mr. Katz. The highest estate tax rate in New York is 16
percent.
Mr. Hanna. So the possibility exists that in New York, for
Mr. Flesher, where it looks like 35 percent at $5 million is
really a minimum of 16 once you reach a threshold of $1 million
and so his effective rate will be 16 percent on that additional
4 million, plus 51 percent on everything over that 5. You may
want to reconsider, Mr. Flesher, whether you like the 5 or not.
Were you aware of that, Mr. Flesher?
Mr. Flesher. I was, but I did not consider it in part of
this testimony here.
Mr. Hanna. Right. Right. The interesting thing is New York
State has lost a lot of its population over the last few years.
It is certainly not growing as fast as other states. And one of
the reasons is that there are other places that are more
inherently tax friendly. So the people have accumulated wealth
have a disincentive to stay in New York, and I imagine it is
generally that way. Any state in the country that has a higher,
rather than lower inheritance tax.
The limit seems to be the problem.
Certainly, people who have a billion dollars or multiple
billion dollars, you may want to think differently about that.
I know, like, for example, Bill Gates' father is very much in
favor of an inheritance tax, but what we are talking about here
is small businesses and how to preserve them and their wealth
accumulating, job hiring machinery. There is also a cost to
society in general to the money that Ms. Rolnick was talking
about the government collects. Because if you dismantle a
business that has been 40 years in the making, how have you
really helped your community or your country?
So I wonder about the $5 million limit, if it is enough and
if it is really the question. Perhaps a larger question is do
we want to tax it at all? Apparently, some people do not. I am
open to discussion about that, but I do think that even $5
million is a low limit. And to fix it at that limit and you
talk about irrevocable life insurance trusts, these are huge
expenses. I personally have friends who spend hundreds of
thousands of dollars trying to figure out how to protect their
estate through multiple gyrations and put themselves at risk,
give away property before they are ready to do it because, you
know, they are still alive and they would really like to stay
in control but our government does not allow them to do that
efficiently.
Is there anything you would like to say about that, Mr.
Katz, being from New York?
Mr. Katz. Well, I think one of the other issues that in the
way Congress hurts states like New York was when they modified
the estate tax law to eliminate the state death tax credit and
changed it to a state death tax deduction. Prior to the change
in the law, whatever you had paid to a state like New York
would come 100 percent off the top of the estate tax bill that
you would pay to the federal government. By changing those
rules and making it now just a deduction, you are only getting
the effective rate benefit of that costing people that live in
states like New York and other states that do have their own
independent estate tax, significantly more money.
Mr. Hanna. Effectively paying a tax on a tax?
Mr. Katz. Effectively.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Hanna. I now turn to Ms.
Clarke from New York.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the
ranking member. I thank all of you for your testimony here
today. I find it a very good and very important conversation.
The testimony here today will help inform many of us as we look
at how we address this issue going forward.
Economic certainty is something that we all desire,
particularly for small business where we recognize the value
that you have in all of our communities across the nation. And
I want to just say that what is so unique about our nation is
that it provides this opportunity for entrepreneurship like no
other nation. And it is the American dream. It is the reason
why the United States, I believe, is one of the greatest--is
the greatest nation on the planet.
But having said that I have a question, and I think it may
even go to the philosophical to a certain degree. Do you--and
this is directed to the entire panel--do you think that the
unique opportunity provided by our nation has a value beyond
compounded wealth accumulation? Or do you believe that those
who have benefitted the most from this unique nature of the
United States owe something back to the country that provided
them the opportunity to enrich themselves?
I heard Ms. Rolnick's requirements in her proposal, but
from everyone else, and I am sorry, Mr. Katz, I came in during
your testimony, I heard that nothing should be paid. So I just
wanted to get some further insights from you. Because of the
unique nature of our nation, the way that we can basically
build ourselves from the ground up--sweat equity builds and
accumulates wealth over time. Is there something that we feel
obligated to in terms of the nation? And how does that
reconcile itself with this demand for the estate tax?
Ms. Madonia. I will start. I guess I would argue that small
business owners are already giving back because we are
employing people. We are buying equipment from companies that
are employing people. I mean, by the very nature of being a
business owner you are giving back. I mean, you are paying your
taxes all along the way as you are earning money. We have got
90 employees that are part of our family. You know, we take
care of those employees. We provide their health insurance. We,
you know, contribute to their retirement accounts. We are
already giving back.
Ms. Clarke. So it is your opinion that your employees also
help you to be a thriving business?
Ms. Madonia. Absolutely.
Ms. Clarke. So it is a symbiotic relationship and they,
too, are paying taxes. Right?
Ms. Madonia. Absolutely.
Ms. Clarke. Okay.
Mr. Flesher. I agree with that. That was a great comment. I
think, you know, we are putting back and giving back every
single day economically. But I am very proud of my country. I
served in the military and we do have to do our part. There is
no question about that. But there is a limit to it. And when
you are taxed over and over again and then you get what is
left, you want to hang onto that. And I think that is a
situation here. And it is pretty simple. I mean, we have paid
taxes over and over again and we do not want to not pay any
taxes. We do not want to not do our part. We want to be part of
the United States, the country that we are so proud of. But we
do not want to be taken advantage of either.
Mr. Katz. From a philosophical point of view I guess I need
to run it right down the middle for a few seconds because
clearly there is an obligation on behalf of all of us who have
managed to accumulate, to try and help those who are less
fortunate than us. I certainly understand the business owner's
perspective of they have worked hard. Ms. Madonia's father
worked seven days a week, 12 hours a day, you know, to
accumulate wealth and should have the opportunity to be able to
maintain as much of that as possible.
I think there are probably economists that are a lot
smarter than myself who would be able to go through and tell
you what the economic aspects of all of this are, but what I
can tell you is that from what I see, as much as anything, it
is the administration of the rules and the uncertainty of the
rules that have created so much problem for people. Business
owners do budgeting, do planning. They do it every day.
If a business owner were to know exactly what their
opportunities were and know that if something happened in 2012
it would be a certain rule and if something happened in 2013 it
would be a certain rule, what happened in 2010 was chaotic.
Changing rules in December, in the middle of December going
back to January of that year, we cannot operate like that. You
cannot ask business owners to be able to plan and budget for
rent and health insurance and all the other things but at the
same time not know what the tax is going to be at the end.
So whatever Congress ultimately decides, whether it is 3.5,
whether it is 5, just pick something. Just pick something and
let that be the rule. And let everybody who is sitting at this
table and all the people around the country who are operating
businesses and all the accountants and lawyers who are advising
people, know what the rules are and know how the rules are
going to be applied.
Ms. Clarke. I thank you for your testimony. I think this
gets to the heart of the challenge that we face as legislators,
understanding and relating to all that you give. And then
looking at what we can do in terms of fairness. I think at the
end of the day we want to be fair. We know that you are the
economic engines of our communities.
I come from an entrepreneurial family as well. You know, I
also understand the obligation that we have one to another and
would want to try to maintain those obligations as best we can
given where we are economically as a nation. So thank you for
your testimony.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Ms. Clarke. And I would only add
that Ms. Madonia, I want to keep saying this, so I apologize,
``If something happens to your dad you would have to sell your
company.'' Ninety employees. So I do not know how having to let
90 employees go is anybody's definition of giving back.
Let us turn to Mr. Bartlett of Maryland.
Mr. Bartlett. I am honored, sir, that you let me sit in on
your Subcommittee. I think protocol says that I go last.
Chairman Walsh. Okay. Thank you. Rookie chairman.
Let us turn--hey, Bobby, you are up. Let us turn to Mr.
Schilling of Illinois.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Chairman. I would like to thank
each and every one of you for being here today. I am also, like
a few of them, a small business owner. And one of the things
that I find very frustrating is the fact that the federal
government can come in and take 55 percent of your estate. I
used to do death tax planning, and you know what? We have got
to stop calling it estate tax. Call it what it is. It is a
death tax. The last person dies, a survivor dies, you have to
go in there. And so many times I would go out and I would see
the families have to go in and spend $10,000, $20,000, $30,000,
$50,000 a year to make sure that they could keep their business
or their farm.
I guess the first question that I would like to have, and
any of the folks on the panel could answer this for me, is do
you believe that the death tax hurts or helps businesses in the
United States of America? Let us go with Mr. Flesher.
Mr. Flesher. It absolutely hurts them. I mean, you talk
about the planning process and having certainty. Even with that
certainty we still have to plan and we have to adjust. We do
not know how long we are going to live. And our estates still
change every year. So it is like a double whammy. I mean, it is
tough to plan for that future anyway. But with the uncertainty
of having this tax over your head it is impossible. You cannot
do it.
Mr. Schilling. Yes.
Ms. Madonia. I was just going to add that it takes a lot of
time and resources away from your business, too, in those years
where you are trying to figure it all out, trying to figure out
how to pass it on. I mean, my dad has spent a significant
amount of time over the last few years just trying to figure
this whole thing out and find a way to pass on his company.
That effort could have been spent focusing more on the
business. Those resources could have been used to expand the
business, hire more people, buy more equipment, open another
branch. So it does, you know, it is not just money; it is time,
too, that is taken away.
Mr. Schilling. Right. And Mr. Katz is probably upon on
this. If life insurance is not properly owned that also gets
included into the federal estate. So some people think that
they are properly planning and in actuality they are actually
adding to the 55 percent or whatever that number is.
One of the other questions I have, and I think one of the
things we see is the heirs are sometimes forced to break apart
the family business in order. And is that basically what you
are saying? If something happens to your father, basically it
is----
Ms. Madonia. Yes. There is not a big bank account somewhere
with enough money in it to pay the estate tax, so we would have
to come up with it somewhere. We would have to, I do not know,
you would have to get out of certain lines of business. Maybe
liquidating some of the inventory that we have. You would have
to close down a branch. Somehow you have to come up with that
money and it is not just sitting there. It is all invested back
into the business.
Mr. Schilling. So your brothers and sisters, would you be
willing to say that they would do better with that up to 55
percent of that money? Or would the federal government do
better with that?
Ms. Madonia. I think we could handle it a little bit
better. Yes.
Mr. Schilling. These are tricky questions, I know.
Ms. Rolnick. I would like to make a comment, if possible.
Mr. Schilling. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Rolnick. We keep talking about how it is going to
affect all these small businesses, and it does affect some
small businesses. But according to the statistics, as I said,
when there was a 3.5 million exemption, only 4,425 small
businesses were subject to the estate tax, while there were
over 22 million small businesses filing income tax returns. So
although it does affect some, and I appreciate how it affects
them, but it is not every single small business. And most small
businesses have been made so fearful that even the corner
barbershop is afraid that he is going to lose his business to
the estate tax and he is not even going to be subject to it.
Mr. Schilling. Very good. I appreciate that comment.
I have got one minute left here. If maybe we go to Mr.
Flesher on this one. If the death tax was fully repealed, would
you use the capital to hire more workers, purchase more
equipment, or otherwise invest in your business?
Mr. Flesher. Well, we would continue to invest in our
business and grow our business. You know, not only our
families, but we have long-term employees. I have got employees
that have been with me 26 years, 24 years, 20 years, 18 years.
It is not just one or two. So, and these employees are fully
vested in this business and may have an opportunity to take
over that business or part of that business as well. So the
ongoing investment in the business would be a definite.
Mr. Schilling. You know, it is one of those things if you
want less of something you tax it more. And unfortunately, none
of us in this room are going to get out of this world alive.
But I thank you all for coming. Thanks. I yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Schilling.
I now turn to Mr. Chabot from the great state of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, the first thing that comes to mind, the democratic
witness for the death tax here just made a statement basically
saying that there are not that many businesses that after all
have to deal with this. We are talking about 3,000 plus. But it
is my understanding it really affects a lot more than that in a
lot of different ways. Would any of the other witnesses like to
respond to that argument that we hear periodically that it
really does not matter that much because there are only a few
businesses that it really applies to so it does not affect
anybody else. Could anybody else respond to that?
Ms. Madonia. Well, to those of us that would be affected,
it is a big deal. So the fact that there are 3,000 family
businesses that are affected, you know, maybe to the average
American is like, well, that is just 3,000 people. To us it is
our business and it is those 90 families that are employed by
us and it is our customers and our vendors. It is a much bigger
piece of the pie than just saying, well, it is just this one
family.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Flesher, I see you nodding. Would you like
to respond?
Mr. Flesher. Well, you know, speaking for our association,
we are a very capital-intensive business. So every one of our
businesses not only has their properties but the expense of
running that business. We do not just have an office set up and
run a computer; we have to buy equipment and replace equipment
every year. Every year, just to stay even, we have to reinvest
10 to 15 or even 20 percent just to maintain our inventory. And
then when you consider during better economic periods we are
going to try to create more growth, we have to invest heavily
year after year. So almost every one of our businesses is
definitely affected by this law.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Katz, did you want to say something?
Mr. Katz. Although only 3,000 or 4,000 businesses are
affected on an annual basis, that does not mean that all of the
other businesses are not out there dealing with this. In our
law firm we do a tremendous amount of planning--succession
planning and planning for closely held businesses. And even to
those people that are not necessarily affected on an annual
basis, they are involved. They are involved in planning. They
are involved in spending money on attorneys, thankfully. They
are involved in spending money on insurance premiums to be able
to deal with liquidity issues. It does take up a lot of time
and effort and energy. And it can create some incredible
stress. Having to sit in front of somebody, like Ms. Madonia's
father and say to him the only way for you to really deal with
this is for you to transfer interest in your business to the
next generation now, to start to take advantage of some of the
rules that are out there. And to have him look at you and say,
``Well, that is all fine and nice but I rely on this business
to live. This is my income. If you start moving interests
around, how am I supposed to survive?'' I do not want to, and
with all due respect, I do not want to ask my daughter for
money when I need it.
So while there may only be 3,000 or 4,000 small business
owners who die during the year who are impacted by this estate
tax, it is impacting a lot of people. There are a lot of people
planning and dealing with this every single day. There are
conferences for lawyers who do estate planning, thousands and
thousands of lawyers learning about this. If there are
thousands of lawyers learning about this, there are hundreds of
thousands of people that are dealing with this every day.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Is it fair to say that particularly
in a tough economy like we have now and have had for a number
of years now, at a time when businesses are trying to stay in
business and be competitive and focus on what it is that they
do to create money and wealth and jobs for their employees,
that a lot of these business owners, their time would be more
efficiently spent concentrating on their business and how to
make it better, and therefore, we more successful and hire more
people than to perhaps have to focus so much time on how to
keep the government from taking this form them at some point in
the life of this business? Would anyone want to address that?
Or you can just say, ``Yep, that was a good point,
Congressman.''
Mr. Katz. That was an excellent point, Congressman.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
Mr. Katz. I certainly think that that goes without saying.
Mr. Chabot. I have only got a couple seconds left, so I
thank all the panel members here for their input in this. I
know I have been speaking about this for a long, long time, and
I would argue that you all know a whole lot better how to spend
your money than the federal government does. And we ought to
let you keep it and get this economy moving and hire more
people. Thank you.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. I now turn to Mr. Bartlett of
Maryland.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you. You know, if an enemy had the
ability to an etherway to permeate our minds and induce us to
do something really hurtful to ourselves he might find it
difficult and do better than the death tax.
Chairman Walsh and Ranking Member Schrader, thank you for
allowing me to participate in this hearing. As we have heard,
the state tax has disastrous consequences and is the most
unfair tax that the government imposes. At a time when we in
government should be removing obstacles to small business
growth, the estate tax provides a roadblock to small business
survival.
But there are solutions, and I am particularly pleased to
recognize Mr. Jack Fitzgerald, who is here today. Jack is a
prominent Maryland businessman and friend of mine who studied
the estate tax problem from the business point of view. He
founded Americans Standing for the Simplification of the Estate
Tax (ASSET) in 2010 in order to change the collection method
for the estate tax. He believes that as long as the IRS
requires the estate tax to be paid there is a simpler, more
compassionate way to collect the tax that would reduce the
impact of the tax and avoid the loss of the family-owned
businesses at a time when they are already dealing with the
loss of a loved one.
I would like to congratulate him for putting together a
grassroots group, which includes private businesses, family
farms, and individuals. I think that the ASSET solution as a
bridge to phasing out the estate tax is well worth studying,
and I am pleased that the Committee has agreed to include it in
the record of this hearing.
In his testimony submitted for the record, Mr. Fitzgerald
notes that he has paid nearly $700,000 a year in after-tax
dollars for life insurance to cover the possible estate tax
liability arising out of his automobile dealerships. Mr.
Fitzgerald and others have maintained that many small
businesses over purchase life insurance in order to prepare for
the estate tax. In your experience, is this a common occurrence
in the small business sector?
Mr. Katz. I cannot say that I have a lot of clients who
have spent that much on insurance every year but, yes, it is a
common occurrence for people to look to find a way to create
liquidity to be able to deal with estate tax obligations. And
one of the most significant ways to do so is to acquire life
insurance, properly owned life insurance, and to hold that life
insurance to deal with the estate tax obligations.
Now, not everybody is insurable and not everybody has that
opportunity to buy insurance. Not everybody has the cash flow
necessary to pay the insurance premiums each and every year. So
while insurance is a solution, it is not the only solution to
the problem.
Mr. Bartlett. The case for tax reform is dramatically
illustrated by reviewing the data cited by the Congressional
Joint Economic Committee in May of 2006. And what they found
generally was that the cost of compliance was just about equal
to the revenues the federal government collected from this.
Could there be a dumber tax than this where the cost of
compliance equals the amount of money which the government
collects from this? Can you please share with the subcommittee
your assessment of the conclusions by the Joint Economic
Committee?
Ms. Rolnick. I personally do not understand where that
number came from. I mean, I know that there are things that
have to be done. There are things like trusts which should be
done, whether there is an estate issue or not, which I have
documented in my written testimony. There are documents that
need to be done if they are doing partnerships. We have trust
returns. But I know what estate tax returns cost and I have yet
to file an estate tax return that costs more than the amount of
tax collected.
Mr. Bartlett. Well, I was quoting from their Cost and
Consequences to the Federal Estate Tax page 17. And you might
check that if you question their study.
The Subcommittee has received testimony for the record from
Mr. Jack Fitzgerald, founder of the ASSET Coalition, which
advocates reform of the current estate tax on behalf of small
business owners. In his testimony, Mr. Fitzgerald asserts that
private capital is locked up in unproductive trusts to escape
estate tax liability, meaning that many of the best business
minds in our nation are forced to sit idly by and cannot create
new wealth with their assets because they must lock them away
for their heirs to inherit. In your experience, is this a
common experience in the small business sector?
Ms. Rolnick. Again, when the first person dies, we usually
fund a B Trust. We call it a B Trust. And assets are put into
that trust up to an exemption amount. There is a problem, as I
see, when you have to fund that trust with a closely held
business stock because you do not get the dividends passed out
or the income passed out to the surviving spouse who may be
looking for a way to supplement their income that they have
lost when their spouse died. But there is no provision in the
code that prevents that trust from owning another business,
starting another business, or investing that in some way to
help business growth.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much for letting me sit in on
your Subcommittee. Thank you.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Bartlett. Thank you all for
participating today. The state tax is a critically important
issue for small businesses. As evidence of that, the
Subcommittee received numerous requests from associations
representing small businesses, including the National
Federation of Independent Business, the Food Marketing
Institute, the American Trucking Association, the American
Wholesalers Markets Association, the International Sign
Association, and the Marine Retailers Association, that their
statements about the negative impact of the estate tax be
included in today's record.
I ask unanimous consent that members have five legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


