- SUBPAR SUBCONTRACTING: CHALLENGES FOR SMALL BUSINESSES CONTRACTORS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SUBPAR SUBCONTRACTING: CHALLENGES FOR SMALL BUSINESSES CONTRACTORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE

of the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING
HELDOCTOBER 6, 2011

__________

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-038
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-819                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
ROBERT SCHILLING, Illinois

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
JANICE HAHN, California
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Mulvaney, Hon. Mick..............................................     1
Chu, Hon. Judy...................................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Joseph G. Jordon, Associate Administrator of Government
Contracting and Business Development, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.................................     6
Ms. Mary L. Kendall, Acting Inspector General, U.S. Department of
the Interior, Washington, DC...................................     4
Ms. Jennifer Bisceglie, President, Interos, McLean, VA...........    22
Ms. Jamie Borromeo, President, The E & J Commission, LLC,
Washington, DC.................................................    25

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Joseph G. Jordon, Associate Administrator of Government
Contracting and Business Development, U.S. Small Business
Administration, Washington, DC.............................    37
Ms. Mary L. Kendall, Acting Inspector General, U.S.
Department of the Interior, Washington, DC.................    42
Ms. Jennifer Bisceglie, President, Interos, McLean, VA.......    44
Ms. Jamie Borromeo, President, The E & J Commission, LLC,
Washington, DC.............................................    50
Questions for the Record:
Chairman Mulvaney Questions for Mr. Jordan...................    54
Chairman Mulvaney Questions for Inspector General Kendall....    57
Answers for the Record:
Mr. Jordan Response to Chairman Mulvaney.....................    59
Inspector General Kendall Response to Chairman Mulvaney......    67
Additional Materials for the Record:
Ms. Borromeo Addendum........................................    73
United Solutions and Services Statement for the Record.......    75

SUBPAR SUBCONTRACTING: CHALLENGES FOR SMALL BUSINESSES CONTRACTORS

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Mick Mulvaney
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Mulvaney, West, Ellmers, and Chu.
Chairman Mulvaney. Folks, before we start officially today,
thank you for coming. I was just pointing out to Ms. Chu that
clearly the majority leader does not call the Subcontracting
Workforce Committee to clear their schedule for votes with us.
And we just received a note that we will be voting today at
about 10:15. It will be a fairly long series of votes. It looks
like there are three or four amendments plus a Motion to
Recommit and then the vote on the underlying bill. So I would
imagine the vote series will take someplace between a half an
hour and 45 minutes. So we will go as far as we possibly can
until they ring the bell and then we will adjourn the meeting
and come back as quickly as we possibly can. I apologize in
advance to the witnesses and to the folks who are here to
participate and to watch, as those of you who have done this
before know that this happens probably more often than not.
So, with that, we will call this meeting to order. And we
are here today to talk about small business and specifically,
subcontracting. We are going to look at the challenges small
businesses face when they are both the prime contractor, as
well as when they are the subcontractor. Additionally, this
hearing will examine the three systems the government uses to
monitor and promote small business subcontracting.
When a prime contract is set-aside for small business, the
government wants to make sure that the small business is not
simply a front for a large business. So the Small Business Act
requires that the small business perform a certain percentage
of the work. However, there are two problems with the current
system. It is very hard to catch bad actors and very hard for
small businesses who want to to comply. These problems make
legitimate small businesses pay even more in compliance costs
and in turn waste even more taxpayer money.
While many of the contracts we will hear about today deal
with the 8(a) program, especially the Alaska Native
Corporations program, these problems are not limited to any
single program. However, it is inevitable that the larger
dollar contracts obviously attract more attention. By
addressing these challenges, we hope to hold--hope to open up
opportunities for legitimate small businesses to obtain
government contracts. The government-wide goal, again, we have
talked about many times in this Committee, for small business
prime subcontracting dollars--excuse me, prime contracting
dollars, is 23 percent and legitimate small businesses, not
fronts for large corporations, deserve those contracts.
There are also challenges when small businesses are the
subcontractors. In Fiscal Year 2010, federal prime contractors
subcontracted over $200 billion. The SBA has established a
government-wide goal of awarding 35.9 percent of those
subcontracting dollars to small businesses, a goal that has
decreased from 40 percent less than five years ago. To help
small businesses compete for those $200 billion in
subcontracts, large prime contractors are required to submit
subcontracting plans. These plans detail how much a business
will subcontract to each type of small business. Failure to
make a good faith effort to comply with this plan is supposed
to result in a fine; however, companies are failing to report
to the government on their actual subcontracting achievements,
and yet no prime contractor ever, ever has been fined as a
result. So clearly, in the last five years, all of the almost
3,000 prime contractors have always perfectly submitted their
subcontracting plans worth over $1 billion or we have a serious
problem on enforcement. We need to address how to retool the
subcontracting program.
Finally, there are three systems that the federal
government uses to monitor and promote subcontracting. First,
the Federal Subcontractor Reporting System, which requires that
all contractors report each subcontract above $25,000. Second,
the Electronic Subcontracting Reporting System, which requires
that firms with subcontracting plans report their subcontracts;
and third, there is the SBA Subcontracting Network, which
allows prime contractors to post subcontracting opportunities
over $10,000 for small businesses to compete for. We need to
examine duplication in these systems, as well as their
effectiveness.
Small business, both prime and sub, are good for government
and good for the economy. They increase competition, increase
innovation, create jobs, and save taxpayer jobs. As this
Subcommittee considers today these issues surrounding small
business and subcontracting, we want to learn how we can
improve compliance without unduly unburdening--excuse me,
unduly burdening, small firms. If we succeed at that goal, we
will help businesses compete, create jobs, and save taxpayer
dollars.
I want to thank our witnesses in advance for their
participation again today--it is good to see both of you--which
will help us achieve these ends.
I now yield to Ms. Chu for her opening remarks before
introducing the witnesses.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Today, small businesses are looking for so many
opportunities to grow stronger and expand. As the driving force
behind nearly two-thirds of new jobs, this is critical for the
economy. One way that we can enhance small firms' job creating
power is through the federal procurement marketplace. In the
last decade, the government has doubled its contracting efforts
to more than $500 billion per year. This makes the U.S.
Government one of the largest single buyers of goods and
services in the world.
Typically, prime contracts are generally viewed as the most
lucrative way for entrepreneurs to participate in this
marketplace; however, subcontracts are nearly as important. I
am so glad that today's hearing is focused on this very
important issue. In fact, last year, small businesses received
$97 billion in prime contracts while receiving an additional
$74 billion through subcontracting opportunities. For
subcontracts, this totaled 35 percent of all contracts, just
shy of the 35.9 percent goal. This reality is that
subcontracting is a critical avenue for entrepreneurs to work
with the government, particularly for those dealing with the
current economic slowdown.
Although subcontracts are an important entry point, more
needs to be done to make them accessible to small firms, and
today's hearing will help us shed light on this. The
preparation and enforcement of subcontracting plans is a
critical area that needs to be strengthened. For businesses,
like the ones here today, such plans are absolutely essential
to winning work. However, given recent GAO reports, it is clear
that more needs to be done to make these plans more effective.
One of the main issues is that limiting the effectiveness of
these plans is both a lack of SBA personnel, namely PCRs and
CMRs, and I am glad that the Agency is here to address this
point.
An adequate and thorough review of these plans is important
but there is simply not enough staff to do so. With more than
three million contracting actions each year, the less than 100
staff assigned to these reviews is insufficient. Additionally,
it is well understood that there is a lack of penalties and
incentives regarding the implementation of a subcontracting
plan. This means that in many cases small businesses will
continue to be an afterthought rather than a primary focus.
I am also looking forward to exploring the tools that exist
for small businesses to become subcontractors. For example, the
SBA operates a database called Subnet. Through this system,
prime contractors can post subcontracting opportunities and
small businesses can search through these entries. However, as
posting is not mandatory, the website presents limited
opportunities. A current search of the database reveals only
100 active solicitations. If we want to draw in more small
businesses, particularly those that are not regular government
contractors, we must improve mechanisms like this.
Finally, in light of recent allegations about fraud and
abuse in SBA's contracting programs, it is worth talking about
subcontracting from another perspective. Unfortunately, in some
instances, subcontracts have become a means to defraud the
government and take opportunities away from legitimate small
businesses. To prevent those abuses from occurring, more
resources must be directed to oversight and penalties have to
be strengthened.
Despite these challenges, subcontracting remains a vital
means for small businesses to access government contracts.
Channeling more procurement opportunities to them is a smart
policy. Doing so spreads the economic power of the federal
procurement marketplace to more companies and communities. With
the economic challenges on the horizon, this is more important
than ever. While we are always talking about the need for
diversification in business models, the slowdown has made this
particularly important, especially for small firms. For these
businesses, government contracts put another option on the
table. By further opening the federal marketplace to small
businesses, we can ensure that entrepreneurs have an
opportunity to win new customers in a new market, and this is
key because while our economy is showing promise, the recovery
remains fragile. We will need to see significant job growth and
this job growth can come mainly from small business.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Ms. Chu.
Just by way of logistics here, we have always been a little
loose with the five-minute rule in this Committee, so what you
will see is the green light in front of you as you begin your
testimony. Yellow will go on when you have one minute left, and
red, technically, when your five minutes is up. But until you
hear me quietly banging the gavel, please feel free to
continue.

STATEMENTS OF MARY KENDALL, ACTING INSPECTOR GENERAL,
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR; JOSEPH G. JORDAN, ASSOCIATE
ADMINISTRATOR, GOVERNMENT CONTRACTING AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT,
U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

Chairman Mulvaney. I will introduce the first panel now.
The first witness is Mary Kendall, the acting inspector general
for the Department of the Interior. Ms. Kendall spent much of
her career as an attorney for federal law enforcement programs
and as a state and federal prosecutor. Since 1999, she has
served as the deputy inspector general.
Sitting next to her is Mr. Jordan. Welcome back, Mr.
Jordan. He served as the associate administrator of Government
Contracting and Business Development at the U.S. SBA since
March 2009. The Office of Government Contracting and Business
Development works to create an environment for maximum
participation by small, disadvantaged, and women-owned
businesses and federal contract awards and large prime
subcontract awards. It also plays a major role in the
formulation of federal procurement policies and affects small
business.
Ms. Kendall, we are going to begin with you today, so fire
away.

STATEMENT OF MARY KENDALL

Ms. Kendall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Chu.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today about the
challenges in the administration of contracts between the
federal government and small businesses.
The Office of Inspector General does not purport to know or
understand all of the intricacies or challenges that attend to
contracts between the federal government and small businesses,
but we can comment on our findings relative to the Department
of the Interior's handling of several small business contracts
which are, we believe, representative of some of the challenges
that influence the management of federal contracts with small
businesses.
During a recent review, we discovered a service contract
with an 8(a) small business, United Service and Solutions, LLC,
(US2) that was not in compliance with the statutory
subcontracting limitations which require the prime contractor
to satisfy at least 50 percent of the personnel-based contract
cost with its own employees. The Small Business Administration
Participation Agreement requires that the contracting officer
monitor and enforce that provision. US2, an Alaska Native
corporation had been noncompliant with the 8(a) subcontracting
limitations for more than two and a half years. The contracting
officer told us that she believed the contractor on an
indefinite quality, indefinite delivery contract, as was the
case with US2, has the life of the contracting limit.
To the contrary, the Code of Federal Regulations state that
in order to ensure the required percentage of costs on an
indefinite quantity 8(a) award is performed by the participant,
the participant must demonstrate semi-annually that it has
performed the required percentage to that date. The CFR goes on
to say that the participant must perform 50 percent of the
applicable costs for the combined total of all task orders
issued to date at six-month intervals. In other words, US2 is
required to perform 50 percent of the work every six months
that the contract was in force.
Our Recovery Oversight Office also addressed compliance
with the 8(a) limitations on subcontracting in certain
construction contracts funded by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act monies. We found inconsistency in how and
whether compliance with the limitations on subcontracting was
assessed by DOI contracting officers. This inconsistency was
found in compliance monitoring and absence of department-wide
guidance and a lack of training for contracting officers.
Confusion on the roles and responsibilities between SBA and DOI
contracting officers contributed to our findings.
In the US2 case, in particular, the contracting officer had
identified potential problems with the limitations on
subcontracting quite early in the life of the contract. SBA,
however, indicated that it found US2's plan to address these
problems sufficient. Therefore, the contracting officer took
this as a signal to continue with the contract. We found this
confusion to affect the recovery-funded contracts as well. The
Department of Interior has since issued department-wide
guidance on the limitations on subcontracting, provided a
worksheet with instructions to all contracting officers to
assess a contractor's compliance, and has agreed to provide
annual training to the acquisition workforce regarding their
responsibilities under the 8(a) partnership agreement between
SBA and DOI.
Even with a clear understanding of the roles and
responsibilities, contracting officers are hampered in their
monitoring efforts by receiving incomplete and inaccurate data
from their 8(a) contractors. For example, US2 broke down labor
costs by those incurred by US2 and those incurred by its
subcontractors, but did not break down other direct costs in
the same way. Based on the other direct costs we reviewed, we
believe that additional subcontractor labor costs were
contained in this category, exacerbating the extent to which
US2 was out of compliance with the limitations on
subcontracting. In fairness to US2, we do not believe that such
manipulation of reporting data is limited to this company but
may well be happening with other 8(a) contractors as well.
Contracting officers are placed at a significant disadvantage
to identify such data problems and correct them.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Chu, that concludes my
prepared testimony. I would be happy to answer any questions
you may have.
[The statement of Ms. Kendall follows on page 42.]
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Ms. Kendall. And our practice
here is to save all the questions until after the testimony of
the witnesses.
Mr. Jordan.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH G. JORDAN

Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Chairman Mulvaney, Ranking Member
Chu, and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me
back here to testify today.
As I told you when I was here a few weeks ago, and I
sincerely mean, our top priority at SBA is to maximize
opportunity for small businesses and ensure the benefits of our
programs flow to the intended recipients. My office works each
day to provide increased opportunities for eligible small
businesses to compete for an win federal prime contracts, as
well as subcontracts. We are always looking for ways to
increase small business contracting opportunities, and in the
two and a half years I have been in my position, the federal
government has made significant improvements. For example, in
Fiscal Year 2010, small businesses won nearly $100 billion or
22.7 percent of federal prime contracting dollars. Small
businesses also won $74 billion or 35.4 percent of
subcontracting dollars, which is a marked increase from the
28.6 percent they won in 2008 and the 31.8 percent in 2009.
In terms of subcontracting, our focus at the SBA is on
three main areas. One, working with agencies and prime
contractors to make sure small businesses get their fair share
of federal subcontracting opportunities; two, ensuring that
when a small business is a federal prime contractor it complies
with the limitations on subcontracting requirements; and three,
developing and maintaining the tools, systems, and resources
needed to monitor and track subcontracting achievements.
I would like to take this opportunity share with you our
initiatives to address each of these areas. First, one of our
top priorities is to ensure that small businesses receive
substantial federal subcontracting opportunities. For small
businesses, subcontracting is not only a good source of
revenue, but also allows them to gain relevant federal
government contracting experience, which may be used as
examples of past performance when they bid on future contracts.
To help increase small business subcontracting and improve
oversight of the process, my office has a team of commercial
market representatives (CMRs), who are stationed across the
country. Their responsibilities include counseling small
businesses, conducting matchmaking events, providing training
on the Subcontracting Assistance Program and conducting
compliance reviews of large business prime contractors.
Additionally, the Small Business Jobs Act included several
provisions specifically related to holding prime contractors
more accountable to their subcontracting plans. In fact, we
published these proposed subcontracting rules in the Federal
Register just yesterday. The first provision is designed to
prevent small business small contracting misrepresentations.
The second provision is aimed at mitigating ``bait and
switch,'' which is when a prime contractor references a small
business as its subcontractor in bid or proposal but does not
utilize the small business in actual performance. The last
provision requires prime contractors to notify a contracting
officer whenever they reduce a payment or are more than 90 days
delinquent in paying a small business subcontractor.
Our second area of focus in subcontracting is ensuring that
when a small business is a prime contractor it meets the
limitations on subcontracting. Statutes and regulations were
developed to ensure that if a small business concern is awarded
a set-aside contract, the fund will perform a substantial
portion of the contract. Although monitoring compliance with
limitations on subcontracting is the responsibility of the
contracting officer, SBA is committed to working closely with
the Office of Federal Procurement Policy and the federal
agencies to ensure they have the appropriate training, tools,
and resources needed to monitor compliance.
My office also conducts surveillance reviews of contracting
activities. These are periodic examinations to provide
recommendations on how to increase opportunities for small
businesses and to ensure contracting officers are in compliance
with small business policies and regulations. As part of these
reviews, my team evaluates compliance with subcontracting
regulations and provides recommendations to agencies on how to
improve these processes and procedures. In addition to these
reviews, SBA takes action against firms that violate the
limitations on subcontracting. Our comprehensive fraud and
abuse prevention strategy has already had significant impact.
For example, last year SBA suspended a large company based on
evidence indicating a lack of business integrity and federal
procurements involving small businesses and an intentional
disregard for compliance with the limitations on
subcontracting. In the last two years, SBA has initiated more
government-wide suspension and debarment actions than it had in
the previous 10 years.
Our third area of focus is ensuring agencies and
contracting officers have the tools, systems, and resources
needed to monitor and track subcontracting achievements. We
work closely with the Office of Federal Procurement Policy and
the General Services Administration to ensure these tools are
available. The two primary systems used to capture federal
subcontracting information are the electronic Subcontracting
Reporting System (SRS) and the Federal Subaward Reporting
System (FSRS).
GSA is currently undergoing an effort to combine the
various procurement databases into one new system called the
System for Award Management, which is being deployed in phases
with the first phase scheduled to be available in the first
half of 2012. As demonstrated by the initiatives and efforts
described in this testimony, SBA is taking great strides to
strengthen our small business prime and subcontracting
programs. While we have made significant progress, we continue
to look for ways to identify further opportunities for
improvement and to maximize small businesses' access to this
important source of revenue so they can grow their businesses
and create jobs.
Thank you for allowing me to share SBA's views and
initiatives with you today, and I will be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Jordan follows on page 37.]
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Jordan. And as our
practice here, Ms. Chu will begin with her questions and then
we will go down to the members and I will go last.
So Ms. Chu, fire away.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Jordan, as you know, there are these major
kickback schemes that were discovered--the major kickback
scheme that was discovered at the Army Corps of Engineers
involving two 8(a) firms. SBA should be at the vanguard of
federal small business procurement and combat the misuse of
these small business contract programs, yet the IG office at
SBA reported that SBA itself had inadequately planned and
inappropriately awarded these two 8(a) sole source contracts.
What tools does SBA need to enforce the federal contract
standards and conduct better oversight?
Mr. Jordan. Well, I believe the case in which you are
referring to was not where SBA had awarded contracts, but it
did involve an 8(a) firm and a different agency actually
awarded and monitored those contracts.
It is hard for me to comment on an ongoing investigation,
but what I can say is that that type of action is a real
demonstration of the type of partnership we have with our
inspector general and the Department of Justice, and evidence
that this administration has absolutely zero tolerance for
fraud, waste, and abuse.
I have talked in the past about some of the enforcement
actions that SBA can take, and these are suspensions,
debarments, terminations and those types of things. We do not
have subpoena power. We cannot prosecute. So what we do is we
take all the actions that we can and then turn over all of that
evidence not the inspector general and the Department of
Justice so that they can investigate further and take
appropriate action. I think that is what you saw the outcome of
yesterday or over the last couple of days.
Ms. Chu. Well, one issue has to do with who is responsible
for monitoring compliance. There is the agency and then there
is SBA. The Interior's IG office previously indicated that the
agency's 8(a) program partnership agreement with SBA did not
say which agency would oversee the subcontracting restrictions.
So what is your comment? Who is responsible?
Mr. Jordan. The contracting officers have the primary
responsibility for ensuring small businesses that they enter
into contracts with comply with the limitations on
subcontracting. That being said, SBA is fully committed to
working with the agencies and the Office of Federal Procurement
Policy to make sure they have the tools, training, and
resources necessary to do that. Now, that is true in any small
business set-aside context, be it 8(a) or any of the other
small business set-aside programs. In the 8(a) contacts though
we did see some areas where clarification would be helpful. So
in March of this year we released the first comprehensive
revision of the regulations--government program in more than a
decade and made clear, especially in areas like joint ventures,
what was permissible and what was not, clarified some of those
rules, and bolstered some of the oversight.
Also, just yesterday, we released three different
subcontracting regulations that implement provisions that
Congress passed in the Small Business Jobs Act. The first of
those really reaffirms and makes it very clear that it is the
contracting officer's responsibility to monitor the limitations
on subcontracting compliance when they enter into a set-aside
contract with a small business.
Ms. Chu. So you are saying the agency is responsible?
Mr. Jordan. The contracting officer is. Yes. But we
definitely want to partner with all of the agencies to ensure
that that is happening, that they have the training and
awareness about what their responsibilities are, the tools to,
you know, fulfill their responsibilities, and that the
oversight is happening.
Ms. Chu. But is not SBA ultimately responsible?
Mr. Jordan. The contracting officer is ultimately
responsible for those clauses in a contract that they are
entering in, but SBA wants to work to makes sure that the
policies are set up to ensure compliance and robust oversight
and work with those agencies to make sure that they have the
tools necessary to do that.
Ms. Chu. And Ms. Kendall, is that your understanding?
Ms. Kendall. My understanding is that in the agreement
between SBA and the agency, at least with Interior, the
contracting officer is, in fact, ultimately responsible. I
think what we were pointing out in the US2 example, however,
was that there was some review conducted by the SBA that
indicated that US2's plan to come into compliance was adequate.
While US2 never did come into compliance but the contracting
officer took that signal by SBA as an okay to continue with the
contract. I think that is where the confusion lay.
Ms. Chu. And how could that be corrected?
Ms. Kendall. Well, I think just clearer communication
between SBA and the contracting officers would be one of the
very simple ways in this case. And I can really only speak on
this case. And I think there was responsibility on both sides
quite frankly for the contracting officer to push back in their
communications with SBA and SBA to be perhaps more clear in
terms of what they meant by ``the plan was sufficient.''
Ms. Chu. Okay. Ms. Kendall, last year your office found a
U.S. Geological Survey contract that did not contain the
subcontracting limitations provisions and this clause is there
to ensure that small business contracts do not act as a pass-
through to large firms. So why is this clause being left out of
contracts?
Ms. Kendall. I am not familiar with the instance that you
are referring to but I would say probably human error. The
contracting officers are, like many people, working as hard as
they can with the tools that they have, but many of them are
overworked, they have more responsibilities in terms of
oversight than sometimes they can actually carry out, and
again, I do not know which case you are talking about but I
would guess that it was probably just a matter of human error.
Ms. Chu. This was in the October 2010 IG Report by the
Department of Interior which said that the agency was not
including the limitation on subcontracting clause in their
contracts. And it seems like it should be standard practice.
Ms. Kendall. It should be. Yes, you are right.
Ms. Chu. And not something that is due to human error but
something that should be a practice.
Ms. Kendall. No, I absolutely agree. Again, I am sorry that
I am not familiar with the report that you are talking about.
Perhaps what I could do is review it after the hearing and get
back to you on what the result of that report was. I would hope
that we recommended that there be some sort of process or a
checklist where this is always included. And I am just not sure
if USGS had done that but I can certainly get back to you about
that.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Also in your testimony you discuss how US2
broke down its own costs and the costs of its subcontractors
for only some categories. And it hid additional subcontracting
costs where they were actually doing less work than was
required. And part of the reason why it seems so easy to
circumvent the system is because the accounting and other
measures are also so complex. How could we simplify the system
so that anyone can figure out whether or not someone is in
compliance?
Ms. Kendall. Ooh, I wish I could answer that question for
you. Perhaps the reporting process would need to be simplified
and clarified. In this case, and I am really only familiar with
what happened precisely in this case, but in the category of ``
Other Direct Costs,'' US2 was putting subcontractor labor costs
into that category. A careful review of this by my office
revealed that, in fact, the individuals that were contained in
other direct costs were subcontractors, but it would not be
apparent necessarily to a contracting officer without some
greater scrutiny. So there may be a way to simplify the other
contract or the other direct costs category or require them to
break it out more thoroughly where it would become more
apparent to the contracting officers.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Jordan, do you have something to say on this?
How could we better fix the reporting system to root out fraud?
Mr. Jordan. Sure. I think there are three things that I
would say. One is ensuring that contracting officers and all
folks involved in the contracting process are aware of what
their responsibilities are. So I mentioned that we came out
with new regulations yesterday that clarify a lot of that
responsibility and making sure that everyone is aware and
trained on that is going to be very important. The second thing
is making sure that we are doing everything we can to drive
efficiencies, especially leveraging technology and systems to
help contracting officers do their job.
I mentioned in my opening statement that the Electronic
Subcontracting and Reporting System, the Federal Subcontracting
(FSRS), Subcontracting Reporting System, as well as some of the
other databases and systems involved in federal contracting are
all being combined into one system for award management. So let
us give contracting officers a single point of entry where they
can check a number of these things systematically.
Third is we really need to look at the resources dedicated
to the contracting officer workforce. You mentioned in your
opening statement that contracting spend has doubled. Well, the
contracting officer workforce charged with getting those
contracts out has not doubled over that same period, and so it
is very difficult for these folks, as Ms. Kendall said, to keep
pace with all the things that we would like them to do. You
know, we are very clear in the 8(a) regulations and in other
regulations that it is applied to limitations of subcontractors
responsibility of the procuring agency, and in a set-aside
contract you want obviously to make sure that that clause is in
the contract and all these types of things. We need to make
sure that we are staffed appropriately, trained appropriately,
and we are giving them all the tools so they can do that.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Jordan, let us talk about the issue of
penalties. Last year, GTSI was suspended for performing the
majority of work for several small business prime contracts,
but GTSI was suspended only for a couple of weeks. And yet, the
small businesses that were involved remained suspended for
about a year. I know that firms should face consequences but
why is there this disproportionate treatment for small
businesses?
Mr. Jordan. Well, over the last two and a half years we
have had five proposed debarments and eight suspensions for
issues involving subcontracting. And 10 of those involved the
prime contractor violating limitations on subcontracting. So
there are enforcement actions happening. When it comes to the
specific case that you have referenced, I am not the agency's
suspension department official so there is only so much that I
can comment on. But what I can say is the decisions that you
reference are those of the agency's suspension debarment
officials, so if they made the decision to suspend GTSI a year
ago, subsequently suspending EG Solutions and MultimaxArray
FirstSource 11 months ago, and to the extent that those
decisions could be made public, they are all posted on our
website.
The letters make clear that the agency evaluated the
evidence and acted decisively based upon everything that we had
at the time. So I am not free to comment further about why
additional actions did or did not occur at the time, but I can
say that the inspector general is continuing to investigate
GTSI, EG Solutions, MultimaxArray, on issues arriving out of
their--arising, excuse me, out of their involvement in these
various contracts. And I would direct further questions on that
case and on that front to our inspector general.
Ms. Chu. Okay. I yield back.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Ms. Chu. We now turn to Mr.
West from Florida.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member,
thank you.
This is a very appropriate subject because just last week I
was down in the District talking to the Brower County Small
Business Advisory Council. And two of the critical issues they
brought up are relating to the subject here today.
The first issue is there is a federal building that is
being constructed in Miramar, Florida, and for whatever reason
the prime contractor in that federal building has not gone to
look at any of the local subcontractors for opportunities for
them being there. Is there some system in place to make sure
that when we have these type of contracts down there that we do
look at the local subcontractors because this does come back
to, you know, jobs and opportunities within a local environment
before we go to outside sources.
Mr. Jordan. So in terms of ensuring that small businesses
are a part of it, the prime contract will have to submit as
part of--a material part o the contract, the subcontracting
plan that says, ``By percentage basis, typically how they plan
to allocate their subcontracting among small businesses and
various groups of small businesses.'' And SBA reviewed about
5,0000 of those plans last year.
Then in terms of which businesses they use, that, as long
as it falls into compliance with the contract terms, is really
up to the prime contractor. Many of them, as they are
formulating the solicitation, engage small businesses to
understand exactly how much they are going to be able to
subcontract to which types of small businesses. Others have a
general idea of what small business representation is in those
industries and sets aside a percentage and then goes and looks
for small businesses to fulfill that percentage. And at that
point in either of those cases that they are looking for
subcontractors, we work with our SBA district offices and some
of our resources partners to try to make small businesses aware
of these opportunities and make both the agency and the prime
contractors aware of the great small businesses in all of those
industries. In terms of forcing them to utilize businesses from
a particular location, other than certain types of contracts, I
am not aware of a provision that allows or forces them to do
that.
Mr. West. Right, yeah, I am not talking about forcing them
but at least making sure that the opportunity is provided to
the local small businesses.
Mr. Jordan. Absolutely.
Mr. West. The second point was very near and dear because
there are a couple of people on this council that were about to
lose their businesses because obviously what happens, you know,
a prime contractor comes down, gets a small business
subcontractor. Let us say it is an 18-month, 24-month project.
Well, you bring in the small business contractor. They do what
they are supposed to do in the three- to four-month period
within that overall larger project. Some of these small
businesses, like I said, two people there on this council have
been affected. Their payment was being held up even though
their work had been completed, it had been certified, it had
been signed off, and their payment was being held up until the
end of the entire project.
Now, you know, small businesses have a very small margin
upon which they can operate. You know, we cannot continue to
allow that to happen to them because that puts them in very
untenable positions. Is there some kind of means by which we
can, you know, eliminate that from happening or, you know, make
sure these prime contractors are meeting their obligations, you
know, within a 90-day period after work being completed? And is
there an enforcement mechanism in place?
Mr. Jordan. Yeah, I completely agree with you, Congressman,
that the issue of payment and cash flow is of paramount
importance right now. A lot of these small businesses are
really going pay period to pay period and need that cash as
quickly as possible. There are two things that we have done
already, very recently. One is, as you heard the president say
in his address to Congress, and later saw the Office of
Management and Budget release, when it comes to small business
prime contractors, we have cut the time in which the government
takes to pay small business prime contractors in half, from 30
days down to 15 days. And we are working aggressively to make
sure that is happening across the board.
When it comes to subcontracting, just yesterday SBA
released regulations that say if a prime contractor is
delinquent, which we have defined as--after substantial input
and public comment period--defined as more than 90 days late,
just like you said, in paying its small business subs. And
assuming the prime has been paid, then they need to report that
to the contracting officer and we are going to put that in the
past performance database so that it can be a mark against them
for any future awards to really give them that monetary and
performance incentive to make sure they are doing it.
We are not done. There are more things that we are looking
at to try to accelerate payments to small business
subcontractors, much like we worked hard to do so at the prime
contractor level. There are a few more issues but I totally
agree. And I would point to those things we have already done
and say we are looking to do more.
Mr. West. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thanks very much.
Ms. Ellmers from North Carolina.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both to our
panel.
Ms. Kendall, along the lines of the US2 situation, I know
that we were talking about other direct costs. Do you know
why--I mean, were they looking at those direct costs? Were they
not? Do you have any insight into that?
Ms. Kendall. I really do not, Congresswoman.
Ms. Ellmers. And then, too, you had stated that some other
Recovery Act contracts also had problems in meeting
subcontracting limits. Can you explain what those would have
been?
Ms. Kendall. These were very much the same. In
construction, the requirement is significantly less than in
services. It is a 15 percent requirement. But we found in the
handful of National Park Service construction contracts that we
looked at, that the same problem was occurring. They just
simply were not conducting the amount that they were supposed
to be.
Ms. Ellmers. And so just in listening to your discussion
and your comments it sounds to me like it has more of a
simplification of reporting, things like that. How can that be
improved? What are your thoughts on that? How can we get more
information and everybody onboard doing it in a, you know,
routine manner?
Ms. Kendall. I wish I knew the answer to that. My
experience in this is looking at it from an oversight body and
really looking at how they are complying with the requirements.
I do not feel like I have the expertise myself to really
respond to that.
Ms. Ellmers. Okay. I appreciate that. Thank you.
And Mr. Jordan, you know, in talking with the situation of,
you know, basically zero tolerance for fraud, waste, and abuse,
and looking at the issues that are facing us right now with
some of those things that have been developed now and some of
the fraud that is going on, if a small business is not
compliant, what measures are available right now? I mean, I am
assuming that there are things in place right now for
enforcement. And what happens to a contracting officer if they
are failing to meet those requirements?
Mr. Jordan. Sure. So the contracting officer would ask, you
know, issue a show cause letter to the small business concerned
saying, you know, show me how you are or will be in compliance
with the limitations on subcontracting. Again, one of the
challenges there is that you have got a contract that goes for
a period of time. They may be below the 50 percent at one point
in time but by the end of the contract they have a clear and
rational plan to get above it. So it is not just a snapshot in
time; it is what is your plan to at the end of this contract
meet that limitation on subcontracting.
That being said, there are, you know, certainly analytical
and common sense evaluation factors that the contracting
officer is looking for. If it, you know, is clear that they
will not be meeting that contract requirement, you know, you
can terminate the contract and there are a host of things the
contracting officer could do. If it is something that moves
more into the abusive or fraudulent area, then SBA may get
involved as things are referred to us. And that is where we
would take things such as suspension and debarment from federal
contracting. And these are real tools. As you have seen, you
know, the reason that suspensions, I believe, are so important
is because the investigations into these bad practices can
take--it is not a week's or even a month's thing; it can be a
year's or years' things. So we try to act when we have clear
evidence on a suspension as quickly as possible.
For example, in 2008, SBA had done zero suspensions in this
area. 2009, one. And then 2010, six. And then 2011, 15. So we
really are utilizing this tool in an aggressive way and being
serious about that zero tolerance. Then, we give all of the
things that we find to an inspector general and to the
Department of Justice so they can further investigate and take
the more serious actions if appropriate.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you very much. And I give back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Mulvaney. All right. Thanks very much. As you can
see we have got about five or six minutes left to vote. We are
going to go ahead--for those of you who are not familiar with
the system, if you want to know when we are going to be back,
keep an eye on the TV which we will leave on. And when it gets
to ``on passage'' that means we will be back about 15 minutes
after that. So if you want to poke your head in from time to
time, that will be great. I expect that we will be back
somewhere around 11:15. That is what we will be shooting for.
So what we are going to do is recess here for about 45
minutes and we will be back as soon as we possibly can. I
apologize for the delay. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Chairman Mulvaney. All right. We are going to call the
meeting back to order, which means I have to do that. And
again, I apologize.
Ms. Kendall, I understand your time constraints and I
assure you we will be out of here in just a few minutes and
move on to the next panel.
My question--it is always difficult to pick right back up
where we were when we have an hour break, but I want you all to
help me understand the process. Okay? I run a small business
but I have never done any government contracting. Let us say
that I am one of these 8(a) organizations. I will come back to
that in some more detail later but let us say that I am on one
of these big contracts. Walk me through the process, either Ms.
Kendall, I think this is, to begin with Mr. Jordan, on how I
get the contract, briefly, but then more importantly, how you
make sure that I am doing what I am supposed to be doing, both
in terms of me as a contractor and then my relationship with my
subcontractors.
Mr. Jordan. Sure. So your first step in the 8(a) context
would be application and certification in this business
development program. So now you are in the program and you want
to compete for contracts. In the sole source context that you
talked about, the agency would identify a contract that, you
know, they had a particular need, they were going to contract
out, and it was suitable for the 8(a) program. They did their
market research. They knew there were 8(a) firms out there. It
was the best small business program to use. So they would
contact a district office or maybe they knew about it--there
are multiple ways that this can happen. But they could talk to
the district office and say, hey, we know you have an 8(a)
portfolio with various firms here or we know that this firm can
do it, what have you. The district office, the SBA district
office would then evaluate, hey, can this firm, you know, does
it have the capacity? Does it jive with their business
development plan that they submitted to us? Yes, it does.
Okay. That contract can go forward and the agency would
then award on a sole source basis, assuming it is within the
various limits, this contract to that firm.
So over the period of that contract term, every year it has
an annual review with SBA as a firm, not just on that contract
but on everything they are doing. How are they improving
against their business plan? Are they achieving their targeted
objectives? All those types of things, one of which would be
looking at what contracts they performed against. Then, in
terms of subcontracting out, in that contract that they had
entered into it would have limitations on subcontracting. So,
you know, if it is a services contract it would say that that
small business, because this was a set-aside, has to perform at
least 50 percent of the labor costs with its own----
Chairman Mulvaney. Let me stop you there.
Mr. Jordan. Please.
Chairman Mulvaney. Some of the things that I read say I am
supposed to be able to--I would not know how to allocate that
in my business. We did not use the cost accounting system. So
tell me how we get around that hurdle? How do I satisfy that
requirement? That 50 percent requirement?
Mr. Jordan. We talk a lot about when we are engaging with
small businesses and getting them up to speed to sell to the
government about being contract ready. That is a phrase that
you hear a lot. And what that means is--a lot of things--but
one of which is you have to have all of the systems in place,
approved systems in place to do business with the government.
So it is very clear what the responsibilities are for the
agency in terms of oversight and in terms of the small business
to make sure that they can prove that. Because at any time it
is a clause in the contract. The contracting officer can say,
show me the documentation that says you are in compliance.
Chairman Mulvaney. Let me ask a quick question, Ms.
Kendall, because Ms. Chu was asking an interesting line of
questions about the examples that you--one example that you
gave where there was no subcontracting language in the
contract. And she asked if there was a standard procedure. And
I guess she is asking--what I am asking in a different way is,
is there not a standard contract? Is it preprinted or is it
written from scratch every single time that Mr. Jordan just
described that it gets let?
Ms. Kendall. I am going to have to defer to Mr. Jordan on
that one. I truly do not know the answer to that.
Chairman Mulvaney. Okay. That is fine.
Mr. Jordan. There are some differences where clauses get
inserted or taken out or whatever. But in the set-aside
context, even if, you know, the example that Ms. Chu raised
earlier it happened. And if Ms. Kendall's supposition proved to
be correct that it was a contracting officer, Erin. We do not
care. The fact that it was a small business set-aside means
that that limitation on subcontractor requirements. Whether or
not the contracting officer forgot to include that or did not
cut and paste correctly, it does not matter in terms of the
law. You still have to abide by limitations of subcontracting
because it is a set-aside and all small business set-asides
must----
Chairman Mulvaney. I will stop you again, Mr.--I have got
news for you. You and I sign a contract for me to do something
and it is not in the contract, I am pretty sure I do not have
to do it.
Mr. Jordan. Our position has always been for all small
business set-asides the regulations are very clear that the
limitations on subcontracting exist. So whether or not they
included that, it is applicable to that small business set-
aside.
Chairman Mulvaney. The staff tells me that may be the case.
It is something unique to small business contracting. So again,
that shows you what my law degree is worth.
Mr. Jordan. I am not a lawyer.
Chairman Mulvaney. All right. So now we are in this
process. You have signed the contract with me. I am an 8(a)
provider. I have got this contract. It is under $6.5 million. I
am not an Alaska Native. How often do you come to make sure I
am in compliance and how often do I have to show to you, prove
to you that I am in compliance?
Mr. Jordan. So for the contracting officer, who is really
monitoring that contract----
Chairman Mulvaney. He is an agency, right?
Mr. Jordan. Yeah. They can do it periodically. They can--if
they have any reason to believe you are not in compliance. And
then typically it is semiannually or annually that they would
check, you know, if it is a firm, fixed price, you know, sole
source contractor. In this case, then the contractor, the 8(a)
from you, would have to show that you have a plan that you are
going to meet the limitations of subcontracting for that whole
contract. And so if you dip below the 50 percent, but you are
saying, yeah, we know, but here is why we are. At the end, we
are going to be back above it. And then that can be acceptable.
If it is an IDIQ, one of those indefinite delivery,
indefinite quantity contracts where you do not know exactly how
much money you are going to get over the life of that contract.
You are supposed to always be above the limitation on
subcontracting.
Chairman Mulvaney. Okay. I have got this contract. Listen,
it is going to be $4.5 million. She has looked at it and says,
okay, it is going to be $4.5 million. And it is not; it is $2.5
million, really. And what I have done is I have inflated the
value of this deal by $2 million. And you see where I am going
with this. I am not going to ask you specifics about the case
that is ongoing, the Yacht Tech, but let us say that I did
that. Let us say I did exactly what these gentlemen are accused
of doing. And instead of telling you, giving you a number of
$2.5 million, I told you it was $4.5 million and you said,
okay, that makes sense. Where are you going to catch--how are
you going to catch my fraud in this process?
Mr. Jordan. There are multiple ways in which these frauds
can be caught. Does it become challenging in a generic
situation where you have a contracting officer, a
representative of the prime contractor, and a representative of
the subcontractor all in a hypothetical sense engaging in
fraudulent activity? Yes. But that is why there are so many
different points at which people are checking this.
Chairman Mulvaney. But even if the contracting officer is
not part of this deal, okay, maybe he just thought the $4.5
million was a reasonable number, is not one of the standards he
has to establish is that the government is being harmed by what
he sees?
Let me find the research. Hang on a second. There is a list
of reasons that--where was it? Was it the memo? Contracting
officers need to prove that the pass-through of the work harmed
the government before most agencies take action against the
companies. However, if I am delivering exactly what I promised
to deliver, how does he meet that threshold? How does he prove
that I am in noncompliance?
Mr. Jordan. So it depends on exactly what is going on. If
it was just a case of inflated pricing or things of that
nature, the government before the contract should or may have
come up with an independent government estimate of what they
expect it to cost. And if they expected it to be that inflated
price and it was, then that would be more difficult to prove.
If it was coming in above what they thought, they would ask a
lot of questions and ask for documentation, ask for proof. And
that is why you have seen the Office of Federal Procurement
Policy push agencies to go more towards these from fixed-priced
contracts because when you are all in agreement at the outset
of what this is going to cost for you to provide me the goods
and services that I have asked for, then it is hardest to play
those games with inflated costs and try and hide that.
Now, the contracting officer would look at these
limitations of subcontractors and say, how much is the prime
actually performing? So is it the sub who is inflating costs
because they are then getting passed back through the prime?
Well, that is going to hurt that limitation because the
subcontracting dollars will go up. The amount the prime--the
percentage the prime is doing would go down and again, that
would have to stay. So that is some of the ways.
And then in the 8(a) context, you are going to have an
annual review and we are going to be talking with you and your
firm to make sure you are operating within the business plan.
There is a whole host of checks we do, too.
Chairman Mulvaney. I guess it strikes me that my example of
inflating a $2.5 million contract to a $4.5 million might raise
some red flags because it is a relatively large percentage, but
when you get to the larger contracts, especially ones with the
Alaska Native companies, the potential for fraud would grow.
Would it not? Because the difference between a $2.5 million and
$4.5 million contract is a relatively sizable chunk. The
difference between a $100 million and a $102 million would not
stand out as much, would it?
Mr. Jordan. Certainly, you know, the percentage--the
percentage difference based on the overcharging in that larger
example is less, but the size of the contract would probably
indicate that there is more attention being paid to it by the
agency overall. And there are two pieces to your question,
really, or to my answer to your question. One is the
surveillance and monitoring. So making sure that folks at the
agency, and when SBA does surveillance reviews and compliance
reviews and these types of things, are looking for this type of
behavior. And then making sure the enforcement is there to not
just punish the bad actors we catch but disincentivize anybody
from trying.
So there are some new proposed regulations that will go
out. And I have talked about them in terms of the Jobs Act
statute that create them around presumption of loss. So in the
past, and this is where that `` harm no government'' piece
really came in, in the past if you misrepresented your size or
status to win the award, we would suspend, debar, maybe pursue
a False Claims Act action against you through the Department of
Justice. But it was hard if the government got exactly what we
wanted for a fair price, for us to go after you significantly
because you lied about being a service-disabled vet. It is
really that second place finisher, the true wounded warrior who
should have got a contract that was harmed. Well, now, it does
not matter. That stuff does not matter. The law clearly states
if you lie about your size or status to win the award, we can
sue you civilly for the full amount of that award and keep what
you provided, and still do the suspensions and termination
debarments.
Chairman Mulvaney. In the last 12 months, how many times
have you all done those things?
Mr. Jordan. Well, this presumption of law is new so it is
still being stood up. In terms of the suspensions and
debarments, we stepped it up quite a bit. We have done--more
referrals for suspension and debarment have happened in the
last two years than the previous 10 years. And I mentioned
before the suspension tool, which I think is a really important
tool because it is something where SBA can take action while we
are waiting for an investigation to run its course and we want
due process to happen and we want any accused parties to get a
full investigation and due process. But we can take the
suspension action. In 2008, there were zero. In 2009, there was
one. And then six in 2010, and then 15 this year. So we are
stepping up the utilization of that tool when we think it is
appropriate.
Chairman Mulvaney. Does the use of that tool partially
explain--I guess it cannot fully explain--does it partially
explain why no fines have ever been issued? The liquidated
damages provision? I heard that in my opening comment and I was
actually reading the details during the break. And it is
actually worse than I thought. In 30 years, there is no record
of any company paying liquidated damages. Ever.
Mr. Jordan. So when I started two and a half years ago and
we started to work on or continue to do work that was happening
on getting small businesses more subcontracting opportunity,
preventing some of this ``bait and switch,'' all these types of
things that were now--we just came out with some of the
proposed regs on yesterday, that was one of the areas we
pushed. The subcontracting plays a material part of the
contract. So if you were violating that, you were violating the
terms of the contract and there is a whole host of actions,
including liquidated damages.
Well, the problem that I am told by agencies is that you
can drive a truck through what it means to make a good faith
effort to meet the limitations or meet the subcontracting plan
requirements. We have now shored up through these new regs
whose responsibility it is, what some of the things that you
should be looking for are, and what some of the penalties are.
But you are right; that is--I have never heard of anybody
actually using----
Chairman Mulvaney. I will make you a deal. If you want to
come up with some suggestions on how to close those loopholes
and this Committee will take up those things. Because our
research indicated the same thing, which is it is very
difficult for you all to prove. There are safe harbor
provisions in the good faith requirements, and if we need to
start closing some of those, let us get together and see if we
can do that.
I am also--we will take up probably another day. It is a
relatively minor issue I know for--in terms of its footprint
but it seems like these Alaska Native companies really wear
some more tension. Does the SBA have an official position on
that policy as to why ANCs get special treatment?
Mr. Jordan. Well, the provisions that allow those types of
things are all statutory part of the Alaska Native Settlement
Act and fall on amendments to that. So it is not something that
SBA has a position on one way or the other, but what I will say
is a point to the regulations that we came out with in March
where we really--and we went around and did tribal
consultations and talked to the community about how to get
these right, but one of the key provisions in that
comprehensive revision, the 8(a) regulations deals with the
joint ventures. And that was a place where some of the actions
that were happening before really did not pass the smell test,
and we have tightened those quite a bit about when you form a
joint venture between the 8(a) firm and a mentor, a larger
business, what percentage of the work the 8(a) firm has to do
and what are some of the subcontracting rules there. And I am
proud of what we did there to move as quickly as possible but
also thoughtfully to close any loopholes there.
Chairman Mulvaney. All right. There was--just a couple more
questions. There was a Washington Post story about a year ago
and in that story it pointed out the SBA had been relying on
three employees and paper records in Anchorage. I am going to
spend more time another day on these ANCs but I want to ask
this one question. That you all were using three employees and
paper records to track some of these companies and there was $6
billion worth of sole source contracts. Tell me more about
that.
Mr. Jordan. Sure. So I have had the privilege of testifying
in front of Congress.
Chairman Mulvaney. By the way, that does not mean I believe
everything that I read in the Washington Post.
Mr. Jordan. No, that is all right.
Chairman Mulvaney. They are here someplace.
Mr. Jordan. No. Yes. So I certainly welcome the
conversation around native entities and the community benefits
that they bestow versus the individual business development of
the traditional individually-owned 8(a) firms.
When it comes to our operating and overseeing the program,
our inspector general raised some concerns, had, you know, six
recommendations on things that we need to look at. Well, by the
time I testified on that report, we already fixed four and we
subsequently fixed the other two. We agreed, and have taken
care of, increasing staffing, increasing training on how do you
process and oversee the native entity applications, which are
much different than when an individual applies or is in the
8(a) program. And what are the rules that govern the behavior
that do fall within our regulatory authority?
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Jordan.
Ms. Kendall, very briefly. Come back to the US2 issue. My
understanding is that they had contracts of about $250 million
but were running out of a guy's house essentially. How did you
all get involved? Help me understand the process as to where
the inspector general's office got involved in this
investigation.
Ms. Kendall. We got involved in two ways. We actually
conducted--we were conducting a joint review with the
Department of Defense IG, which is mandated for them to do but
because it was Sierra Vista's Contracting unit, we joined with
them and found this contract and flagged it as a problem. We
also----
Chairman Mulvaney. What about the contract made you flag
it?
Ms. Kendall. I am not sure I can tell you right now.
Chairman Mulvaney. Fair enough.
Ms. Kendall. But we also got a referral from one of the
deputy assistant secretaries where they had identified this as
a potential problem. So we looked at it both as a result of the
audit where this came to light for reasons I will be glad to
tell you later, but then we also--the entity itself identified
a problem with this particular contract and asked us to take a
look at it.
Chairman Mulvaney. Is it fair to say that that would have
been an inquiry within the agency that was initiated by the
contracting officer?
Ms. Kendall. I do not know if it was initiated by the
contracting officer or someone in the chain of command, but
somebody internal to Interior identified it.
Chairman Mulvaney. And I guess my question is this--did it
happen--let us take your independent investigation off the
table. I want to focus on the one that came from the deputy
director. Did that happen by accident or did it happen the way
it is supposed to happen?
Okay. All right. And so you got involved with it and then
what happened next? You are doing your independent
investigation. You are also getting an inquiry from the agency
itself.
Ms. Kendall. Yes.
Chairman Mulvaney. How did you come to find out that this
was a problem?
Ms. Kendall. We went in and looked at their records. We
interviewed the contracting officer. We interviewed the entity.
It was clear it was a problem on many, many levels. And I guess
I feel like I maybe missed an opportunity with the
congresswoman when she asked a question about fixing. And I
refer to Mr. Jordan's answer just a minute ago. I think on all
fronts we could do better to look at the capacity of these
companies. In this case it was a company of one or two people.
And I have only heard, I do not know for a fact, that it was
run out of someone's living room, but previously they had never
done more than $100,000 a year in business. To suggest that
they had the capacity to do 50 percent of a $250 million
contract is----
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Jordan, are you familiar with the
US2 situation?
Mr. Jordan. I have read the inspector general's report just
in preparation for this conversation but not in depth.
Chairman Mulvaney. To the extent you can then, here is the
question I am hoping to get an answer to--why were they allowed
to get as far as they did? Why was a company that had never
done more than a couple hundred thousand dollars worth of
contract end up with such a huge chunk? What part of the
process broke down to here that company could get as far along
as they did?
Mr. Jordan. I am not familiar enough with this case to
speculate as to exactly where it broke down.
Ms. Kendall. Well, and I am not pointing fingers certainly
at SBA. I think that the Sierra Vista Contracting folks should
have asked the question themselves, but it is----
Chairman Mulvaney. Is that not part of the standard
procedure though? I mean, is there not a form that says ``Have
you ever done any other government contracting? If so, how big
were they?''
Ms. Kendall. There is past performance that accompanies
``Who Wants to Do Business with the Government?'' It attaches
to their application. I am not familiar enough with the entire
process to say that it is part of a process or not but it seems
to me that it is a practical thing that somebody would want to
ask the question or would look at the capacity of a company to
say, hmm, not sure that they could do this.
Chairman Mulvaney. I recognize you are not familiar with
this exact situation but that has got to be part of the past
performance, is it not?
Mr. Jordan. Yeah. The contracting officer will make what is
called ``responsibility determination'' that this prime
contract is responsible or capable of performing on the
contract and abiding by all of the clauses. And in the 8(a)
context, it is a business development program so we want them
to grow and that sort of thing. But, so SBA will look at that
and agree with them. But in this specific case I am not sure.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you all very much.
Mr. Jordan, I am serious about those suggestions. If the
SBA wants to start looking at a way to close some of those good
faith, safe harbor loopholes, it is certainly something this
Subcommittee would be interested in taking up in the upcoming
year.
So Ms. Kendall, thank you very much. I understand you have
another time commitment. Thank you all both.
We will go ahead and seat the second panel now and move
through that as quickly as we can.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you very much again to everybody
for waiting.

STATEMENTS OF JENNIFER BISCEGLIE, PRESIDENT, INTEROS, ON BEHALF
OF WOMEN IMPACTING PUBLIC POLICY; JAMIE BORROMEO, PRESIDENT,
THE E & J COMMISSION, LLC

Chairman Mulvaney. The second panel, I am going to
introduce Mrs. Bisceglie, who is, excuse me, Jennifer
Bisceglie, who is the owner of Interos, a small women-owned
supply chain and logistics company. Ms. Bisceglie is testifying
on behalf of Women Impacting Public Policy. And Ms. Chu is
going to introduce our other witness.
Ms. Chu. Yes. I have the honor of introducing Jamie
Borromeo, and she is the president of E & J Commission, a
federal contracting research and strategies firm which is based
in Washington, D.C. And she is the co-founder and CEO of
Generation Drive Entrepreneurs Network, which is a national
non-profit that mentors young adult start-up firms. She has
consulted with over a dozen Fortune 500 senior executives,
CEOs, and community-based organizations on issues of economic
development, public contracting, supplier diversity, and public
policy. And also is a former executive director of the National
Council of Asian-American Business Associations. Welcome.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you. Ms. Bisceglie. We ask you to
begin. And again, five minutes, give or take. When you see the
red light on it means your five minutes is up.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER BISCEGLIE

Ms. Bisceglie. Chairman Mulvaney, Ranking Member Chu, my
name is Jennifer Bisceglie. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today on behalf of Women Impacting Public Policy
(WIPP), a non-partisan organization that represents nearly one
million women business owners with a coalition of 59
organizations that support its policy objectives. I serve as
chair of the board of WIPP, and I am also president of Interos
Solutions, which is a small, women-owned company specializing
in integrated logistics strategies, specifically as it relates
to cyber security and supply chain risk management. Currently,
100 percent of our billable work is subcontracting in the
federal government sector.
Just two years ago, my company was growing, we had 10
employees, and we were very optimistic about our work in the
government. Unfortunately, we had a development transpire with
our largest prime contractor. In the span of about two months,
they released five of my people, which in fact, cut my business
in half. We had no recourse. The company had cut off any
relationship we would have had with a contracting officer or
with a government program manager. The only relationship was
with the prime. At that point, I could not point to any other
violations in the subcontracting plan because those were never
shared with us. In short, there was really nothing we could do
about the situation and we really felt pretty powerless. If
there is a silver lining that I could share today, it really
forced us to diversify the prime contractors and customers that
we were working with, and we are now actually seeking prime
contracts on our own. But it is not really a pretty solution,
if you will, and it has been a pretty painful experience.
The title of this hearing is Subpart Subcontracting, which
encapsulates the experiences of many members who do
subcontracting in the federal government. Many of us are happy
for the work but frustrated when it comes to the limited rights
that our small businesses have with respect to carrying out
that work. The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 contained an
important provision which WIPP advocated for--a requirement
that prime contractors must use those subcontractors listed in
the subcontracting plans. We refer to this as ``if you list us,
use us.'' We are interested in knowing whether this requirement
has actually made any tangible impact within the agencies.
While we are on the subject of the subcontracting plans, we
wonder if prime contractors actually formally filed those
subcontracting plans. Does anyone in the government actually
read them? And if they read them, how or are they enforced at
all?
WIPP also suggests that the federal government should
require disclosure of the portion of the subcontracting plan as
it relates to that sublist. The government should require the
primes to share that information with the subcontractor upon
award. If the subcontractors do not have access to these plans,
how can we ever be sure if the prime is actually compliant?
WIPP does not believe the answer is to do away with filing the
subcontracting plans; we think the answer is really better
enforcement of those plans. Reminders are commonly used tools
and calendaring software, so the solution we would think would
be something just as simple, alerting the affected parties or
the monitoring parties that their plan has not been filed or
updated.
A more fundamental problem is the confusion surrounding
limitations on subcontracting contained in the Small Business
Act. First, we actually learned something in preparing this
testimony because we as small businesses are repeatedly told
that prime are required to perform 51 percent of the work. Upon
reviewing the law, we actually found that the actual percentage
is only 50 percent. Let me just say that if the agencies do not
understand the rules, small businesses are certainly not going
to understand them or argue with that. While we definitely
assume that and accept that our responsibility as federal
contractors are to read and understand the FAR, we are, after
all, running businesses and the rule just does not really make
much sense.
In the case of service contracts, the prime is actually
required to perform 50 percent of the cost of contract
performance incurred for personnel with employees of the prime.
As we interpret this, in order for us to be compliant with this
requirement we would actually have to know our subcontractors'
personnel costs to make that calculation. No business that we
know is really going to share that information, whether it be a
commercial contract or a government contract. Second, this
requirement basically requires a cost-based accounting system
to monitor that many small businesses are not required to use
and therefore, we do not use because of the cost.
WIPP suggests that the Subcommittee take a look at amending
the law to require 50 percent of the price of the contract, not
the cost of the contract. In addition, it is our view that in
the case of small business set-aside contracts, 50 percent
should be calculated by including all of the small businesses
on the contract, not just the prime.
While we are on the subject of subcontracting plans, again,
we note that there really are only two databases in which
subcontracting plans are entered--FSRS and ESRS. It seems to us
that the two databases are collecting much of the same
information and really do not communicate with each other. This
strikes us as an example of wasteful effort on the part of the
government and the businesses that file the paperwork with
those systems. We are unable to identify any penalties for non-
compliance in either system as well.
In conclusion, subcontracting is a good way for women-owned
businesses to get involved in government contracting. With the
implementation of the women-owned small business procurement
program, we expect the ability to bid on prime contracts will
increase. Nevertheless, many small businesses excel in the
subcontracting arena. WIPP urges the Subcommittee to examine
and push for changes that will make more small businesses
successful subcontractors.
Our suggestions and observations in summary are as follows:
Compliance requirements can only work if penalties are in
place. WIPP believes that in order to make the subcontracting
rule effective, the percentage should be clarified. Is it 50
percent or is it 51 percent? In the case of small business set-
aside contracts, we urge that all small businesses on the
contract should be counted towards the 50 percent requirement.
And finally, we believe a few basic changes in the electronic
reporting systems could result in much better data on
subcontracting plans, thereby enhancing compliance.
Thank you for giving WIPP the opportunity to testify on
this important issue, and we welcome any questions.
[The statement of Ms. Bisceglie follows on page 44.]
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Ms Bisceglie. Again, we will
hold our questions until the end.
Ms. Borromeo, please. Five minutes, give or take.

STATEMENT OF JAMIE BORROMEO

Ms. Borromeo. Chairman Mulvaney, Ranking Member Chu, thank
you for inviting me to testify today. My name is Jamie
Borromeo, and I am the president of the E & J Commission, LLC,
which is a contract research and strategies consulting firm for
disadvantaged businesses. We are based here in Washington, D.C.
In my former capacity as executive director of the National
Council of Asian-American Business Associations, and in my
former position as intern to Congressman Mike Honda, who was
the chair of the Congressional Asian Caucus at the time, I was
exposed to a number of small business owners across America who
had voiced their challenges within both commercial and
government contracting. Entering the federal market is one of
the most challenging areas to break into as a small business
owner, but even more so if cultural and linguistic barriers
prevent one from being able to understand the complexities of
government systems. So now after 10 years of working with
communities of color, I am certain that institutional
discrimination within federal contracting still exists and this
is highlighted in the lack of subcontracting opportunities for
our community.
Subcontracting is the first point of entry for most small
businesses attempting to enter the federal market because, one,
agencies like to see past performance from those seeking award;
and two, subcontracting allows for the slow growth necessary so
that the small business can gain experience, capacity, and can
acclimate to doing business in the federal contracting space.
Discrimination within the subcontracting process is very
difficult to prove, especially when those on the program level
are not outwardly excluding small business from participating.
What some are doing is turning a blind eye to the issues. It is
in their dispassionate and apathetic approach to the matter,
rather than their intentional overtly discriminatory practices
which is the injustice in this case. Doing nothing is just as
bad as causing harm, and the lack of oversight of these passive
actions are what concern me the most.
The first point I would like to address is the lack of
compliance with the subcontracting plans administered by the
contracting officers. I understand from many industry experts
that there is an issue with contracting officers not properly
evaluating subcontracting plans or monitoring, evaluating, and
documenting contractor performance. I have worked alongside the
Asian-American Justice Center, a civil rights organization for
Asian-Americans that address these issues through the
contractor empowerment program currently led by Ms. Jeanette
Lee. We have partnered to identify some of these challenges and
have collected testimonials from small business contractors.
Some are hesitant to provide testimonial because they are
afraid of being blackballed or not maintaining good rapport
with an agency they still would like to receive work from.
However, some brave contractors have emerged from the pack to
describe their unjust experiences.
In our findings, we discovered fraudulent practices that
create barriers to contracting opportunities for Asian-
Americans, women, and other minorities as outlined by Ms.
Jeanette Lee in this statement where she describes ``bait and
switch.'' And I quote, ``Because there is no enforcement, prime
contractors often team up with minority contractors in order to
win a bid but then drop them from the contract once they
receive the award. I have heard this from several Asian-
American contractors that this is a prevalent and pervasive
occurrence.'' These, among many others, are testimonials from
contractors that are still looking for an entity to hold firms
accountable for what was promised to these small businesses.
Another issue I would like to point out is that most
contracts that are moved from large defense contractors to
small businesses to reach set-aside goals are still controlled
and dictated by the large contractor in the end in regards to
who needs to be hired, what salaries they will be paid, and
what benefits they will receive. The way that this occurs is
large contractors keep a list of disadvantaged business
enterprises that are willing to do just about anything for our
contract. It is common practice for a large contractor to work
with an agency to move some of their contracts which have
recently been designated for set-aside programs to large
contractors preferred vendors. These vendors will then continue
to employ virtually all the same employees that the large
contractor employed with identical compensation packages.
Therefore, in essence, these employees are still working for
the large defense contractors who maintain the specifics of
their employment throughout the process. When the small
business protests, they seem to find that their current and/or
future contracts disappear from the federal agency, if not the
federal space as a whole.
Because the small business owner is hungry for work, they
feel lucky to be in the game. Money for morals is what is up
for trade here and until there are more small business
opportunities and legitimate ones, it is all one closed network
that is circulating contracts and dollars among their own
without informing or much less encouraging competition.
Lastly, a major issue I would like to present for the
record is the lack of market research conducted to find
qualified small businesses. With Silicon Valley as my former
home, I witnessed some of the most creative, talented, and
capable small businesses in the country produce and engineer
products and services that are currently provided by large
contractors. The boutique-size company has just as many robust
capabilities to do the work; however, because adequate market
research is not conducted, government agencies are not
utilizing their services. Making the connection with these
companies takes additional work, but as one large defense
contractor admitted to me, I quote, `` We do not have time to
look through databases. If we find an opportunity, we are going
to our existing contacts.'' The challenge for subcontracting
then becomes who you know and whom you know is not necessary
determined by your skill, capability, or work ethic.
My recommendation to the Subcommittee is twofold. Number
one, we must ensure that contracting officers and technical
representatives are complying with rules and systems in place
to ensure prime contractors are performing well on existing
contracts and subcontracting the proper amount to small
business. This can be done by requiring past performance
reports are executed by the COTR team. The contractor should
perform monthly performance reports and check-ins with the
contractors. I interviewed one former contracting officer who
said that if the agencies and agency heads made it a priority
in the contracting office, surely the contracting officer would
as well. It takes leadership to enforce these and agencies are
predominantly focused on prime contracts, but now we need
concerted efforts to focus subcontracting efforts.
Number two. Diligent and proper market research performed
by program offices is necessary. I have met a number of small
business representatives but access to the program office is
nearly impossible unless you have an existing relationship.
Existing relationships are usually formed through large federal
primes that allow the small business into their network.
Program office and technical reps should be required to do just
as many meet-and-greets as the small business offices are.
Taking a meeting with a new small business is declined for fear
of protest on bids. Those are the excuses I have heard from the
program offices, but it should be a requirement to know the
leadership behind who is providing the goods and services for
the federal government which is paid for by the American
taxpayer.
It is our right to meet with those making the executive
decision on who is winning these contracts and monitoring
subcontracting plans. Leadership of agencies should also
encourage the program office to network with the small business
program office with an agency so they build good rapport
amongst each other.
I have additional comments I would like inserted in the
congressional record that were not stated in this verbal
testimony, so in the interest of time I would like to thank the
Subcommittee for inviting me to this hearing, and I would be
happy to hear any questions you might have.
[The statement of Ms. Borromeo follows on page 50.]
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Ms. Borromeo. Rest assured
your additional comments will be made a part of the record.
Before I turn it over to Ms. Chu, I want to thank you
ladies for coming in. I was making comments to staff as you
were speaking along two lines. Number one, that many of the
recommendations that you have simply made, just now made in
your presentations, staff has made to this Committee as well,
and we will be pursuing many of those in the upcoming months.
Secondly, and I know Ms. Chu would back me up on this, I would
like in the future to make sure--do every effort that we can to
have the real people testify before the agency people do. I
would like to hear from the business owners, from the business
operators, before I hear from the agency. You raised several
questions here today that I would like to have Mr. Jordan and
Ms. Kendall back again. So next time we will try and get the
real world testimony on the record before we let the agency
folks go. What a great opportunity for you to ask questions
through us of the folks who are actually in a position to help
you right away.
So with that I will turn it over to Ms. Chu for her
questions.
Ms. Chu. Well, Ms. Bisceglie, you had several suggestions
for improvements on the subcontracting process. And one area
had to do with how the costs are calculated. You have to--the
small business prime contractor has to perform a percentage of
work based on the cost of the contract, but in so many cases
small businesses do not have the resources to calculate their
own costs, let alone a subcontractor's cost.
So do the requirements as written make it difficult for
small businesses to calculate the work that they must perform?
And which ways could it be made simpler and easier for small
businesses to understand?
Ms. Bisceglie. Okay. Thank you for the question. I think
the difference that we are sharing is that all businesses
should understand their costs. The challenge is that most
businesses are not going to share their true costs with other
businesses. So our suggestion is that the percentage of work is
based on the overall price. So if I am working with a prime, I
can give them my rolled up price that it will take me to do
that work versus my cost, which in effect is profit minus what
it actually costs me to do. And that is where the rub is. So
the suggestion is to look at just the grand total of what it is
going to--my price to that prime versus asking for any
breakdown of costs. So that would be the difference, is to look
at the grand total of price on the contract.
Ms. Chu. Very good suggestion.
Ms. Borromeo, in your testimony you talked about how some
Asian-Pacific American businesses are afraid to speak up about
the discrimination and challenges they face as small business
contractors and subcontractors. Do you have an example of these
testimonies that we can insert into the record?
Ms. Borromeo. I do. Yes.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I would like to have unanimous
consent that this example be inserted into the record.
Chairman Mulvaney. Accepted without objection.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Thank you.
What systems need to be in place to make businesses
comfortable with bringing up some of these problems to light?
Ms. Borromeo. I think realistically small business owners
probably will not just come out and, you know, say that they
are going through this. Like I said in my testimony, they want
to keep the current work they have or the relationships that
they have with the agencies or the prime contractor. But if SBA
or another entity within the federal government is actually--
they actually have some measurements or oversight reports that
are happening more frequently, I think that might be a way,
instead of the small business owner having to come out. They
are already the little guy in this, and if you are trying to
take down Goliath, some of these large prime contractors that
are making, you know, multi billion dollars off of federal
government contracts, it is very difficult to come out with an
honest testimony about what is happening to them. So I think
that it is going to be the responsibility of either SBA or
whatever entity you see fit for this to really hold them
accountable with more reporting and, you know, just taking
notes on where they are in their performance.
When I interviewed the former contracting officer he said
he did not feel like the agency was enforcing it. And I said,
well, do you have too much on your plate? You know, do you have
too much work that would not allow you to do these reports? He
said, no. If they made it a priority we could absolutely do it.
So I know that from a testimonial from an actual contracting
officer that it can be done. It is just you do not ever see
these people and there is not really any accountability on the
agency level. A lot of the time they are going to small
business for these answers when they should be going directly
to the contracting officers.
Ms. Chu. What should SBA, MBDA, and other agencies tasked
with improving access to these contracts do to make sure that
more Asian-Pacific American businesses and other minority
businesses and women-owned businesses secure contracts?
Ms. Borromeo. What should they----
Ms. Chu. What should the SBA and MBDA and other agencies--
--
Ms. Borromeo. Well, the subcontracting plans are already
required for them to submit. And so it is about follow through
and making sure that they actually stick to the subcontracting
plan that was submitted. So like I said, they are not doing the
reviews thoroughly, so I think that Mr. Jordan had expressed
that they, you know, they meet with them annually but, you
know, I mean, meeting annually does not mean that they are
actually performing the work well or even subcontracting
fairly. And so I think there has to be more frequent reviews
and penalties incurred if they are not meeting the goals of
their subcontracting plans.
Ms. Chu. Very good. I would like to ask about how the
subcontracting plans are being carried out by, say for
instance, the commercial market representatives which are
supposed to be counseling the large prime contractors on their
responsibilities. So either of you, I would like to ask that--
in your opinion are the commercial market representatives doing
their job on this front in aiding small businesses in marketing
themselves to the large businesses?
Ms. Borromeo. I can go ahead and answer. I have been to a
number of trade shows, networking events that SBA hosts and I
have never met a CMR before. Even when you--when someone had
asked me about the CMRs and SBA before I said what is a CMR? So
I think that they are not relevant in the contracting process.
And unless people like myself, who are constantly meeting with,
you know, contracting, or attempting to meet contracting
officers, do not even know about CMRs. I think it is more of an
awareness campaign maybe SBA needs to do to make sure that
these CMRs are visible and relevant to the contracting process.
Ms. Bisceglie. I absolutely agree with that.
Ms. Chu. Have you ever met one?
Ms. Bisceglie. No. Not through my business, from an Interos
perspective. No.
Ms. Chu. That is pretty shocking. Well, then let me ask
about this. The large prime contractors must submit
subcontracting plans for review, and if the contracting officer
finds that plans are inadequate, he or she can decide not to
award the contact. In your experience, how often does that
happen?
Ms. Borromeo. In the example of talking to another
contracting officer, again, he said that he has had colleagues
that want to terminate contracts after a prime has been
performing for a year saying they are just not, you know, doing
what they said they were going to do. And he asked a colleague
why, you know, what are your grounds for terminating him? You
have not been taking notes on or reporting anything that they
have been doing. And he said, well, I mean, it is not a
requirement so I am not going to do it. So it is a lack of
oversight. You just cannot terminate a contract without
grounds. And so if they are not required to enter the data or
report on how a contractor is performing, then it is just not
going to happen. It is an enforcement issue from the agency
level.
And my experience working with the agency reps is OSDBU--a
lot of the time the OSDBU reps are doing a fantastic job. They
just do not have any power within the agency to really effect
any change. And that is where the barrier is. I only meet with
OSDBU reps. When I ask for a COTR, when I ask for a technical
rep or a contracting officer, they refuse to meet with me until
the solicitation is out on the street. And it is like, well, I
cannot--if I cannot understand what the requirements are before
it is out on FedBizOpps, how are we supposed to prepare for the
bid?
And so it is an unfair advantage to federal contractors who
are experienced in this space because they already know the
requirements. They already have the in with the agency. They
already know the COTR. And so it does not allow for new vendors
to enter the marketplace.
Ms. Bisceglie. And I think I would absolutely agree. I
think from, again, from an Interos standpoint, it is twofold.
As she mentioned, the first part is the compliance. Are they
actually being filed? Is someone actually looking at them? And
is there any penalty for not being compliant?
To the question or one piece of the question that you asked
though, I think from a subcontractor standpoint and what I
shared earlier in my testimony is that those subcontracting
plans are never shared with us so there is a total lack of
transparency. So when you ask if they are filed or if they are
enforced, I do not have an idea. And again, when you have
larger contracts that go on for five to 10 years, as Mr. Jordan
mentioned, there is an ebb and a flow to how the subcontracting
plans are implemented because it is over the lifetime of the
contract. So in that, if there is a lack of transparency from
the bottom up and there is a lack of compliance from the top
down, there is a little bit of a who knows going on out there.
Ms. Chu. I would also like to ask about the contractors who
over-report their subcontracting achievements. In 2010, it was
reported that small businesses received over 34 percent of
subcontracting dollars, yet there have been cases that found
that prime contractors were overreporting their small business
subcontracting. Either of you in your estimation, what
percentage of subcontracting dollars is actually going to small
businesses?
Ms. Bisceglie. And I will defer. I do not know if you have
a shake on that again. I defer to the fact that we just--we
have never been in the situation to have the transparency even
on the contracts we are on to have an answer for you.
Ms. Borromeo. Yeah. I mean, I think that for a lot of the
small businesses that I represent, they are not even given the
opportunity, so I cannot even answer that question. They are
not given the opportunity to even compete. So it is a question
of can I even just compete on this so that I can answer that
question? I mean, that is a big issue.
Ms. Bisceglie. It is a competition but it is also, to your
point, when the filing occurs and the percentages are reported,
we have no visibility to that. We do not have any visibility to
how the overall subcontracting plan as executed, much less or
actual role on it. So if at the time of the contract award, if
the prime says we are going to subcontract 10 percent of the
award to Interos, we are never told that. And we are never--it
is never measured at the end because we are not actually,
except for the public information that you can actually pay for
on FOIA, that you can see how large the contract was. You do
not know where that 10 percent falls at any point in time. So
it is a very difficult answer to provide to you at this stage.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Ms. Chu. And you--I think we
shared a little bit of surprise at the fact that nobody had
ever seen a commercial market representative. Staff informs me
there are 35 or 36 of them nationwide, many of them part-time,
overseeing $200 billion worth of contracts. Not a surprise that
you have not seen them yet.
Ms. Borromeo, let me press you on one issue because I did
read the submission from the Asian-American Justice Center. And
I am more than willing to consider that the possibility for
discrimination exists. I used to work with large contractors
building roads and bridges and so forth, and you certainly did
not see a lot of women-owned businesses out on those jobs.
Again, I am willing to entertain the possibility that the
potential exists, but are you saying that you are seeing
evidence of discrimination based upon the fact that groups of
particular race or creed or gender or is it because--do you
believe you are being discriminated against based upon the size
of your company?
Ms. Borromeo. I think it is both. I think small businesses
in general based on size all experience this, but I think it
becomes even more complex when you have cultural or linguistic
barriers that do not allow for you to communicate your point as
well as maybe other vendors would. So I think small businesses
as a whole are not being treated very fairly in the space. But
when you add, like I said, the cultural and linguistic aspects
to it, it becomes very difficult. And if you also do not
understand how government works, they would be very--they would
be afraid to talk to you right now thinking you are going to
hand them over to the police.
Chairman Mulvaney. Do not feel bad. One of the traditional
ways we try and deal with that is by trying to make the process
as neutral as possible. Having been through the subcontracting
process, do you see places where we can change the process in
order to remove the potential for discrimination based upon
race or gender?
Ms. Borromeo. I think employing more folks in the federal
government that would understand the cultural nuances of some
of these folks. I think that if you have people that
understand, you know, how a person grows up or how they
communicate, you know, it is increasing the diversity within
the pace. Hiring more women, hiring more minorities, to
represent in the contracting space would make it much easier.
Chairman Mulvaney. Let me go through sort of a real world
scenario. Let us say I am a prime contractor and I have got a
Department of Defense subcontract and I am looking to
subcontract some of it out. I may post it on various websites
and so forth. I do not understand the exact logistics of that
but at some point I am going to receive a bunch of inquiries,
either in paper or over e-mail or so forth. Is there some part
of that process that says, oh, wait a second? It allows me to
say that is a women-owned business, that is an Asian-owned
business. Is there something that is broken in that system?
Ms. Borromeo. I believe that they are not collecting data
at this point regarding who is a minority or who is a woman. So
that is one issue.
The second issue is they are not posting these things, do
you do not even know that a subcontracting opportunity exists
except within your own little network. And it is when the prime
contractors let you in. You have to hobnob in the same circles
with them and it can cost a whole lot of money to go and
network with them, and you just have to have the connections.
And if you are not familiar with the culture or with a language
or, you know, things like that or you are not comfortable
interacting with another gender then it might be very difficult
to make that.
Chairman Mulvaney. If we had had more time today with Mr.
Jordan we would have pressed him on some of the shortcomings
that we perceive in the SBA regarding the postings and making
information available.
Ms. Bisceglie, you looked like you had some input on that
process as to where it might be improved.
Ms. Bisceglie. I actually, just from a support standpoint,
one of the pieces from a governmental perspective to support
what Jamie just shared, is the passage of the women's set-aside
program. So the government is admitting that there is gender
bias within government procurement. So I just wanted to bring
that up as a resounding support point throughout her case.
Chairman Mulvaney. An again, I am willing to admit it. I am
trying to fix it through the process. Again, if you gave me a
document--if you made an application for a subcontract on my
prime and the name of your business was ABC Subcontracting, it
is unlikely that I would ever know that you were a women-owned
business is my point. So again, I am willing to admit that the
potential is there; I am just trying to figure out at what
point in the process you expose--you have let people know you
are a women-owned business so that you cannot be discriminated
against.
Ms. Borromeo. Well, maybe when they are looking for these
subcontractors they could ask if they qualify for any of these
set-aside programs or if, you know, they are a DBE. So, number
one, let us post it on Subnet. I went on Subnet and I actually
talked to Judge Orden's office about it and I said, you guys
only have a couple hundred subcontracts posted on this. I said,
is there a more robust database that I can go to for this? Oh,
everything is posted on FedBizOpps. It is not posted there.
And I talked to a prime contractor, a large defense
contract, who told me that they are not required by the federal
government to do that. And so--and they just do not like your
system so they are not going to do it. They have their own
system of identifying qualified contractors.
Ms. Bisceglie. And I think that is, if I may, back to the
compliance issue. Many of the large prime do follow similar
compliance to socioeconomic standards that are out there, so
they go for a certain percentage of 8(a)s, a certain percentage
of women-owned businesses. So they are out there. And very
frequently, directly to your question, when we receive an RFP
from one of those large prime, there is a check box that says;
which of these socioeconomic standards are set-aside so you
file under? So you check women-owned. You check small business,
what have you. So right up front very often you announce where
you fit.
I think it goes back to compliance though, if I may, in
that there is no teeth that says that we need to be--we need to
actually implement the diversity that we are asking for. So we
are starting to ask the questions and the information is being
shared, but there is no compliance that says that we actually
adhere to those levels.
Chairman Mulvaney. And it strikes me. I know I asked the
question but it struck me as you were giving your answer that
there is a catch-22 here, which is there is a requirement that
is a target. I cannot remember if it is three percent or five
percent for women-owned businesses. Certain for service-
disabled veterans. And so forth. And in order to meet the
requirement you are required to disclose that you would fall
into those categories. So again, you are in a catch-22. If you
want this completely blind test that would not allow
discrimination, you would not be able to satisfy the
requirements of the--requirements that we have set. Interesting
issue.
Ms. Bisceglie, very briefly to you. You talked a bit about
the transparency and about the small business plan not being
shared with you. I am sympathetic to that but I have also been
a subcontractor, I have been a contractor. It would be rare
that I would share information about my contract with my owner
with my sub. Not typically something that I would do. What
would you be most interested in seeing in that if you had your
will?
Ms. Bisceglie. If I had my will I would be most interested
in seeing the part of the response that affected me. So how
were they measuring the success of my relationship with the
prime?
And you are right. Even as a potential prime contractor,
there may be subcontractors that we share information with and
some that we do not. I mean, again, from a small business to a
small business, there is a bit more other relationships a
little bit different than a very, very large business. So I can
absolutely accept that. But I think understanding--if the prime
contractor is going to be held to a level of compliance based
on how they are dealing with me, it would be nice to have a
voice in that fight.
Chairman Mulvaney. Agreed. Go back to the specifics of the
contract that you all dealt with. Did they breach the contract
with you? I mean, the reason I ask, and it is completely off
topic perhaps why we are here today is we have had some in-
sourcing hearings this year and we have heard testimony about
folks getting kicked off of contracts. And one of the questions
I always ask is, did they breach the contract? Did the contract
terminate? What were the grounds under which they were allowed
to displace five of your folks?
Ms. Bisceglie. I do not know. What I was told was that the
folks, all five of them, were not working out and they were
instantly replaced with five of the prime's people. So again,
from our standpoint, it would have been nice to know what was
reported to anybody managing the subcontracting plan. One, from
just a reference ability from my own company. From the
contracting, the people, all five of those people had worked on
previous contracts for me with it never a problem, so it was a
surprise. And the larger surprise, back to our wish and our
desire to understand the compliance with the subcontracting
plan, is that it was swift. It was your people are gone in less
than five days. It was not this is not working out. We need to
change it. It was just very quick and they replaced with their
own people.
So it was all Department of Defense work. My guess is that
it was a budgetary situation, but we do not know, which again,
is why we are asking for the transparency and the understanding
of the compliance of the contracting plan.
Chairman Mulvaney. All right. Thank you for that. Again, it
strikes me that you have a contract and I could never just
break my subcontract with my subcontractors unless the contract
allowed me to do so.
My last line of question relates to the experience you had
in transitioning from a sub to a prime. How did you find it
generally? Was your experience as a sub helpful to you when you
tried to do it? And are there things you learned as a sub that
have made you a better prime contractor dealing with your own
subs?
Ms. Bisceglie. Right. So the only two prime contracts we
have right now are very large IDIQs. And we have not gotten
billable work. They are relatively new for us. And right now we
have three proposals to be prime contractors. So we have not
been awarded as a prime yet.
As far as the process, the one thing I will share with you
is--and I will tell you, one of the bids that we have in right
now is with a very, very large contractor who is a sub to us.
And the other two are with mid-tier or smaller businesses just
because of the work.
And the one thing that is actually I have been educated on
is a lot of what I shared here in the testimony, it was very
easy for me to be here today because we have a very different
relationship with our subs on these bids, as well as the ones
that are on with the IDIQs, than we have had with our primes in
the past. And part of it is the transparency and the working
relationship that we are trying to foster, so it is kind of
like, you know, be the change that you want to see. And I think
that that is probably the biggest thing that we have learned.
So we are already implementing a lot of that transparency with
our subcontractors and hope and look to continue that once we
get awarded the work.
Chairman Mulvaney. The Past Performance Report, did you
find it to be a fair process? Did you find it to be helpful to
you? Did you find it to be a hindrance?
Ms. Bisceglie. As far as filing our price performance?
Chairman Mulvaney. Right.
Ms. Bisceglie. It is--I think it is just we are fortunate.
We have been in business for six years and I have been in the
same industry for over 20. So from a past performance
standpoint, we are very, very fortunate in the fact that we can
definitely stand on our own laurels. So it is a lot of
paperwork but I think it is fair in the fact that it is
pretty--again, to Jamie's point, it is pretty blind as far as
that is concerned. It is a standard template. You fill it out.
You put your point of contact so that they can check
everything, and for us it has been fine.
Chairman Mulvaney. Would you have been able to go straight
to prime contract? Or would you have had to have gone through
the sub programs in order to qualify?
Ms. Bisceglie. It depends on the contract. Some of them
need specific relevant past performance. Again, because of the
way that I am building my company, all of my people have at
least 10 to 15 years experience in this industry so I am a
little bit of an anomaly in that standpoint. I think that the
benefit of coming in as a subcontract is that I had the ability
to learn a lot of what it takes to be a federal government
contractor on somebody else's time, if you will. And we have
been able to foster some of the relationships that are going to
make us much more successful going forward.
Chairman Mulvaney. Have either of you ladies participated
or known anybody who has participated in the mentor programs?
Ms. Borromeo. I was actually just going to say that. One of
my clients has been with the DHS Mentor Protege Program for a
year and there is no extra merit in being part of that program.
Ms. Bisceglie. We have actually done the Department of
Defense and DHS, and I would absolutely agree. I think----
Ms. Borromeo. They are for show.
Ms. Bisceglie. Well, I think that what I have seen, and I
actually attended the Mentor Protege conference. And I think
that what I saw was that, and this again, this all is Interos,
from a--I think that the programs largely came out of being
product companies, so if I wanted to sell product to the
government. And so the Raytheons and the Boeings and those sort
of companies have very, very successful programs. We are
services, and I think it is a little bit more difficult. And a
clear example is that our mentor in the Department of Defense
program, we thought it would work because they understood what
we do for a living, yet then within their own company there was
a stress factor of why should we bring in a sub because that
takes work away from us? And we are not an IT company; we are a
supply chain company. So if you can only imagine with as many
IT contractors you have in this area, that that issue is all
over the place.
So I think that what I have heard from peers that have been
part of the program, if you are with one of the larger that
started as a product and move over to services, that they have
seen a lot of success. But just services to services, it is a
little bit tougher to implement.
Chairman Mulvaney. Ladies, thank you very much. I
appreciate the testimonies. It is fascinating stuff. We could
do it all day but everybody has been here three hours and I do
apologize again for the long hearing.
As we--this Committee will work to expand opportunities for
small business and compete for federal contracts both as prime
and subcontractors. We keep in mind that there is a lot of room
for improvement. Thank you specifically for your suggested
improvements. Those will not go unheard of or unresponded to.
Ms. Borromeo, thank you for this. This will be included in
the record. And I think this really does help me and the
ranking member try and get a feel for where we want to take
this Subcommittee especially next year.
So with that I will ask unanimous consent that we have five
days to revise and extend our remarks or to ask questions of
the witnesses. Again, witnesses, thank you very much. Thank you
all for sticking around for three hours. Ms. Chu, it is always
a pleasure. And with that we will adjourn for the day.
Ms. Chu. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:50 p.m., the Subcommittee hearing was
adjourned.]


