- IS UNCERTAINTY CONTRIBUTING TO THE JOBS CRISIS: THE VIEWS OF LOCAL ILLINOIS SMALL BUSINESSES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IS UNCERTAINTY CONTRIBUTING TO THE JOBS CRISIS: THE VIEWS OF LOCAL
ILLINOIS SMALL BUSINESSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC GROWTH, TAX, AND CAPITAL ACCESS

of the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
DECEMBER 12, 2011

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-048
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov/house

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

72-954 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
ROBERT SCHILLING, Illinois

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
JANICE HAHN, California
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________

OPENING STATEMENT

Page
Hon. Joe Walsh...................................................     1

WITNESSES

Eric Treiber, President and CEO, Chicago White Metal Casting,
Inc., Bensenville, IL..........................................     3
Perry Moy, Owner, Plum Garden Restaurant, McHenry, IL............     5
Craig Larsen, Founder/President, AHC Advisors, Inc., St. Charles,
IL.............................................................     7

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Eric Treiber, President and CEO, Chicago White Metal Casting,
Inc., Bensenville, IL......................................    16
Perry Moy, Owner, Plum Garden Restaurant, McHenry, IL........    24
Craig Larsen, Founder/President, AHC Advisors, Inc., St.
Charles, IL................................................    28

IS UNCERTAINTY CONTRIBUTING TO THE JOBS CRISIS: THE VIEWS OF LOCAL
ILLINOIS SMALL BUSINESSES

----------

MONDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Growth,
Tax, and Capital Access,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., at
the Woodstock City Hall Council Chambers, 121 West Calhoun St.,
Woodstock, Illinois, Hon. Joe Walsh (Chairman of the
Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representative Walsh.
Chairman Walsh. Welcome. Thank you, everybody, for coming.
Let me officially gavel in this hearing of the Small Business
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax, and Capital Access. We
are now in order.
It is great to be in Woodstock. This is a field hearing
away from D.C.
I would like to, before I get started, and I will do this
again, thank our three witnesses for coming this morning. And
we look forward to your testimony on a very important and
timely topic, so thank you.
And welcome to everybody else who has come this morning.
According to economists, the recession ended more than 2\1/
2\ years ago. While that may be the view in certain academic
circles and on Wall Street, it is definitely not the view or
experience of small businesses in Woodstock and on Main Street,
or the over 13 million Americans who remain unemployed.
According to statistics from the Small Business
Administration's Office of Advocacy and the National Federation
of Independent Business, small businesses suffered more than
their larger counterparts in the recession, and their optimism
about the future is also lower than expressed by large
businesses.
While the experiences they face in the difficult recession
may account for some of this sentiment, a growing body of
evidence and the voices of small-business owners are
demonstrating that policy actions and inactions in Washington
are in no small part causing their malaise.
The economy, our economy, needs entrepreneurs to take risks
and invest in the kinds of capital improvements that will
expand their businesses and create new jobs. However, when
faced with uncertainty, businesses are often reluctant to bear
new risk. And as a result, they hold off on making new
investments.
In a recent research paper, economists with the University
of Chicago and Stanford University created a policy uncertainty
index that tracked business concerns about the direction of
Federal spending, tax and other policies, and measured their
impact on the broader economy and on employment.
In applying these models to publicly available data going
back to 1985, the researchers found that policy uncertainty has
had significant impact and effects on the broader economy and
has impaired the creation of some 2.5 million jobs.
A similar study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
found that in 2011 the percentage of small-business owners
planning to hire would be 6 percentage points higher if it were
not for policy uncertainty.
This is not rocket science. It is common sense. If you are
a business owner and need to hire another employee or buy some
new equipment, but you are unsure about how Washington is going
to change your taxes or how much a new regulation is going to
cost your company, you will hold off on that purchase and you
will hold off on that hire. Scenarios like this are playing out
all across our district and all across the country.
This policy uncertainty is preventing American small
businesses from creating jobs, and it is crushing economic
growth.
The current Administration does not understand this. It
doesn't understand how business works. In the last fiscal year
alone, Federal agencies unleashed 43 major new rules. According
to the National Federation of Independent Businesses, the cost
of implementing these rules is $28 billion, the highest level
since 1981.
Who is going to make new hires or buy any new equipment
when they have to comply with $28 billion in new rulemaking?
The purpose of today's hearing is to learn how policy
actions and inaction in Washington are affecting local Illinois
small businesses and to hear their recommendations on how
government can create a more positive business environment more
conducive to job creation.
So again, to our witnesses, welcome. Thank you for coming.
Let me just take a moment to explain the timing lights. You
will each have 5 minutes or so to deliver your testimony. The
light will start out as green. When you have 1 minute
remaining, the light will turn yellow. And finally, it will
turn red at the end of your 5 minutes. Try to keep within that
time limit, but your chairman has been known to be quite
lenient when it comes to finishing testimony.
And, again, your written testimony will be part of the
official record.
Our first witness this morning is Eric Treiber. He is
president and CEO of Chicago White Metal Casting in
Bensenville, Illinois. The company was started by his
grandfather in 1937 and manufactures metal castings for a
number of industries. Eric is testifying today of behalf of the
North American Die Casters Association.
Mr. Treiber, thank you, and welcome. You are welcome to
deliver your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF ERIC TREIBER, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CHICAGO WHITE
METAL CASTING, INC., BENSENVILLE, ILLINOIS, ON BEHALF OF THE
NORTH AMERICAN DIE CASTERS ASSOCIATION; PERRY MOY, OWNER OF
PLUM GARDEN RESTAURANT, McHENRY, ILLINOIS, ON BEHALF OF THE
NATIONAL RESTAURANT ASSOCIATION; AND CRAIG LARSEN, FOUNDER AND
PRESIDENT OF AHC ADVISORS INC., ST. CHARLES, ILLINOIS, ON
BEHALF OF THE FINANCIAL PLANNING ASSOCIATION OF ILLINOIS

STATEMENT OF ERIC TREIBER

Mr. Treiber. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Walsh. You
cut about a minute out of my presentation, so I appreciate
that. That gives me some additional time.
Today, there are over 350 U.S. die casters manufacturing
thousands of nonferrous casters. More than 90 percent of all
manufactured goods and capital equipment use metal castings as
engineered components, or rely on castings for their
manufacture.
In Illinois, Chicago White Metal is one of nearly 40 die-
casting facilities, and our company is a leading manufacturer
of aluminum, magnesium, and zinc castings.
We have 230 employees. Many of them are in skilled trades,
with an average tenure of 17 years.
Our customers come from the medical, automotive,
industrial, telecommunications, and recreational industries. As
an example, for the automotive sector, we produce a number of
intricate die castings that become parts of rearview-mirror
housings, headlight housings, and the power system of electric
vehicles.
The manufacturing sector has been deeply affected by the
recession with more than 2 million jobs lost. A strong U.S.
manufacturing sector is key to jobs, innovation, and prosperity
in the State of Illinois and America.
To regain momentum and encourage hiring, the U.S. needs not
just improved economic conditions but also consistent policies
in taxation, energy, labor, trade, health care, education, and,
certainly, regulation.
Unfortunately, many die casters are holding off hiring new
employees for the following reasons: uncertainty about the
economy, uncertainty about tax liability, double-digit
increases in our health care premiums, increased costs with
waves of new regulations, and potential increases in our energy
costs.
In particular, we are troubled by three new costly
Environmental Protection Agency regulations--the Boiler MACT,
Utility MACT, and Cross-State Air Pollution Rule.
We are extremely alarmed that Utility MACT could endanger
America's power supply. The electric industry has only 3 years
to comply with the new rules that are designed to force dozens
of coal-fired power plants to shut down. It is likely that the
Nation's power grid will be stressed in ways it has never
experienced.
Given the great amount of uncertainty over critical
government policy areas, instead of hiring new employees, the
die-casting industry is faced with utilizing overtime with its
current workforce and/or hiring temporary workers to fill
employment needs.
This Administration has imposed excessive regulations with
little regard for their impact on job creation and the economy.
In my testimony, I am focusing on two areas, the EPA and
U.S. tax policy. The die-casting industry has long recognized
the need for sensible regulations to ensure workplace safety
and protect public health. But the Federal Government has gone
too far.
The Obama Administration has 4,257 new regulations in the
works, 219 of which will cost over $100 million annually, which
is 15 percent more than last year.
A recent Small Business Administration report showed the
total cost to employers of Federal regulations is $1.75
trillion. The average regulatory cost for each employee of a
mid-sized manufacturer now exceeds $13,000 per year.
Meeting the demands of Federal regulations can cost
companies millions of dollars each year in staff time. We
specifically had one and a half people devoted to following
regulatory compliance.
Some of the most economically threatening regulatory
proposals come from the EPA. The agency is currently advancing
20 proposed major rules with 173 others.
In 2011, the agency began regulating greenhouse gas
emissions from stationary sources under the Clean Air Act.
While only the largest facilities will be regulated at first,
this action sets the stage for future regulation of much
smaller sources.
Despite being a small business, it turns out our company is
already bound with a set of reporting requirements under the
new greenhouse gas requirements. Nowhere did the EPA announce
and/or outline these new reporting obligations. There was no
public outreach to business. We had to do it all on our own.
Our environmental manager spent hours researching potential
reporting triggers and discovered that die casters that utilize
magnesium, which we do, are immediately covered.
Beginning in 2012, we have to register at E-GGRT, which is
the electronic greenhouse gas reporting tool, and start
reporting our emissions. It takes about 6 hours a year to
monitor, not even including the reporting time it will require.
We believe that major regulations that place new burdens on
the private sector should be subject to congressional approval.
I support the REINS Act, which is Regulations from the
Executive in Need of Scrutiny, which passed the House on
December 7th, which would require all bills be signed off by
Congress and the President that have a $100 million or greater
impact.
As Congress begins debating tax reform, the tax code should
provide businesses relief from burdensome and confusing tax
rules. Many of these provisions are enacted on a temporary
basis, requiring repeated extensions.
The uncertainty resulting from such temporary tax policy
makes it difficult for die casters, which rely on 5- and 10-
year business strategies, to plan effectively.
The bonus depreciation and section 179 expensing will be
extended in 2012, but at a much lower rate. Bonus depreciation
and section 179 expensing provide tax relief for companies that
want to buy capital assets, such as plant machinery and
equipment. These investment incentives have had a positive
impact and incentivized business purchasing and job creation.
While it is possible that Congress may choose to extend
some of the expiring tax provisions, there is no guarantee that
they will be available to the same extent. We need a national
tax climate that does not place manufacturers at a competitive
disadvantage in the global marketplace. Our tax rate is higher
than trading partners such as Canada, and they pay perhaps half
the taxes that we do, 18 percent compared to our 40 percent.
The bottom line is predictability and consistency in U.S.
tax code will offer the long-term planning in investments that
enable us to stay competitive.
Chairman Walsh, thank you again for the opportunity to
testify today. I would be happy to ask respond to any questions
at the appropriate time.
[The statement of Mr. Treiber follows on p. 16.]
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Treiber, for your
testimony.
Our next witness is Perry Moy. Perry is the owner of Plum
Garden Restaurant located right in McHenry. He is testifying
today on behalf of the National Restaurant Association and
previously served on that organization's board of directors.
Mr. Moy, you may now deliver your testimony.

STATEMENT OF PERRY MOY

Mr. Moy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I speak from close to 50 years of experience in the
restaurant business. My dad was a naturalized U.S. citizen, a
descendant of the Chinese immigrants who built the railroad
from San Francisco to St. Louis. He died at an early age of 30,
leaving my mom with four kids.
In 1965, we moved to Park Ridge, which was a suburb just
outside of Chicago, and my mom and I took the train down to:
McHenry. We stopped in McHenry and went to Main Street. It was
a bustling street. It had the bank. It had the post office. It
had the famous Althoff's plumbing. That is where they started.
We walked down that street and I asked this big man--and I
was all of 14, and my mom was all of 4,1" and couldn't speak a
word of English. ``How much to rent this building, sir?'' And
he looks at us and looked at us and he finally said, ``How
about $70 a month? I will throw in the utilities, and you can
live upstairs.'' And that was it. That is how the Plum Garden
started. And I graduated from McHenry High School in 1969.
From that then, I am proud to say we are the oldest
independent restaurant in the history of the county, close to
46 years. A lot of you in this room have been to my restaurant,
and I employ about 18 people. I consider them to be a part of
my family. We have worked hard to try to maintain the quality
of service.
But this county has gone through some very, very tough
times. We were the fastest growing county, as you alluded to,
Mr. Chairman, due to the construction of homes being built
here, 20,000, 30,000 homes a year sometimes. And now that
industry is over.
We saw a 30 percent drop in my business in 2009. How do we
handle the skyrocketing costs? And the fuel costs, we are at $5
a gallon, and stuff like that. The food costs are going up. How
do we deal with things like this?
I got my team together and said, ``We have to work harder.
I am asking you to do more for less.'' And a lot of my staff
have been with me since high school, over 20, 30 years. And
that's how we began the turnaround.
From this, then, we worked harder. We worked smarter. We
tried to do more. My staff did more for less, and I thank them
for that. And that was a part of the spirit of our community.
I have learned a lot in this these past few years. First, I
think America has ignored Main Street. Small business can't get
access to capital they need. Nobody qualifies, especially in
the restaurant business. Banks sit on funds, but we cannot
achieve any of those funds. The SBA has great programs. I have
looked into them.
And I encourage the Federal Government to make the SBA loan
process as easy as possible. If Congress can keep the SBA loan
guarantees high, and the bank's exposure--especially the local
community banks' exposure at a minimum, it would be a great way
to ease the pain during these tough times.
Secondly, I would like to see a moratorium on new taxes,
regulations, and mandates. Let's just stop this craziness that
is going on. As entrepreneurs, we don't know what is around the
corner. Health care is a major concern. Maybe I may not qualify
for the mandated national health policy that is going to come
around, but I know every small-business guy and every
restaurateur is so afraid of what is around the corner, they
don't know how to react to that.
A business like mine is hit hard by not just Federal
Government but local government. Everybody is seeking taxes,
and mandates, regulations. Because they are hurting, they want
to pass that burden onto us, and I have to pass that burden
onto my guests and customers who have been with me close to 40
years. And it is just impossible to handle that challenge
sometimes.
We all want to comply with the law, but these government
mandates divert our savings and our energies to try to produce
a great product.
And finally, the State of Illinois created--we went through
an audit, a random audit, so they say. And at the end of the
day, the Illinois Department of Revenue said, ``Perry, the
State of Illinois owes you $112.'' But then he asked for my
purveyor bills, and he looked at them. He spent another 4 hours
with me and looked at all my--he handed me a bill for $5,000.
And I said, ``I thought you said you owe me $112.'' He finally
came up with a thing that had said, ``Well, you use cooking
oil, don't you, in your food?'' And I said, ``Yes, I do.''
``Cooking oil is defined by the State of Illinois as a use.
It is not deemed as food. Ten percent is food; 90 percent is
use, so I am going to charge you 6 percent on your cooking oil,
so you owe us $5,000.'' Never heard of it. I called up all my
friends in the restaurant business, and they never heard of
things like that.
These are some of the predatory things the government tries
to do. They come out to reach in these times against small
business.
As my friend here, Eric, has stated, we need a fair tax
code. We want to know what is coming around the corner. I mean,
things like I just put in a small bar and a new floor, and it
cost me $8,000. If Congress could support that 15-year
depreciation schedule for restaurants, I think that would be
great. Instead, that is going to expire. It is going to go to
39 years. I know that both sides of the House are wrangling on
it.
The other thing that I could see happening is the work
opportunity tax credit incentive for restaurants. We hire
people that fall through the cracks sometimes.
As a basic principle, the tax code always says that
business expenses should be fully deductible. I remember back
in the '80s that we had 100 percent business meal
deductibility. I was honored to be a delegate to the White
House Conference on Small Business, and that issue to maintain
and retain business meal deductibility was the number two issue
coming out of the White House Conference on Small Business
under President Clinton, 14 or 40 votes short of being the
number one issue. And I remember President Clinton asking me,
why is this so important? Because it means jobs. It means a
future. Because small-business people like myself and like
sitting at this table need a place to share some coffee and
some bread so that they can market themselves and create new
jobs. And I think that is important.
Finally, I think that I want to thank Senator Durbin for
helping us, for lowering the fees on debit cards. I mean, we
have had partners in our restaurants, people that use credit
cards and debit cards, the fees are outrageous. And he helped
us lower those fees, and I thank him for that.
Unfortunately, government sometimes doesn't really
understand that--just get out of our way, and I think we can
create jobs. And the restaurant industry is the second-largest
job creator in the country. We employ almost 13 million people.
So from this testimony, I hope that we can move forward.
Just a moratorium on new taxes would be great.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, everybody here.
[The statement of Mr. Moy follows on p. 24.]
Chairman Walsh. Thank you.
Our next and final witness is Craig Larsen. He is founder
and president of AHC Advisors, Inc., a financial planning
company located in St. Charles. Mr. Larsen began his career
working on the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange before
leaving to found AHC Advisors in 1995. He is testifying today
on behalf of the Financial Planning Association of Illinois.
Mr. Larsen, thank you for coming, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony.

STATEMENT OF CRAIG LARSEN

Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Chairman Walsh. Thank you for
inviting me here today to speak about the difficulties that
small businesses face in today's uncertain political and
economic climate.
I think my testimony will be less than 5 minutes, because
in many places, I can say ditto. Although we are from three
different industries, there is a common theme that I hear.
My company is a small business, a very small business. I
have one full-time employee and one part-time employee. My
company is expanding, and I need to hire another person. I will
relate some of the challenges that I am facing later in my
testimony.
The first area I would like to focus on is tax policy. The
tax code is continuously being modified. In 1986, the goal of
tax reform was to make the code more fair and simple. Since
that time, there have been tens of thousands of changes and
additions. That isn't simple.
This complexity adds to businesses uncertainty. Many of
these changes are driven by special interests who are able to
secure preferential treatment. These changes have been
supported by both Democrats and Republicans over time.
For example, in Illinois, both the CME and Sears are
seeking preferential treatment that won't be available to small
businesses.
The current tax rates will be in effect until the end of
2012. New business projects or an expansion of existing
ventures are evaluated by using models that estimate take-home
profits to their owners over the life of the project. A very
important component of this evaluation is the expected tax
rate.
If businesses are unable to reasonably predict future tax
rates, how can they be expected to expand or undertake new
projects on the margin if it is possible that future tax rates
could be so high as to make these projects unprofitable?
If businesses don't expand existing projects or take on new
projects, employment growth will remain muted. Although
differences in political philosophy will shape an individual's
view of how the tax code should be written, it cannot be
disputed that more complexity and uncertainty in the tax code
reduces the likelihood that businesses will invest in existing
or new projects that will produce economic growth and, most
importantly, create jobs.
Regarding regulation, although there has been a significant
increase of regulation of many industries--we have heard some
examples here--including health care and energy also, I am
going to focus on the industry in which my company is engaged,
which is financial services.
The financial services industry is one of the most heavily
regulated sectors of our economy. There are tens of thousands
of pages that regulate financial companies. However, what we
see time and again is that new regulations don't eliminate
problems in the future, even in the areas that they were
specifically designed to address.
For example, the Madoff scandal is a good example. What
Madoff did violated the laws that were currently on the books,
and I don't believe that additional regulations would have
stopped him from engaging in fraudulent behavior.
Compliance is so complex and ambiguous in the financial
services industry that I have had to outsource this area to an
outside legal firm. Despite this, we spend quite a bit of time
internally dealing with compliance issues. I estimate that our
external and internal regulatory compliance costs exceed
$10,000 per year. These costs have increased since the passage
of Dodd-Frank.
This is time and money that is spent dealing in large part
with ambiguous and unclear legislation as it is written. This
is time and money that could otherwise be spent growing my
business.
However, I don't believe that all regulations are bad. A
set of consistent, clear, and reasonable regulations are
important to have. Unfortunately, that is not what we have in
the financial services industry. Instead, we have financial
regulations that are vague and ambiguous in many areas, that
were designed in large part, many of them, in the '30s and
'40s. They are also, in large part, a product of the lobbying
efforts of the very same financial institutions that were at
the heart of the financial crisis.
George Stigler found that oftentimes regulators become
captives of the regulated, because that is who lobbies the
regulators. That is important to remember.
My experience as a business owner is such: My business is
expanding. I need to hire more people. Given elevated costs
related to tax increases and increased regulation, and,
importantly, uncertainty about potential even greater costs in
the future, I have made a decision to hire only a part-time
employee, instead of a full-time employee.
How am I supposed to make informed and rational decisions
on hiring when there is so much uncertainty? This is
uncertainty both in the tax code and the regulations that my
firm operates under.
I don't think that I'm alone. In fact, we have heard that
here. I think that businesses large and small are dealing with
similar issues and that this directly contributes to the
stellarly high unemployment rate that we face today in the
United States.
It is my hope that we can leave the environment of tax
uncertainty and excessively politically driven regulations
behind us. Our country would be better off if we put in place a
set of limited but commonsense regulations and a tax code that
is less complex and provides businesses with the certainty of
knowing what their future tax rates will be. Businesses would
then be able to plan for the future, grow, hire even more
employees, and get our country back on the path of growth and
prosperity.
Thank you for your time, and I will take any questions that
you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Larsen follows on p. 28.]
Chairman Walsh. Thank you. Thank you all for your
testimony.
Let me sort of weave my way around a few different topics
with some questions.
Let me address the first couple toward each witness.
It was former Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen, I believe,
who said a billion here, a billion there, pretty soon you are
talking about real money.
I have been in Washington a year now. We are not talking
billions; we are talking about trillions of dollars that
Washington is spending that Washington doesn't have.
All of this Federal spending, all of the debt, all of the
deficits, give us your take on what that does to your
particular type of a business. What sort of uncertainty in
general does that create for you as small-business men? The
overall debt that Washington finds itself faced with.
Mr. Treiber. From our standpoint, not just as a
businessman, but as a person in the community, it is as if--if
we ran our business like the government is running theirs, we
would be bankrupt. We would be out of business. So it leaves me
specifically wondering how can they operate this way, because
if we were to do that, we would no longer exist. So it leaves
me wondering who is really in charge.
Mr. Moy. Mr. Chairman, it is such a negative role model
that we look at. We look for leadership. There is a lack of it.
And that then, we feel that we have been left down. And I think
that is the major concern. And that creates that uncertainty
and that cloud.
Mr. Larsen. I would just say from my perspective the huge
debt we have--I think our total debt is almost 100 percent of
GDP, so we owe almost as much as we produce in a year--as I
look at that and plan, my assumption is that we obviously have
to pay that debt back in the future. And unfortunately, I think
that is going to come through increased taxes. However----
Chairman Walsh. No, Craig, continue that was--or maybe come
back to that as well. Do most business men and women understand
or assume that that is going to have to be paid by someone?
Mr. Larsen. So money doesn't grow on trees. You can only
spend the same dollar once. So if a dollar is spent, it is
spent on some venture and it is owed, it has to be paid back.
And that has to come from either a cut in spending or an
increase in taxes. Unfortunately, I think in this environment,
we are going to narrow the deficit by increased taxes. It is
unfortunate, but I see that.
So when it comes to planning, for example, my expansion,
I'm looking at new office space and all the capital costs that
go into that. Now I have to discount what additional profits
may be sent to the government, and that is less money that can
be used to pay back----
Mr. Moy. And there is also a concern of inflation. You keep
printing that money out and all of a sudden now the charge of
my food has to go up to coincide. It is a domino effect. It is
just a horrible, vicious cycle that we seem not to be able to
get out from under.
Chairman Walsh. Eric, any final thoughts on the whole debt
and the uncertainty that that creates for business?
Mr. Treiber. Well, again, it is unknown, but one would
assume that the way to mitigate this in the future is going to
be through increased taxes.
Chairman Walsh. Let's then segue into taxes and tax policy.
The House will probably vote this week on another extension of,
say, the payroll tax cut. The Bush tax rates are going to be up
again, so there will be debate and discussion as to whether
they should be extended temporarily.
The prevailing mood in Washington seems to be to extend
things temporarily, to fiddle around with taxes temporarily.
Give me your notions on this whole movement toward temporarily
raising or cutting taxes and doing something permanently,
either raising or cutting them, and how that impacts business.
Start with Craig.
Mr. Larsen. So Milton Friedman won the Nobel Prize in 1976
for something called the permanent income theory. In a
nutshell, what that means is that people make rational
decisions based not upon what might happen next week or next
year, but what is going to happen in the long run. And so when
you apply that to temporary tax cuts, what he found is that
what happens next year really doesn't matter because businesses
essentially expect that in the long run, this temporary tax cut
might expire or you have uncertainty. So temporary tax cuts
might do nothing but build the deficit.
Chairman Walsh. Will extending the payroll tax cut, and
even cutting the employer's piece of it temporarily, will that
lead to any hiring?
Mr. Larsen. No, because--I am very surprised that this is
being talked about and continues to be something that is found
as a way to stimulate the economy. You are taking a system that
is already under stress, Social Security, and now we are paying
less into it. Well, you are paying less into it. Eventually
that money has to be paid back.
And so it is a very clear example of how temporary tax cuts
are going to lead to future tax increases, because if you are
paying this much less to Social Security, which is already
under stress, in the future, you are going to have to pay this
much plus what you didn't pay in the past. It is, in my
opinion, a terrible idea.
Chairman Walsh. It shouldn't be surprising.
Perry, so we temporarily cut your share of the payroll tax.
Is that going to lead to more hiring?
Mr. Moy. A short-term fix creates long-term problems. I
support the permanent. Cut it permanently. Then we can adjust
to the budget. Maintain the Bush tax cuts. We are overtaxed, as
it is. And from that then, we can plan for the future.
When government acts in a way of a temporary fix, a short-
term fix, it creates long-term concerns and problems. And the
big problem will be that it is not going to create a workable
job creation economy.
Chairman Walsh. The whole issue of the payroll tax and
Social Security is an issue that nobody in Washington really is
even talking about. Members of both parties are, ``It is a tax
cut, it is the tax cut,'' not even mentioning the fact that we
are dipping into the money to pay for Social Security.
So an important issue, a separate issue, because everybody
is just on the tax cut bandwagon.
But, Eric, this notion of temporary vs. permanent when it
comes to tax policy?
Mr. Treiber. That would spur absolutely no job creation for
us. A temporary tax credit, we are going to have to--it is not
going to----
Chairman Walsh. Not going to compel you to hire.
Mr. Treiber. Absolutely not. Absolutely not.
We talked about the R&D tax credit, which expires basically
every year. It is set to expire again at the end of this year.
It is the 14th or 15th time. That type of policymaking really
hinders our desire to go out and make investments in our
company and capital equipment because we don't know what the
future holds.
So temporary tax cuts or those that require renewal every
year are very self-defeating.
Chairman Walsh. If the three of you could each be king for
a day and you could enact one permanent piece of tax policy,
what would it be?
Mr. Moy. A moratorium.
Chairman Walsh. A moratorium on?
Mr. Moy. A moratorium on any new tax, regulation, mandate.
Chairman Walsh. Craig, if you could specifically
permanently alter one aspect of taxation, what would it be?
Mr. Larsen. Pick a rate and stick with it. Let us plan.
Obviously, I would prefer lower rates, but whether the rate is
23 percent or 26 percent, that really doesn't matter. What
matters is, pick a rate and stick with it. Let businesses plan.
Chairman Walsh. Eric.
Mr. Treiber. I would reduce the corporate tax rate to
something that is comparable with those countries that we are
competing with across the globe.
Chairman Walsh. Quickly, let's move to health care. The
health care legislation that was passed last year, what has
that done negatively or positively in each of your estimations
to the overall business jobs climates in the country?
Perry, let's start with you.
Mr. Moy. In 1965, when we opened the restaurant, I offered
health insurance in 1971. I was the oldest and one of the first
groups that Blue Cross Blue Shield--it was innovative at that
time, because I offered it to my staff. From that then, I had
to take it away, because of this great recession that we are
having.
And what the mandated health care does is create false
hopes for my staff. ``Oh, we are all going to be taken care
of.'' And no matter what I say to them, ``It is not going to be
that way for you. It is not going to be like it was in 1971
when I offered you and gave you the health care benefits. That
is not going to be the same. It is going to be different. It is
going to be challenging, and no one knows how it is going to
be.''
Chairman Walsh. Craig, when it comes topic of this hearing,
the overall uncertainty in the environment right now, combine
that with a favorable or unfavorable climate for small
businesses, what will this health care legislation do?
Mr. Larsen. Like a lot of the other regulations, create a
lot of uncertainty and make it difficult to plan.
The whole health care act, part of what balanced this act
and made it revenue neutral was the CLASS Act when it came to
long-term care, and that is falling apart. So now there is a
hole where we don't have that revenue. Somebody has to fill
that. So it is going to come either through increased taxes or
possibly, I would expect, businesses could expect their penalty
that they pay for not insuring employees will go up.
Again, it comes back to uncertainty and the known. Now
there is uncertainty, but there is the known that we are going
to be dealing with some bad things down the road.
Chairman Walsh. Eric.
Mr. Treiber. Our costs to insure our employees is
increasing in double digit percentages each year. Our agents
and providers have told us that that is what is going to
happen, that is what we should expect going forward. We are a
$30 million a year revenue company, and our health care burden
has gone to $650,000 a year, so it is going up by $65,000 or
$70,000 every year. That is a big number.
Chairman Walsh. And so what will that force you to do?
Mr. Treiber. What we have done is we passed those increases
along to our associates. And, in some cases, we pared back
various benefits. For example, the dental benefit became an
option and you have to pay for it extra. And people have a
difficult time understanding that.
But it was mentioned here, the penalties for eliminating
coverage altogether, we have run the numbers on that, in the
absence of all the data out there, but it would be less
expensive for us to forgo coverage----
Chairman Walsh. Forgo coverage.
Mr. Treiber [continuing]. And pay the penalty.
But where does that leave our associates? That is not
something that a four-generation family business wants to do.
Chairman Walsh. You have how many employees?
Mr. Treiber. Two hundred and thirty.
Chairman Walsh. Okay. But even----
Mr. Treiber. They are not all in the program. Some may be
through their spouse--covered. We have about 120 people that
are in the program.
Chairman Walsh. You are telling me what I have heard from
most companies in the 100- to 200- to 300-employee range, that
when you run the numbers, it will be much less expensive to
basically just forgo coverage.
Mr. Treiber. And I say that with not knowing what the
future holds. There are a lot of things that haven't been
enacted yet as part--in 2013 and 2014 that are going to hit the
road.
Chairman Walsh. One specific question for each one of you.
Eric, I will start with you. Manufacturing and the fact that--
this is something that I hear at my town halls all the time:
How are we going to get these jobs back here? How are we going
to get the manufacturing sector back into this country?
In your estimation, balance all the regulation, what we
have been talking about this morning, regulations and taxes,
how that contributes to us not being able to keep manufacturing
jobs here, balance that with policy toward China, other
external forces that are preventing us or causing us to lose
manufacturing jobs. How do you wrap it all up?
Mr. Treiber. If the question was asked of me a few years
ago for manufacturing in general, there would be a heavier
slant toward offshore competition, currency manipulation,
unfair trade practices, things of that nature. That is shifting
more toward a focus on taxes and regulations in the fast past
few years, as the cost of doing business in low-cost regions is
rising. As their overall economies improve and their employees
ask for higher wages, the costs levels are shrinking. And now
we are focusing on other things, such as regulatory policies
and taxes.
In no way diminishing the importance of what Perry does, it
is our belief and has been our belief that manufacturing is the
economic engine that drives this country. If you look back at
all times of recession and times of prosperity, it is having a
strong manufacturing sector. When that exists, we get to go use
Perry's restaurant and we get the financial services from
Craig. Without that, a nation that relies on Starbucks and
McDonald's and banks is doomed for failure.
Chairman Walsh. So what are two or three things that your
government can do to bring back and keep manufacturing jobs
here?
Mr. Treiber. Establish sound and responsible regulations
through, for example, the REINS Act, which would require
Congress to approve and the President to sign off on
regulations that are of such a financial magnitude that they
pass a certain threshold. That would be one ready example.
Chairman Walsh. So is it fair to say from your perspective
that the regulatory environment in this country makes it very
difficult to keep manufacturing jobs here?
Mr. Treiber. No doubt about it. And all regulations aren't
bad. We need environmental regulations. We need regulations for
our employees to have a safe and comfortable workplace to go
to. We understand that. We promote that. We are an
environmentally very proud steward of our footprint.
But give us a chance to compete against other countries.
Chairman Walsh. Craig, we are losing small and community
banks weekly in this country. Nobody worries for the big banks.
They are fine, and they are sitting on a lot of cash. They have
been taken care of. It is the small and community banks that
have really taken it on the chin. I hear from small businesses
in my district all the time that they can't get access to
capital.
We held a hearing in Washington a few months ago and
brought in the heads of small and community banks, and they all
said the same thing to us: ``The reason we can't lend is
because of regulations.'' Namely, they pointed toward Dodd-
Frank.
Give me your 30 seconds to a minute on Dodd-Frank, what we
can and should do. I will limit you to 30 seconds.
Mr. Larsen. Okay, I guess first of all, removing a lot of
ambiguity in the bill. It was well-intentioned. I think they
try to take care of the too big to fail. Part of the problem is
that we didn't take care of too big to fail as it relates to
overseas branches. So if they went down, I don't think that
would solve the problem.
I think Dodd-Frank is a good example of legislation that
was passed on the heels of a crisis that tried to address
everything, and it didn't do much, in my opinion, to help. I
think smarter regulation, more clear regulation, would be more
helpful.
Chairman Walsh. Are you telling me you have the nerve to
sit here, Craig, and tell me that Washington passed a piece of
legislation without fully understanding what was in it?
Mr. Larsen. Yes, believe it or not, yes.
Chairman Walsh. Okay.
Perry, I think you told me that before, but as a 14-year-
old, how you and your family started that business, your
business, back in the good old days; I don't mean this to be an
easy question, but can you imagine doing that today? Would it
be as easy to simply start a new business like that today?
Mr. Moy. We have to bring back that climate, Mr. Chairman.
And we have lost sight of that. The strength of this country
has always been the middle class. We are a blue-collar country.
We have the values. We have the people. We have the wherewithal
and the desire to succeed, but we have stopped them. Government
has put a block right in front of them.
Chairman Walsh. My final question, short answer from each
of you, there is obviously a lot that we as a country have to
get right in the next year, or two or three. The biggest
problem we have, which impacts everything, is we are not
working. Americans are not working. Too many of us are not
working.
Give me a brief answer as to, again, if you want, connect
it to what we are talking about today, but when it comes to
jobs policy, what can or should your government do or not do to
help put this country back to work?
Eric, start with you.
Mr. Treiber. I think things that are focused on creating
jobs. I was lucky enough to sit in the Congress when President
Obama addressed a joint session of Congress, and it was all
about creating jobs. And now it looks like we are blocking it.
There are a lot of holes out there.
As Perry said earlier, get out of the way of small
business. We are the creators of the majority of jobs in this
country. Get out of our way. Let us do business the way we need
to do business, responsibly regulated, and we will create the
jobs the way we have been doing it for decades.
Chairman Walsh. Perry, how are we going to get this country
working again?
Mr. Moy. As an industry that employs almost up to 10
percent of the jobs here in this country, get out of our way.
Don't regulate us. Don't mandate us. And again, no new taxes.
Let us create the jobs that we are capable of doing.
Chairman Walsh. Craig, you are president for a day. What is
your jobs policy?
Mr. Larsen. Reduce regulations, a stable tax policy, and
the realization that government doesn't create jobs, business
creates jobs. So every time you hear the government talk about,
``We want to grow jobs, and we have a certain policy to do this
or that,'' what they are doing is picking winners and losers.
I love what Perry said: Get out of our way.
Chairman Walsh. Thank you, three. And we are going to wrap
up this field hearing here right now.
I would like to acknowledge Woodstock's finest, our mayor,
for letting me sit in his chair this morning, Mayor Brian Sager
in the back row there. Raise your hand?
Thank you.
Stick around, anybody, when I gavel the hearing to a close,
I would be happy to answer anybody's questions informally and
get your thoughts. And maybe we can get the witnesses to stick
around for a little bit as well.
I would like to thank all three of you for coming today.
You have all provided, I think, valuable insight into how
decisions that we make in Washington impact you all. Most of
the hearings that we hold, obviously, are in D.C. It is always
enjoyable and, I think, as informative to get outside the
Beltway and hold a field hearing.
I ask unanimous consent that any members of the
Subcommittee have five legislative days to submit their
statements and any supporting materials for the record.
Your written testimony as witnesses will be made part of
the written record.
And without any objection, that has been ordered.
Chairman Walsh. Now we will gavel this hearing to a close.
Thank you for coming.
[Whereupon, at 10:55 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


