- THE STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS ACCESS TO CAPITAL AND CREDIT: THE VIEW FROM SECRETARY GEITHNER

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS ACCESS TO CAPITAL AND CREDIT: THE VIEW FROM

SECRETARY GEITHNER

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 22, 2011

__________

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-023
Available via the GPO Website: http://www.fdsys.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-850                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Graves, Hon. Sam.................................................     1
Velazquez, Hon. Nydia M..........................................     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Timothy Geithner, Secretary, United States
Department of the Treasury, Washington, DC.....................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
The Honorable Timothy Geithner, Secretary, United States
Department of the Treasury, Washington, DC.................    39
Questions for the Record:
Graves, Hon. Sam.............................................    50
Additional Materials for the Record:
The Small Business Agenda, the National Economic Council.....    51
Statements for the Record:
Governor Rick Snyder.........................................   134
The Financial Services Roundtable............................   136
Michigan Credit Union League.................................   139
Independent Community Bankers of America.....................   140
Wolverine Metal Stamping, Inc................................   143
United Metal Products........................................   144
Michigan Ladder Company......................................   146
Women Impacting Public Policy................................   147
Missouri Credit Union Association............................   151

THE STATE OF SMALL BUSINESS ACCESS TO CAPITAL AND CREDIT: THE VIEW FROM
SECRETARY GEITHNER

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 22, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Sam Graves [chairman
of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Chabot, King, Mulvaney,
Tipton, Landry, Herrera Beutler, West, Ellmers, Walsh,
Velazquez, Critz, Altmire, Clarke, Chu, Cicilline, Richmond,
Peters, Owens.
Chairman Graves. We will bring this hearing to order. I
would like to say good morning to everyone. I would also like
to definitely welcome Secretary Geithner to the Committee. He
is the first Secretary of the Treasury to testify before this
Committee, and so we appreciate that. Obviously, we appreciate
that very much.
More than two years after the President's inauguration, the
economy still remains stagnant. Growth is anemic, unemployment
hovers around nine percent, and that figure excludes those who
have simply given up looking for a job. No Republican or
Democrat can be satisfied with those results. However, every
single member of this Committee truly believes in one thing--
that any recovery will be led by the ingenuity and drive of
America's entrepreneurs.
To accomplish that goal, small businesses need capital in
order to purchase inventory and invest in plants and equipment
and hire workers. America's entrepreneurs simply will be unable
to revive the economy without access on reasonable terms to
debt or equity capital.
There is little doubt that the environment for obtaining
debt financing is difficult for small businesses. This
Committee has heard on multiple occasions that entrepreneurs
cannot get credit and small businesses face significant cuts to
their existing lines of credit. Bankers have told this
Committee that they have capital but are nervous about lending
because the regulations might question the safety of the loans
of those small businesses.
Nor can small businesses easily turn to equity markets. To
do so they must navigate a complex series of federal and state
regulations. Those businesses then face significant ongoing
regulatory costs in order to comply with the securities laws,
including Dodd-Frank and Sarbanes-Oxley. These are resources
that could be better spent hiring new employees.
Today's hearing focuses on the efforts by the Department of
the Treasury to improve small business access to credit through
the State Small Business Credit Initiative and the Small
Business Lending Fund. These programs are designed to bolster
the capital available to community banks so that they can then
lend to small businesses.
I did not support these initiatives and opposition came
from both sides of the aisle. The opponents did not object to
the worthy goals of this program; rather, they do not believe
that the incentives provided will generate sufficient new
lending to ``small businesses'' as that term is defined by the
Small Business Act.
Despite my concerns about these programs, I want to do
everything possible to help small businesses obtain needed
capital. And with that in mind, I would like to hear from
Secretary Geithner about the potential benefits of these two
programs. I also want to know whether the Secretary believes
changes to the programs might provide greater capital access to
small businesses. Finally, I am sure that the Committee would
like to hear any suggestions on improving the ability of small
businesses to obtain equity capital.
I recognize that the programs have not been in full
operation and the Secretary would be welcome to return and
discuss these initiatives after the Department has had greater
operational experience with those programs.
Before yielding to the Ranking Member for her opening
statement, it is my understanding that the Secretary has
obligations that are very vital to all members of this
Committee and to Congress, which are going to require him to
leave at noon. So as a result of that I am going to strictly
enforce the five-minute rule.
And with that, now I will turn to Ranking Member Velazquez
for her opening statement.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Secretary. And welcome.
In early 2007, when the financial crisis began to emerge,
no one could have predicted the economic damage that would
follow. For small businesses, the capital markets dried up,
leaving many unable to find lines of credit. To address this,
actions were taken, many in fact led by the Small Business
Committee. These measures were successful. Thanks to these
policy changes, along with gradual although uneven economic
improvement, small firms are now better able to secure capital
than at any time since the heart of the crisis in 2008-2009.
These more favorable credit conditions have been confirmed by
both the Federal Reserve and the Thompson Reuters PayNet Small
Business Lending Index.
The Fed reported that in net 15 percent of banks eased
terms while the Thompson Reuters Index rose 17 percent in April
from a year earlier. This represented the ninth straight
double-digit rise in the index. Even the NFIB measures of
credit conditions remains near a two year high. These are very
positive developments since small firms have been all but
locked out of capital markets for a long time. Unfortunately,
while credit conditions have loosened for borrowers, we are not
seeing corresponding increases in overall commercial lending.
In fact, lending now is below the level reached in June 2006,
declining by $15 billion in the most recent quarter. Totals of
small business loans dropped 2.4 percent from 624 billion in
December 2010 to 609 billion in March 2011. Small loans of less
than $100,000 were down by 2.9 percent, while large loans
outstanding declined by 2.2 percent.
From the broadest possible view, small businesses are
getting less capital than they did five years ago. As
demonstrated by the many hearings this Committee held in the
last four years, the reasons behind this decline are
complicated. However, we do know that banks are flushed with
more cash than any other time in history. Banks are holding
nearly $1.6 trillion in reserves at the Fed, of which only a
small portion are required reserves. This is nearly double
where they stood just two years ago when banks held only $900
billion at the Fed. Clearly, liquidity is not a problem for
lenders.
With that in mind, today we will examine Treasury's SBLF
program, an initiative designed to increase small business
lending in one particular way--liquidity. Only 847 banks
applied for 11.6 billion from the fund by its June 6th
deadline. Less than half of the $30 billion was made available.
If liquidity was a problem, there would be a line out the door
for SBLF funds, rather than the lack of interest we are now
seeing from lenders.
There are two areas in particular that I hope to review
today. The SBLF's lack of requirement that its funds be used by
banks to make small business loans undermines the supposed
intent of the program. Instead, the SBLF relies on loose
incentives and nonbinding plans to channel capital to small
firms. I do not believe this is enough. You know that, Mr.
Secretary. Throughout the debate that was an issue and concern
that I raised. The problem is compounded by the initiative
relying on an overly broad and vague definition of small
businesses. So when banks do lend, it will be virtually
impossible to know if they are lending to true small businesses
or actually large corporations.
During the debate to pass the SBLF, the rationale most
offered by its proponents was that we needed to quickly put a
policy in place and that the SBLF could be implemented within
six months. But here we are, more than nine months after
passage and not one single investment has been made in the nine
months since enactment. It could be several more months before
any SBLF dollars made their way through banks and into the
hands of entrepreneurs. All of these issues are as relevant
today as they were when the legislation was considered.
And so with that, Mr. Chairman, I thank and I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much. Secretary Geithner,
your entire written testimony will be entered into the record.
And you are now recognized to give your statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER, SECRETARY,
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Secretary Geithner. Thank you. Nice to be here. Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of the
Committee, it is good to come before you today to talk about
this broader challenge.
You know, I know we have not always agreed on the best way
to advance this objective of helping small businesses and we
have had to make some compromises to get things done, but I
know we all share that basic objective of looking for ways we
can make it easier for small businesses to expand and to invest
and to hire.
Now, as you both said, this financial crisis took a very
heavy toll on small businesses and American workers. You know,
in the month the President took office, job losses peaked at
about $820,000. The recession ultimately claimed nearly nine
million jobs.
Our efforts over the past two and a half years have helped
restore economic growth. The President righted the ship, put
out the fire, and we have now seen 15 straight months of
private sector job growth. More than two million Americans have
gone back to work over that period, one million within the last
six months alone.
But of course, even as economic growth continues, we
continue to face very substantial economic challenges. And in
order to help strengthen this recovery, help get more Americans
back to work, we need to continue to find ways to help small
businesses. As you all know, half of the workforce of this
country is employed by companies with fewer than 500 employees.
Now, the recession hit small businesses especially hard and
that is for two reasons. The first is that it is because so
much of the recession was concentrated in construction and
small businesses, of course, are disproportionately
concentrated in the construction and real estate areas. The
second reason is because small banks, small businesses were
most directly affected by the contraction in credit we saw
across the financial system.
Small businesses are more dependent on bank loans than are
large businesses, and therefore, they were more affected by the
pressures we saw on small banks across the country. And they
were more affected by the withdrawal of credit for loans backed
by real estate. And of course, the broader contraction and
credit card lending.
Now, in view of these challenges we worked with Congress
over the past couple of years to run a series of programs. I
want to describe briefly and summarize briefly the basic
elements of that strategy. The first was to provide a
significant amount of additional tax relief targeted at small
businesses. We have supported 17 direct specific tax breaks for
small business, many of them through the Recovery Act. Overall,
these 17 specific tax breaks are estimated to save small
businesses more than $50 billion over the 10 years over the
classic budget window. And this means that the overall tax
burden for small businesses is lower today than when the
President took office.
We propose in the budget some additional long-term tax
relief for small businesses which I will be happy to describe
in more detail.
The second element of our strategy was to help small
businesses get more access to capital, access to credit on more
favorable terms. We are now implementing two public-private
partnerships--the Small Business Lending Fund and the State
Small Business Credit Initiative--which are designed to
leverage government resources with the local knowledge of
community banks and state credit programs. We have already
approved 10 states for the State Credit Initiative, including
the announcement today that Kansas will receive funding to spur
more than $130 million in small business lending.
Now, these capital programs are one of the most cost
effective ways we know that Congress can help encourage small
business lending because every dollar of capital that Congress
provides can be leveraged to support lending that is many
multiples of the government's investment. And the bank capital
programs that were at the center of the government's emergency
programs that began under the last administration have
demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach. We have seen
these broad programs, capital investment banks yield a
significant positive return to the taxpayer and they were
decisive, of course, in bringing about the overall improvement
in credit conditions that the Ranking Member referred to.
Now, as you know, in addition to these direct--these new
types of credit programs, we have, with the help of this
Committee, increased the SBA's 7(a) and 504 loan guarantee
programs and permanently increased SBA loan limits. The
Community Development Financial Institutions Fund continues to
be a critical source for capital to reach underserved
communities through a variety of programs, including the New
Market Tax Credit Program and through the Start-Up America
Initiative and other efforts we are looking at ways to reduce
barriers to equity capital and the chairman referred to this.
It is just so important for start-ups and other high growth,
innovative small businesses.
The third piece of our strategy is about regulatory reform.
The President has directed Cass Sunstein at OMB to lead a
government-wide review of existing regulations so that we can
eliminate or fix rules that are outdated and unjustifiably
costly and to make sure that new regulations undergo a more
rigorous process of review. And of course, as part of this
effort we are going to take a close look at how we can remove
unnecessary barriers and burdens to small businesses.
The fourth piece of our strategy is about federal
contracting opportunities for small business, which we are
committed to work to expand. We are very pleased that a third
of the Recovery Act dollars went to small businesses. We want
to look for ways to do more. And finally, we are looking at
ways to improve export opportunities for small businesses. As
part of the President's broad National Export Initiative, we
placed a high priority on helping small businesses access
foreign markets. My testimony lays out in more detail the scope
of those programs.
Now, these initiatives, these programs we believe are very
important to continue to help small businesses expand, hire,
and invest. We have got a lot of challenges ahead. And I want
to just end by saying that it is very important that as we work
towards a bipartisan, comprehensive agreement to reduce our
long-term deficits, we make sure that we reach agreement on a
program that is good for the economy, that does not endanger
the recovery, and it helps make sure that we can retain and
remain competitive in the long run. If we meet that test, then
we can help small businesses thrive as we recover.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Geithner follows on page 39.]
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And I will start with questions. And I ask that if other
members have opening statements, please submit them for the
record so we can get the majority of our questions in.
And basically my question is fairly simple and I am just
looking for reasons why we cannot--we seem to have a gap here.
We hear in testimony every single week from bankers that come
in here and they tell us they have got money to lend. With the
fact that I point out and the Ranking Member pointed out, too,
even with the Small Business Lending Fund that we have only
seen a portion or at least a few banks applied for it. But
banks say they have money to lend and yet we have small
businesses come in here every single week also and tell us they
cannot get capital. We are trying to find a reason for that. Do
you have any ideas, thoughts? What is causing the problem here
or this divide that nobody seems to be able to cross?
Secretary Geithner. Well, Mr. Chairman, that is the right
question. And I will give you my sense. And of course, you
know, like you, I talked to small businesses across the country
all the time and I hear the same things. People still say it is
very hard to get credit. We think we deserve it. We should be
able to have access to it. Banks were throwing money at us
before the crisis and now it has dried up. We think that is
unfair. It is hurting our capacity to expand. Many of them say,
you know, we are just on the verge of being able to--we are
seeing more demand for our products. We would like to meet that
demand but we cannot do it unless we have more working capital.
So I think you are absolutely right about the nature of the
problem.
And I think the way to explain why it still feels that bad
is just to remind people that the crisis caused a huge amount
of damage. It is going to take years for us to dig our way out
of that hole. A lot of the damage was concentrated in
construction where a lot of small businesses operate. And the
credit damage caused by the crisis hurt a lot of small banks'
capacity to lend and hurt a lot of the classic lending channels
that small businesses rely on. So I think those are the best
explanations for why it still feels so bad.
It is fair to acknowledge that, you know, examiners across
our banking industries, state and federal, are trying to be
more careful. You know, they look back at the experience or the
judgments they made on the run-up to the crisis. They felt they
were behind the curve in lots of ways. And they are being very
careful. Now, maybe too careful in some ways. The typical thing
you see in recessions, coming out of recessions caused by
financial crises is that there is a risk that supervising
examiners overreact. And after a period of maybe being a little
too loose they tend to overdo it.
And so I think it is very important as we try to make sure
these programs reach as many people as we can, that the federal
banking agencies continue to try to give their examiners more
balanced guidance so again they do not make these problems
unnecessarily worse by overdoing it. They should be cautious.
They should be careful. But they do not need to overdo it.
Chairman Graves. We hear some of exactly what you said when
it comes to the examiners. They are either requiring more
equity for the same line of credit on a business that has never
missed a payment or they are lowering their line of credit,
with the same equity--the reverse.
Do you think that small businesses out there are, one of
the things that I worry about, too, just sitting on cash that
they may have? And do you think that the concern over the
deficit or the concern over the debt is hampering that growth
or do you think that small businesses are holding back just as
a result of that alone?
Secretary Geithner. I think it is a good question. You
know, we have a bunch of surveys that some of you cited that we
use as a measure of what small businesses say their main
challenges are. And I think those surveys have consistently
said throughout the crisis that the biggest challenge they
face, the biggest source of uncertainty is over how much growth
and demand for their products they are going to see. And
although we have had now about 18 months of positive growth,
because the crisis was so traumatic and caused so much
uncertainty, so much damage, you know, this is something that
most Americans had never experienced before in their lifetime,
never thought they would experience. And that has lasting
damage to confidence. And people are a little more tentative of
giving the shocks caused by the crisis about how strong it is
going to be in the future. That seems to be the main effect.
However, having said that, I agree very much that if
Congress can find a way to reach a bipartisan, comprehensive,
balanced agreement to bring down the long-term deficits that
that would help. It would be a sign that Washington works, is
able to try to come together and solve some problems. And I
think that would improve overall confidence across the country.
Of course, how we do that is very important. As I said at the
end, it is important not just to bring more gravity to our
fiscal position, demonstrate that we can live within our means,
but we have to do that in a way that is going to be good for
growth, good for the economy in the near term and good for the
economy in the long run. And that is a complicated challenge.
Chairman Graves. I have a lot more questions. I am going to
defer to the Ranking member because I want to make sure that
our other members have the opportunity to ask and I will ask at
the end if we still have time.
Ranking member.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I would like to discuss the SBLF program.
The focus of it basically was liquidity to address the issue of
the lack of liquidity. Given the fact that only less than 10
percent of the banks who qualify for these funds have applied,
why is it that more lenders are not applying?
Secretary Geithner. It is a good question. And I should say
that, you know, you referred to our debates and discussions
about how best to solve this problem. And I very much respect
not just your record of accomplishment on these issues. I know
you have had somewhat different views than us and I respect
those views, so I will give you my sense.
We have had about roughly almost 850 banks apply. I think
that is a pretty good, reasonable number of banks. I think it
suggests a fair amount of interest, although you said, you
know, we are a country with 9,000 banks, 8,000 banks. So it is
not a large fraction of banks. But it is a pretty substantial
number. And not all of them will qualify. And you are right to
say you cannot be certain what you are going to see in terms of
the term on those investments. But we think it will be
positive.
Ms. Velazquez. You do not think that is because of the TARP
stigma?
Secretary Geithner. I think that, and you are right to
recognize that, you know, we have done this in three stages,
these broad approaches to credit. We are experimenting a bit.
And what we found in the first stage of TARP, as you know, is
we saw hundreds of banks withdraw their applications for the
program because they were worried about the stigma. And they
were worried that if they came and took capital from the
government that they would be penalized in the eyes of their
competitors and their creditors and their customers. And so
they withdrew in waves. And therefore, that instrument was not
as powerful as we thought it would be for small banks. That is
partly why we tried to design a complimentary program that had
less stigma.
Ms. Velazquez. Another reason could be that banks are
sitting on a record amount of cash.
Secretary Geithner. Well, I think you are right to say if
you look across the banking system, the banks today have much
more capital than they did before the crisis. And you are
seeing them--they are not facing much loan demand yet, and a
little tentative to use that in some cases, but what this
program tries to do is reach a subset of the banking system
that cannot raise capital on their own but are still viable
institutions. That is not going to be the bulk of banks but it
is going to be a meaningful fraction of banks.
Ms. Velazquez. What will Treasury do with the excess funds
that will not be used for the SBLF?
Secretary Geithner. That is a judgment only Congress can
make. We have no authority to use the funds once we run out of
time and once we reach the ones we think are eligible.
Ms. Velazquez. So if you do not use it because banks will
not apply, will you recommend to Congress to rescind the funds?
Secretary Geithner. You know what, I have not really
thought about it yet. We have been focused on trying to get
this moving but I would be happy to talk to you about what the
best use of the remaining authority is.
Ms. Velazquez. Well, you heard the Chairman and in my
opening statement I also make reference to the fact that time
and again, businesses are coming here telling us that they are
having--and these are creditworthy companies--and still are not
getting any affordable capital. So do you think, do you expect
that the SBLF fund will change this trend?
Secretary Geithner. Well, I think it is going to make a
meaningful difference for the banks that qualify and are
eligible. And it will make a meaningful difference for their
customers. Because, again, you know, the central feature of
this program is that you get a dollar of capital and that means
that you have between eight and 12 additional dollars of
lending capacity. If you are short capital, it is less likely
you have to cut your lending to your credit lines to your
customers by that magnitude. If you have ample demand for loans
and capital then you can leverage that money substantially. So
it will make a meaningful difference for the banks that apply
and a meaningful difference to their customers. And in a very
efficient way for the Congress. I think one of the most
efficient ways we have to use the taxpayers' money to try to
incent investment and hiring.
Ms. Velazquez. On a scale of one to 10, one having no
effect, 10 satisfying the capital needs of small businesses, at
the end of the day how do you qualify the SBLF fund will lend?
On a scale of one to 10.
Secretary Geithner. Well, I think I will repeat what I
said. It will make a meaningful contribution. We are a $14
trillion economy. We have 8,000 banks. We have had 850 roughly
apply. The total capital that they have applied for is about
$12 billion in authority. So it is meaningful for those who are
eligible, meaningful for their customers, but of course, you
are right to say we are a large economy.
Ms. Velazquez. Mr. Secretary, throughout my discussion with
Treasury staff I was told that the program will be up and
running in six months. And I am quite disappointed that still
not a single money has been disbursed to a small company, a
small firm. When will the first small business actually see
this money?
Secretary Geithner. Very soon. But thank you for asking
that question again that you said in your opening remarks. And
let me explain to you why we are here. Because we are a little
disappointed, too, and a little surprised. It has been a little
slower than we thought. Let me explain why. In the program
Congress legislated, there are very strong protections to
protect the taxpayer as you would expect. Very important that
those exist.
And in our system we rely on two safeguards for that. One
is we require the applications to be reviewed by their primary
bank supervisor. And we do not consider them unless they get
recommended by the bank supervisor. That program leaves us
vulnerable to the time it takes those regulators to be careful
in a review. But also we have to look independently of them and
we are trying to be careful. So we are a little slower than we
thought but we are very close to moving ahead. And again, I am
very confident you are going to see a very meaningful impact on
the institutions that are eligible and we are close to being
able to unleash that capital.
Ms. Velazquez. I have many more questions but in light of--
what guarantees are we going to have that community banks or
the banks, financial institutions that will get these funds,
will provide small business loans?
Secretary Geithner. Well, you know this debate as well as
anybody. We do not have the capacity and the program does not
give us the ability to force banks to lend. We do not think we
can do that. What we did is something different. We created a
program structured to provide very powerful incentives for them
to lend. But you said they are incentives. They are not
guarantees. They are not compulsory. But if a bank does not
lend above the baseline of lending that proceeded the enactment
of the law, then they have to pay a higher dividend. So their
incentives are pretty strong. But you are right to point out
that we do not have the power to compel.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
I am going to follow along the same lines of the Small
Business Lending Fund. I have some real concerns. I mean, I
have had--whether it has been small businesses who have said,
hey, look, this is one of the only games in town or I have had
several community banks and credit unions, creditworthy, right?
I had a bank fail in my largest county so I am learning the
difference here. We are talking about creditworthy, financial
institutions who have come in and said can you help us with
Treasury? We cannot get a response. That was in my first couple
of months here. As it has drug on, we are now at six months
plus. And as we communicate with Treasury we get told we hope
so. So when I filter through kind of the answer I heard you
give the Ranking Member, it had to do with, you know, getting
approval through a primary bank supervisor and then an
independent review, correct me. I was not here so please do
correct me if I am wrong. But I thought the whole purpose of
getting this small bit of cash infusion to those small
community banks to get out to small businesses in a short term
was the goal. What is happening with the money? And can you
give us a time guarantee? Because it should not take this long.
Secretary Geithner. Well, I wish it were otherwise but we
are doing what I think you would want us to do and you would
expect us to do, and you would hold us accountable for, which
is we are being careful with the taxpayers' money. If you think
about the U.S. banking system today and community banks today,
they fall roughly into three categories. There are banks that
are very strong and were very careful. Can go raise capital and
therefore can expand their customers on their own. They have no
interest in coming to the government for help.
There are a lot of other banks who got themselves way
underwater, lent too much to commercial real estate or in
sectors affected by the crisis, innocent victims of the
recession who may not survive. Do not have enough capital and
we cannot justify helping keep them alive.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Yeah. And----
Secretary Geithner. But then there are banks in the middle
who this program can help that are viable, cannot raise capital
on their own because those markets are still much more
tentative about lending to banks given the crisis. But we think
there is a good way, responsible way to reach those banks. But
they will not protect banks from failing, a lot of banks from
failing. And there are a lot of banks that would like this
capital that will not be eligible.
I wish it were different, but the reason why we are a
little behind schedule is because we are being careful and
because the regulators are being careful. And that is what you
want us to be.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. With that, I think you are right.
There are going to be banks who are still teetering. Right? And
Washington State has had--were fourth or fifth, I think, in
terms of bank closures. But again, I am not talking about--and
we had Washington Mutual. I am talking about a big bank that
made a lot of these risky loans. Right? Got into the subprime
market. I am talking about community institutions. Heritage
Bank in Olympia. IQ Credit Union in Vancouver. I am talking
about financial institutions who have weathered this, continued
to weather this well and cannot get a response from Treasury.
Secretary Geithner. Well, again, we will be as responsive
as we can and we will be as clear with people about if they do
not meet the test, the regulators' test or our test, we will
make sure they get a response. But just a little context
without commenting on the specific banks you mentioned. You are
right to say that in general this was a crisis not caused by
small banks. But it is also true that if you look at small
banks across the country running up to this crisis, a very
substantial number of those banks got themselves very, very
exposed to commercial real estate as a share of capital.
Therefore, very, very vulnerable.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Absolutely.
Secretary Geithner. It is hard for any of us--any of you
really or even me in this context, to know----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Let me reclaim my time really quickly
because I recognize there are a lot of banks who got out over
the tip of their skis. That is not what I am talking about. I
am talking about creditworthy institutions who cannot get a
response from Treasury, from your office.
Secretary Geithner. But you----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Let me finish. From your office on
whether or not they are approved or not approved. And we are
talking six months.
Secretary Geithner. No, they will get that response. But
again, the reason why people have not heard from us yet is
because we depend on the regulators to review these
applications. We do not even see them until they meet that
review. When they see them, we look at them. And we will make
those judgments as quickly as we can. But again, none of you, I
hate to say it, will be in a position to make a judgment
independently on your own about whether they are viable or not.
That is a judgment that you need to leave to and the law is
designed this way. Leave to the checks and balances we set up.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Let me, the last couple of seconds,
well, then, if this turns out that of the banks that maybe we
cannot judge as creditworthy or the credit unions,
institutions, do not meet your criteria, is that money going to
then be returned? What happens to that money if we are not
lending it and it is not getting to small businesses?
Secretary Geithner. The way the law of the land works, if
there is money leftover, meaning there is not eligible
institutions come on a scale to use all that money, then that
money is left to the Congress to choose what it wishes to do
with that. It cannot be used--we cannot use it. And you can
make your own judgments. And this Committee should take a look
at that. What would be a better use of those funds?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Altmire.
Mr. Altmire. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. And
when we confirmed your appearance here I went back to my
district and talked with some key small business owners and
asked them what they would like for me to ask you given the
opportunity. And universally, businesses in my district are
saying that lenders are focused primarily on real estate--and
you addressed this in your testimony. Real estate loans--rather
than on providing the working capital that will enable small
firms to rehire the people they have had to lay off and expand
their operations and their employment, which has led lenders to
state that there is no demand. And businesses are claiming
there is no supply, the push and pull that you described
earlier.
So how can the Treasury ensure that businesses are getting
the loans that they need in that climate?
Secretary Geithner. Cannot ensure. You know, we can help
but we cannot ensure. And you have not given us the authority
or the power to ensure. And I do not think you could. All we
can do is through this mix of things. And it is a very
substantial mix of programs we put in place. The SBA guarantees
the capital programs, the tax incentives, that we are doing as
much as we can to help them dig their way out of this as
quickly as possible. But we cannot ensure.
And, you know, countries facing these challenges over the
decades have tried all sorts of different ways to get capital
directly to companies who need businesses. And those programs
are littered with failure and waste and distortion and
politics. It is not a record you want us to emulate. And
because of that we are left with the tools that we have which
are to try to work through banks, use the knowledge banks have
about who is creditworthy, who is not. Not to make those
judgments independently but try to make it economically, more
economically attractive for them to lend.
Mr. Altmire. Right. And for many lenders, when making a
determination of creditworthiness, the discussion we were
having earlier, they look at the past year or two. Obviously,
that was not a good time in the economy and it is difficult for
any business to have shown a profit in that time period. And
the Fed, Federal Reserve has encouraged lending to creditworthy
businesses to aid the recovery. But to date the Fed has yet to
define what creditworthy means. So the uncertainty further
compounds the lenders' fears that regulators will penalize them
for making loans that will later be found to have been made to
non-creditworthy businesses.
So what guidance can the Treasury offer or have you offered
to help define what creditworthy means? And do Treasury's
lending initiatives allow for a longer term review beyond the
two years for a business's finances?
Secretary Geithner. We cannot really make that judgment for
the regulators or their banks. Not something we can do. But the
programs we set up do not--would still give the primary
regulators the discretion to make a judgment about whether
banks are looking at credit risk in a more balanced, reasonable
way. And you are right to say that when you have a crisis like
this, you know, this is something that could have been a second
grade depression. And you saw a huge amount of business
failure, a huge loss of wealth, huge trauma to the American
economy. It has made everybody too tentative. A little too
tentative, too cautious. And I think a real challenge we all
face is to try to make sure people look forward and look at the
earnings capacity of these businesses, recognizing that we will
be coming out of this over time and you want to make sure they
give as much weight to the future as they give to the recent
past.
Mr. Altmire. Right. And lastly, Mr. Secretary, in Western
Pennsylvania, venture capital. Something I hear a lot about and
access has been an issue recently. And it has proven to be a
critical driver in producing the high-tech, high-growth jobs
and new businesses can create jobs that would fuel the economy
in the way that we all hope to see. Do you think that more of a
focus should have been put on retrospect on this type of equity
investment rather than solely on debt financing?
Secretary Geithner. It is a good question. I think you are
right to say that, you know, one of the great strengths of the
American financial system before the crisis was we were really
better than any country in the world at helping small
businesses get access to equity capital and debt capital, early
stage. And we have got to make sure we are recreating that
fundamental strength of our system.
And you are right that angel investments and early stage
equity investments are very important to innovate companies.
And we are looking at a range of ways to help that.
On the credit side though, our judgment was we have to work
really with the knowledge of community banks; not try to
independently make judgments of which companies are
creditworthy, which ones they are not.
But we think there are some other things we can do on the
equity side, and we are working closely with the SEC and the
SBA and others in that direction. I will be happy to talk to
your colleagues about how best to do that.
Thank you.
Mr. Altmire. Thank you. Thank you for being with us today.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. West.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Secretary Geithner.
Great to see you here today.
Last week, Friday, I had the opportunity to speak to the
Greater Fort Lauderdale Chamber of Commerce. And of course,
there were a lot of local community bankers that were there.
And again, the reoccurring theme always seems to be, you know,
we want to provide that access to capital but we are seeing an
increase in regulation. We are seeing more examiners coming
down. They really do not understand things going on here on the
ground and that relationship. In the six short months that I
spent here I have learned that in Washington, D.C., if it is
worth reacting to, it is worth overreacting to.
So I am just wondering, is anyone at the Treasury going
back maybe now and looking at the Dodd-Frank law and looking at
maybe the potential negative impacts that we could find on
small businesses and those community banks? The large banks
have these huge staffs. They can take care of these things, but
the small banks and that relationship with small business, is
it a possibility we can go back and review Dodd-Frank?
Secretary Geithner. Well, I want to, I think, you are
raising a really important question. And I agree that the main
challenge in thinking about regulation is how to get the
balance right. It is obvious looking back at the financial
crisis, we got a whole bunch of things wrong as a country and
how much oversight we put over the banking system. And we have
to fix that. And that is what Dodd-Frank was designed to do.
But we have to be careful we do not overdo it. I completely
agree with you.
I do not believe that--well, let me say it affirmatively. I
think Dodd-Frank was very carefully designed to make sure that
small businesses were not the object of a huge increase in
regulation or meaningful increase in regulation. In fact----
Mr. West. But there is a little collateral damage that has
happened.
Secretary Geithner. Well, it is a good question I think
that they were largely protected, insulated from the core
provisions of the act. The act was really designed at the big
failures by large institutions and markets and that is why I
just want to read you this quote from Cam Fine when the bill
was passed. Cam Fine, as you know, chairs the Independent
Community Bankers Association. He said that Dodd-Frank
recognizes the two distinct sectors in the financial services
sector, Main Street community banks and Wall Street Meta Banks.
Broadly supportive of the act. Does not agree with everything
in it but it recognizes the efforts of many people on the hill
to make sure that small banks were not subject to an unfair and
unnecessary burden as we try to fix the big failures in the
system.
But I agree with you that we want to be very careful that
we do not overdo it. And I think that the bigger challenge, I
think, apart from just the uncertainty facing banks and
businesses across the country is that I think examiners, there
is just some natural tendency. These are human beings. They
want to make sure they are earning this out of caution now and
we want to make sure they do not overcorrect.
Mr. West. Well, but I think that as we go forward, let us
just make sure, as you just said, that sweet spot, kind of like
on a baseball bat, we need to find that right position as far
as this regulation.
The next question I had is when we look at the Small
Business Lending Fund, and you just talked about how many
thousands of banks we have out there, but how many are looking
toward using this fund? We really have a bottom-up process by
going out, talking to the SBA, talking to some small business
leaders, community banks, as far as what would you like to see
us tailor this fund to be so that it could be a bottom-up
process and maybe not a top-down driven process?
Secretary Geithner. Very good question. You know, it took
nine months for Congress to react to the initial proposal we
made and reshape them and ultimately legislate them. Nine
months is a long time with a country facing this degree of
challenge in the financial sector. And during those nine
months, not just we but your predecessors and other people on
the Committee spent a lot of time talking to states with
experience in these programs to community banks and businesses
about what would be the most powerful set of packages. And I am
sure we did not get it perfect but what we all tried to do was
take the best mix of things that would command the most support
up here and, you know, we are trying a lot of different things.
You know, Roosevelt said in the Great Depression, he said,
you know, if I am not mistaken what the country needs is bold
experimentation. And we are experimenting with the best mix of
things we think will help mitigate it. It is not going to make
it easy for everybody caught up in this mess, but we thought we
were taking the best mix of ideas that could command the most
support up here.
Mr. West. Okay. The last thing I will say is from a lot of
people down in South Florida where we still have some double
digit unemployment and incredible foreclosure problems, please
remember that small businesses operate as S corporations from
personal income tax rates when you start talking about raising
taxes.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Secretary Geithner. I absolutely will remember that. And
you are making a good point.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Cicilline.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being with us today.
I have a small business jobs and economy roundtable in my
state and my district. And when I talk to small business owners
in that setting they reaffirm how important capital is, the
lifeblood of small business, as you have said already. In Rhode
Island, where our economy has been particularly hard hit, small
businesses, many of our small businesses do not have a strong
balance sheet. They may be underwater in a building that they
are in or in their own home and they may have impaired credit
scores because of credit card debt that they have taken to keep
their business running and keep their businesses open. And so
with all those factors in play, even with an SBA guarantee
getting a capital infusion can become--may be still very, very
difficult for some small businesses in Rhode Island.
So when I spoke recently with the president of Coastway
Community Bank, which is my state's largest dollar lender of
SBA loans, I was very surprised to learn that his institution
is not planning to take advantage of the Small Business Loan
Fund. Coastway is a mutual institution and according to the
documents that I have had the opportunity to review from
Treasury, mutuals cannot issue preferred stock to Treasury
without changing their tax elections, so Treasury will not
offer mutuals tier one capital. And so here we have instances
where we have a lender who really is an experienced lender that
could have borrowed $10 million from Treasury and leveraged
that between $100 and $150 million in small business loans, but
instead, because of this complication, they are really forced
to remain on the sidelines and not participate.
And so my question is what could we do now at this stage in
the SBLF program to engage these mutual institutions in this
program. We know, as you said, 844 banks have submitted
applications seeking $11.6 billion, so there is $18 billion
remaining. And if this distinction between tier one and tier
two capital is keeping these really good, tried and tested and
secure and successful banks like Coastway in Rhode Island on
the sidelines, what can we do? What can Treasury do now to get
them in this game to really get that capital out in places like
Rhode Island and in places like my congressional district.
Secretary Geithner. I am not sure we have a solution to
this problem, just to be honest. But we will be happy to talk
to you in more detail and to your staff about it. But let me
explain the way--the nature of this constraint.
Under the system we have today, it is the banking
regulators that determine what counts as capital. And in their
judgment, for those types of institutions, they are not
willing--I want to say this carefully--to count as capital the
capital Congress made available to this program. And that gives
us a problem. And what it does mean is that this has limited
benefit for certain types of institutions that are structured
in that form. But I would be happy to talk to you and your
staff in more detail about it and see if there is anything we
can do about this. I am not sure there is.
Mr. Cicilline. I mean, it just strikes me that some of
these community banks which are best positioned to do this work
and have the pre-existing relationship with small businesses
are in the best position to do this kind of lending and they
are prohibited, which----
Secretary Geithner. Yeah. I completely understand. The
whole program is designed to take advantage of the knowledge
community banks have about who is creditworthy and, you know,
it has got very good leverage in it because of the public-
private partnership. But we have got this problem, which is
that bank regulators do not want to or do not feel they can
count as capital, tier one capital, this type of capital
investment for those types of institutions. And I am sure they
would be happy to explain to you why they came to that
judgment, and we would be happy to be a part of that.
Mr. Cicilline. Terrific. Thank you. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Tipton.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you for joining us here today.
I would like to go back actually to your opening comment
when you stated that the President had righted the ship. And
frankly, I have to tell you in the Third District of Colorado,
we have not seen the ship righted. We see unemployment at 9.1
percent. If you go through the Third Congressional District of
Colorado, we have better than double digit unemployment in many
of our communities right now. We are seeing great frustration
in terms of the marketplace. Access to capital, I am a small
businessman. And let me tell you the problems that I see and my
counterparts are really seeing right now. It is actually
uncertainty. You can provide the access to capital, but if we
do not have sales it does not work. We have to be able to get
this economy moving and the uncertainty that we are seeing,
frankly, coming out of the administration is greatly impacting
a lot of business decisions right now.
When I read through your entire statement last night, you
were talking about government-run health care providing
certainty. It has created uncertainty for a lot of small
businesses that are out there. When we are talking about the
tax code that Mr. West had referred to as well, you and the
President have stated that if you earn $250,000 or more in this
country you are wealthy. I would invite you to come to Colorado
with me, sit down with small businesses, LLCs that are working.
They do not feel that they are rich because in the case of my
business, and believe me, for the last few years we have not
had to worry about making those types of profits. We reinvest
those back into our business to be able to keep our people
employed. We are facing higher gas prices in this country. So
in the entire scope of things that we are looking at right now,
when we are talking about access to capital and we are doing
everything we can to state, to go to your comments, to make
sure that we are preserving and standing up for the American
taxpayer, I guess I would like to know when we look back on
TARP and ERA, did the government actually stand up for the
American taxpayer?
Secretary Geithner. In TARP?
Mr. Tipton. Yes.
Secretary Geithner. Let me come back to where you started
because you are absolutely right that unemployment nationally
is roughly nine percent but that does not capture much higher
unemployment rates in many parts of the country. And you are
absolutely right that this is still a very tough economy and we
have got a long way to go to dig out of and repair the damage
caused by the crisis. So I do not disagree with you on that.
And I absolutely agree that, again, small businesses in many
parts of the country, parts where unemployment is very high or
businesses that were in construction and real estate are still
showing the deep scars caused by the crisis. The question is
what can we do to help make that better.
Now, you referred to a tax question. I just want to make
sure I respond to that because I know that is a broad concern.
Let me explain to you what our view is about that particular
question. What we proposed is to allow the tax rates that
affect individuals and businesses that pay taxes as pass-
throughs, who make more than $250,000, to have those rates
revert to the level they were at the end of the Clinton
administration. And we do not do that because we think that we
want to do it in particular; we do it because we have huge
fiscal challenges as a country and we have to figure out a way
to dig out of that mess. And we think the best way to do that
for the economy is through a broader balanced approach with
savings matched by some modest changes in revenues.
Now, you are right that that will change the tax treatment
of small businesses but only roughly three percent of small
businesses. And we think that is a reasonable strategy given
the broad challenges we face. And we are just restoring to the
rates that prevailed at the end of the Clinton administration,
which was a period of very good small business performance,
very strong investment growth, very small income growth, very
strong employment growth, very strong productivity growth. And
we think the economy can handle it. And, you know, it is about
alternatives. If we do not do that, you know, if we extend
those tax rates for the top two percent, then we have to go out
and borrow $700 billion over the next 10 years. We cannot
afford to do that and that is why we proposed that.
Mr. Tipton. Well, I understand that. I just might throw out
the suggestion if we get people back to work we are creating
new taxpayers. And one way I can assure you that we will not be
getting people back to work is you can dismiss only three
percent. Those are job creators, people that are creating jobs,
and we have got struggling people right now that cannot meet
those mortgages.
But if we go back a little bit to some of the issues that
we are really seeing on the banking end of the world, Colorado
Bankers Association notes that we are going to have 25,000
pages potentially of new regulations coming out of Dodd-Frank.
These are going to impact it. And when we look through the five
Cs in terms of making those actual loans to small businesses in
this country, banks want to be able to loan this money but the
regulators, regulations again are coming into play, choking off
the American economy and our ability to be able to create jobs.
Secretary Geithner. I do not agree with that. Let me
explain a little bit why I think it is a fair approach to
thinking about that. And as I said, again, it is very important
we get this balance right. And there is no perfect way to get
that balance right. But remember, look back at what happened
given the basic failures of oversight in our financial system.
It caused a huge amount of damage to small businesses. They
were the innocent victims in many ways of the big mistakes in
design of regulation, checks and balances of our financial
system. It was catastrophic. So we have to figure out a way to
fix that mess. And those regulations are overwhelmingly
targeted. Not at small banks; at the large institutions, the
derivatives markets, the complex aspects of our financial
system where most of the trauma was. And these are complicated
problems and they require complicated solutions. But the law
was designed very carefully because of the efforts of many of
the people in this body to make sure that those burdens did not
fall on small banks. And we have got to make sure we have a
system that provides more stability, more stability and access
to credit, and that is what those rules are designed to do. But
of course, you are right to say we have got to be careful to
get the balance right and not overdo it.
Chairman Graves. The gentlelady from California, Ms. Chu.
Ms. Chu. Last year, the Congressional Asian-Pacific Caucus
and the Congressional Black Caucus teamed up to offer an
amendment to the Small Business Lending Fund legislation that
would make sure culturally and linguistically appropriate
services are part of the financial institution's lending plan
where appropriate. And of course, we did this to ensure that
there is greater success for the program and that the funds go
where they are needed. What criteria have you set up to decide
whether or not businesses will have to institute culturally and
linguistically appropriate lending plans?
Secretary Geithner. Congresswoman, I am going to have to
consult with my staff and come back to you in writing with a
more detailed response to that. But I know the provision you
are referring to. The objective is something we share. I think
it is very important. We have worked very hard to do much more
extensive outreach across the country to make sure people are
aware of these programs and can take advantage of them. We are
committed to continuing that and we are happy to work with you
on how best to do that. And I will be happy to report on the
detail and exactly what we are doing with that provision.
Ms. Chu. I would appreciate that. I am also very interested
in the establishment of the Office of Minority and Women
Inclusion at Treasury and at the other federal financial
regulatory agencies. Minority communities face many cultural
and linguistic barriers that are often tackled by community-
based organizations or CBOs. The CBOs are the link to these
communities that often do not know about federal government
programs or understand how to navigate the federal process. It
is important that this new Office of Minority and Women Affairs
overcome these barriers, and without significant expertise in
community affairs in the office, we are concerned about the
effectiveness of the outreach program. Can you give me a status
update on the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion offices in
the Department of Treasury?
Secretary Geithner. Absolutely. And I think you are right
to point out the challenge and you are right to say it requires
people in these jobs who have a better feel for what is
happening in those communities. And as I think you know, we
appointed Dr. Lorraine Cole to take this job at Treasury in
February of this year. She is excellent, great record of
accomplishment in this area. And if you have not had a chance,
I think you should spend some time with her and she will be
happy to give you an update on exactly where she is, what she
is doing, where the opportunities are, where the challenges
are.
Ms. Chu. To what extent has this office been active in
reaching out to minority-owned banks or banks where there is a
high concentration of minority businesses so that they can
promote the Small Business Lending Fund?
Secretary Geithner. Well, the entire council and people at
Treasury responsible for these programs have been doing a huge
amount of outreach to small banks across the country. And she
will play a meaningful role in that. But that is a broader
department-wide priority. It is not just a burden we place on
her.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Switching topics, let me ask about the State
Small Business Credit Initiative. This is a program that is
building upon successful models of state small business
programs. And I know California received $169 million through
this program. How successful has this program been in
increasing lending to small businesses in California?
Secretary Geithner. Well, I think to be fair it is a little
too early to tell. But again, the basic rationale for this
program is you had across the country a lot of state programs
with a pretty good record of creative, innovative ways to help
small business get credit. And we made the judgment with
Congress that as a complement to what we did directly with
banks using their expertise, we take advantage of these credit
programs, and California is one example of that. But we have
now approved 10 states for funds through this program. We have
other applications coming. We expect to reach a bunch more, but
it is going to take us a little bit more time to judge the
actual results.
Ms. Chu. Why are not more states applying for these funds?
Secretary Geithner. Well, as I said, we have had 27 apply.
We have had many more express interest. And, you know, we leave
that judgment to them. Many of them may have felt that they did
not need the additional assistance. Or many may have felt that
they could not match their programs to the requirements in the
law. It is hard to know. But we think we will reach a
significant number of states.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Walsh.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank
you for being with us today. I know you have got a busy
schedule.
I can guarantee you of very few things in life, but I can
guarantee you--I wish I could guarantee you of more--but I can
guarantee you that if you and I took a day and we spent the
afternoon in my Eighth District of Illinois and we randomly,
just randomly knocked on the doors of 30, 40, 50, 20 small
businessmen and women in my district, I can guarantee you they
would all say the same thing. The uncertainty is killing them.
They see their government pass a piece of health care
legislation that their government does not even seem to know
what it will cost. How are they expected to factor it in? They
are feeling overregulated. And they are feeling--there is huge
trepidation about regulations they see coming down the pike. I
can guarantee you if you and I knocked in my district on the
doors of five small and community banks, or 10, they would all
say the same thing. Government regulations are tying our hands.
That is why we are not able to lend.
I love listening to you. I always learn something when I
listen to you. But is it at all possible that all of those
business men and women in my district and those bankers, are
they all misguided when they say they are overregulated, they
are scared, there is uncertainty? And everything, and again let
me just be pointed here as I close, everything they see coming
out of this administration adds to their uncertainty and their
fear. To all of them.
Secretary Geithner. I do not--I think I have a slightly
different perspective. I will tell you my view. Absolutely,
businesses, small businesses are more uncertain about the
future than they would have if you asked them the question in
2005. Absolutely. And the biggest concern they have and the one
they talk about the most, and this is what all the surveys say.
Not our surveys. They say their uncertainty is about how much
demand for their products is going to grow. They put that at
the top of the list. That has been true for years now and that
makes sense. It is sort of a natural thing because they are not
going to invest or hire unless they have more confidence what
rate of growth and demand for their products is going to be.
And even though we have had 18 months of growth, people
understandably, given the pressure you are seeing in the
economy today, gas prices, weather, Japan, a little concern
about Europe, you see a few more headwinds now. So that is
understandable.
Now, it is also true that businesses always want less
regulation. Understandable. And banks would like to operate
with less regulation. There is nothing unique in that.
Mr. Walsh. No, but understandable, but is it correct?
Secretary Geithner. Well, I think what is correct is that
we have to be very careful given the trauma caused by the
financial crisis to make sure that we have a financial system
that is more conservatively managed. And I do not believe there
is really a meaningful risk for small banks that Dodd-Frank
itself is going to add to their regulatory burden. I think
there is some risk, as I said, that examiners are going to do
it a bit. Maybe a little too cautious, tighten up a bit. And
that is something that I think the chairman of the Fed, the
chairman of the FDIC, other bank regulators, are trying to lean
against carefully so there is more balance in that.
But where there is concern about people over on the
regulatory side, we will take a careful look at that. But that
is the way I would see it. And you know, I have not spent any
time in your district but I spend a lot of time talking to
people and they say similar things. They say banks say we are
not lending because we are regulators, which they often say.
And we see businesses that were more uncertain. And I do not
think that is surprising given what this country has just been
through.
Mr. Walsh. So how do we give them certainty?
Secretary Geithner. Well, I think there are a lot of things
that we can do and I think that just to speak to the issue of
the day, I think it would be very helpful for Washington to
come to agreement on a long-term fiscal consolidation plan, you
know, a reasonable growth fiscal consolidation plan, because I
think that would demonstrate that the country has the
capacity--the country leaders in Washington have the capacity
to try to make some progress in solving a long-term problem
that is a bit of a cloud on the country. I mean, just to be
honest about it.
Mr. Walsh. I hear all the time from folks that, look, this
recession, this crisis was not the President's. It was there
when he came into office. This recovery is his. When you look
at this recovery in historical perspective, and I know I am
running out of time so you have got to be brief, we are not
nearly where we need to be at when it comes to this recovery.
Secretary Geithner. I agree with you about that. But I
think this is an important question. Mr. Chairman, can I just
spend a minute on this issue? Because I think it is at the
center of this big debate we are having about the country and
it is very important to understand this issue as we think about
what we can do about it.
And I think it is important to recognize that you had a
crisis caused by a country that was living beyond its means.
Too much leverage in the banking system. People across the
country borrowing way beyond their means. And when you have a
crisis caused by that, then recoveries are necessarily
unavoidably slower. And why is that? When you build too many
houses, you are going to have a long period where construction
is weak. When people have to reduce the amount of debt they
have to feel more secure about the future, they are going to
spend less, be more cautious when banks have to deliver. So
those create headwinds for the recovery that consign us to more
moderate recoveries than we would normally have. Much more
modest recovery is the reality we face today. The question is
how can we make it stronger? How can we make it better? And I
think we can do things on the tax side by expanding exports, by
doing a sensibly designed long-term fiscal plan. By being
careful about the balance in regulations, we can improve the
odds if we get more people back as quickly as we can. But most
of what we are living today as a country now is the effects of
those mistakes we made up to and after the crisis.
And if you look outside construction, you look beyond the
banking system, you look beyond the sectors most directly
affected by people being a little more careful about how they
spend and borrow, the rest of the American economy, if you look
at export performance, private investment growth, productivity
growth, agriculture, manufacturing, high tech, this is a very
resilient, very productive, very innovative economy. And we
have a very good chance, if we make some sensible judgments
coming out of this, to emerge from this crisis stronger.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
Chairman Graves. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here.
In anticipation of this hearing I did reach out to my local
community banks and businesses to just get a sense of what they
would like to hear and get answers to, one of which I think we
have talked about for awhile. However, I would like to just ask
the question again and get as concise an answer as possible so
I can make notes and give them the answer. Particularly, some
of the banks applied for the SBLF on the first day and they
still have yet to hear any type of response. I heard you say
that there are numerous steps but their question is can you
give a timeline to the best of your knowledge, or if you have
to get back to me that is fine, on when these banks should
start hearing their fate in the program?
Secretary Geithner. Relatively soon. As I said, we have had
about 850 banks apply. The first step they have to go through
is they have to go through their primary regulators. We only
see the applications or we only look at applications after they
make it through that process. That process is taking longer
than I think anybody expected. But we are moving as quickly as
we can. But remember, we have an obligation to be careful;
careful with the taxpayers' money. So we will give people as
quick a response as we can.
Mr. Richmond. Just to follow up on that, something that may
help us is to let us know how many have been through that first
phase of the regulators and are now sitting in Treasury.
Secretary Geithner. I cannot tell you that now but we are
not the meaningful source of delay.
Mr. Richmond. Okay. If you can get me that information that
would certainly help.
The second question posted from the bankers was how
especially in Louisiana we continue to lose our local and
community-based banks because of mergers and acquisitions by
larger banks. And following the financial crisis, the bigger
banks are only getting bigger. Knowing community banks are the
engines of entrepreneurship in their local communities, what is
Treasury doing to affirmatively support the local banks and to
help them grow and sustain themselves?
Secretary Geithner. A very important question. You are
right to say that one of the great strengths of our system and
we intend to preserve it is we have a system with I think more
than 8,000 banks, community banks, operating alongside the
large institutions. And that is a great strength of our system
and it makes the system more stable, more resilient, more
responsive to the needs of Main Street businesses. We intend to
preserve that.
The two most important things we can do about that are,
one, make sure that we help these programs to provide capital
to banks, reach as many institutions as possible. And the
second is to make sure that as we reform our financial system
we are putting the bulk of the burden for reform on the large
institutions that took the most risk, whose failure caused the
most damage. And so just to give you two examples, we are
putting higher capital requirements on the large institutions
relative to the risks they take, relative to small banks. And
we are making sure that large banks, not small banks, bear most
of the cost of solving future crises. Those are just two
examples. But again, we are committed, as are you, to try to
make sure we preserve a system with this great strength of
thousands of institutions that operate in these communities and
can better meet the needs of their Main Street customers.
Mr. Richmond. And in just shifting a little bit from
community banks, my experience in Louisiana especially and
watching our small business growth and actually had some very
good results with the New Market Tax Credit program, part of my
question would be to maybe gauge the administration's view of
the success of new markets. What can we expect in the future in
terms of new market, which is a very creative way to put equity
investments into communities to create jobs?
Secretary Geithner. You are right. It is a great program.
It has had a lot of bipartisan support over a long period of
time. A very good record everybody can look at for impact. And
the main thing that we are looking at now is to try to make
sure we can enhance the program so that more of the incentives
go directly to small businesses that are not directly in the
real estate business. And we think we can do that. We have got
some suggestions on how to do that. I am happy to have my
colleagues brief you in more detail on what we think is
possible there.
Mr. Richmond. And in my last 30 seconds I will just make a
quick comment, which is to, as best as we can, to continue to
help those small businesses, especially as the administration
will come to us and present maybe three trade bills to us, to
make sure that our small businesses can compete, to make sure
that they can get their products and their goods to market and
all of those things so that they can be competitive.
And I will end with my last plug, as always. We cannot get
our goods to market unless we dredge the Mississippi River.
Sixty percent of all grain in this country comes through the
Mississippi River. There was an 800-foot ship stuck in the
middle of the Mississippi for two days a couple of weeks ago.
So we have to do that if we are going to be serious about
doubling exports and getting our goods to market. So thank you
again for coming in. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Secretary Geithner. I agree. Exports and infrastructure are
a very important part of our long-term growth strategy.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Mr. Richmond.
Now we have to turn to another member from Louisiana, Mr.
Landry.
Mr. Landry. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Geithner, if I ask
you a question that you answered already, I apologize. I had to
go to a committee to vote.
You know, it is frustrating on our end because I hear your
comments that, you know, you tried to place the majority of the
burden on the larger banks because it seems like they were more
at fault as to this meltdown. But yet I do not hear them crying
as much as I do the community banks. Why do not we just waive
the community banks from Dodd-Frank and then if that is the
case, then we can allow the community banks to go back to being
community banks because they are crying more than the larger
banks under this bill? So how can that be if what you are
saying is we tried to place more burden on the big banks than
the small banks?
Secretary Geithner. Dodd-Frank did largely, not completely,
but did largely leave small banks out of it. But I think if you
listen carefully, the large banks are complaining much louder.
They are spending a huge amount of money trying to undo, shift
the burden, delay the reforms that are targeted at them and
their risk taking. They are spending a huge amount of money
trying to block, delay, erode, weaken, walk back. And I think
it is important to small businesses, to businesses and small
banks that you guys do not let that happen because again, why
would you want to put the country through what we went through
in this crisis where so many innocent victims were left bearing
the consequences of a lot of mistakes they were not part of?
Mr. Landry. Look, I am with you. I am trying to protect our
community banks. And that leads me into the next question. You
know, I started several businesses. One of them, the first one
actually using a SBA loan. And I was always under the
impression that SBA loans were kind of a bridge to help the
little guy out there when the other banks were not able to or
did not want to lend to them. But yet my community banks are
telling me that now, in fact, I had a real life example of
where there was an application by a business owner to invest in
a business and he had great credit, he had plenty of
collateral, but the examiners would not allow the community
bank to make the loan because they felt that his business
plan--he could not prove that his business plan could continue
to pay the note. Well, if that was the case, a lot of us would
not--I would have never been able to start my business. But yet
he was able to get a loan through small business. And what
concerns me is that here we have the private market willing to
take the risk, but yet we are moving them to the taxpayer who
is going to take the risk when the private market would gladly
take the risk. And they are pinning that on the regulators. Why
would that be? I mean, is that the effect that you guys would
like?
Secretary Geithner. I do not think so. And I agree with
you. And I think that you are right that the challenge in this
is you have to figure out how to put out a financial fire, make
sure you open up the credit channels again when they are stuck
because of the crisis, but do so without creating more
dependency on the government over the long run or crowding out
private markets from financing. I think we have actually been
very, very successful at doing that in the financial system as
a whole. And the terms of these loans, these programs are
established in a way where as conditions improve, as people are
willing to take more risk, as the private markets come back and
it will not be economically attractive or sensible for banks to
rely on the government for these programs.
Mr. Landry. So you are saying that example should not have
happened?
Secretary Geithner. Well, I do not, again, in a crisis, for
a temporary period of time when the markets freeze up and
private investors pull back----
Mr. Landry. But this was within the last six months.
Secretary Geithner. I think now you should see the balance
shifting. And you are right. I think your point is we should
not create a system where government programs are crowding out
private capital from financing that. Absolutely. And I do not
think that we face a meaningful risk of that. I do not think we
do.
Mr. Landry. As long as I have your all commitment that that
is not what you are trying to do.
Secretary Geithner. Absolutely not.
Mr. Landry. Okay. All right. Thank you, Mr. Geithner. I
yield back.
Chairman Graves. The chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Critz.
Mr. Critz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here.
Talking about the SBLF, launched December 20th of last
year, as of June 20th of this year you have 869 applications
for approximately $11.6 billion in funding. There is $30
billion available. Is it succeeding? Is that where you think it
ought to be? Or are there issues that we need to review or that
you can help to get that money into the economy?
Secretary Geithner. Well, as I said at the beginning
several times, I think we are a little behind what we thought
was the realistic schedule at the beginning, and that is
because it is taking longer to put in place the checks and
balances to determine eligibility. In our system, those checks
and balances to protect the taxpayer depend on two steps. One
is the review by regulators. That is taking longer than we
thought. But as I said, we think we are going to reach a
meaningful number of institutions and make a meaningful
difference in their capacity to lend. And I think we are
largely going to achieve the basic objectives of the act. You
cannot be sure at this stage because it is still early days.
Mr. Critz. So the delay caused--where I am going is I would
have thought that banks would have been out there. They would
have seen this impasse and would have been sending applications
in?
Secretary Geithner. Oh, yeah. They came and they came in
numbers, in the hundreds.
Mr. Critz. Which is not a big number.
Secretary Geithner. Well, actually, I think it is a pretty
big number.
Mr. Critz. Okay.
Secretary Geithner. I think it is a pretty big number
because, you know, it is true we have 8,000 banks but many will
not be eligible. Many of them are fine on their own. So I do
not think it is a surprisingly small number.
Mr. Critz. Well, the thing that I find interesting about it
is that the dividend that the banks will pay the Treasury goes
down as they lend more to small business. So it is a huge
incentive. This is not a Democrat or Republican issue. I think
we all have small businesses that are looking for credit and
having a hard time finding it. So this program seems so perfect
for that opportunity.
Secretary Geithner. I agree. I think it is a well designed
program, pretty powerful incentive and, you know, again, I
cannot be sure why it is 800 and not 2,000. But I do not think
it is that surprising, again, because you have a lot of
institutions that feel fine on their own and, you know, do not
want to do business with the government. And frankly, I do
not--I think that is reasonable. You want people to be
reluctant to come to the government.
Mr. Critz. Right.
Secretary Geithner. And we would like these programs to
reach as many institutions but we cannot force them to come.
Mr. Critz. Well, that brings me to my next point, which is
a statistic, and I am assuming it is accurate, about 38 percent
or, no, 59 percent of the funds requested are from institutions
that took TARP money, and they are trying to convert that
money. Now, are we defeating the process by converting TARP
money to this? I mean, it really was not to do that.
Secretary Geithner. Well, no, it actually was designed to
do that. Congress chewed over that and thought about it a lot
and decided that was a good thing to do. And the reason why
they reached that judgment, and I agree with that judgment, is
there are just two reasons. One is because the reasons you
said, this is a, we think, pretty well designed way to create
incentives for more lending. So we think it has more bang for
the buck in terms of lending than the additional, the original
capital programs.
Mr. Critz. Okay.
Secretary Geithner. So we think that is a good reason you
should let them refinance. The other reason is just a fairness
question. You know, why should you penalize institutions that
took the initiative to apply for the initial capital program?
Congress issues a new program. It is more economically
attractive. Why would you penalize them for coming early?
Mr. Critz. All right. You had mentioned earlier about
housing, the construction, small businesses and construction
took a huge hit. I had my staff run some numbers that Home
Depot's fourth quarter profits were up 72 percent. Lowe's is
more for a home person. Home Depot does a lot for individuals
but also a lot for small construction companies. Lowe's was
down a bit. Then 84 Lumber, which is one in my district. Of
course, they are much smaller than they were in '05, about a
third of what they used to be. But it seems like there is some
activity there, although when calling the halls, the union
halls back home, I know I got a lot of people that are still
laid off and we are in prime construction season. So you know,
this housing issue is going to drag on our economy for quite
some time. Are there things that we should be reviewing as a
Committee that we can help jumpstart or help get that housing
inventory off the market?
Secretary Geithner. I think you are right. Housing is still
very tough. There are some signs of light in some parts of the
country but you know, with unemployment so high it is not that
surprising. You still have such a large imbalance between homes
out there and demand for new homes. And that is going to take
realistically several more years to work through.
We think the three most promising things you can do about
that are first, and this is overwhelmingly the most important
one, is to make sure growth is stronger. More people back to
work, more incomes growing again. That is the most important
thing we can do. And everything we do here and you do in
Congress should be governed by that basic simple objective.
Housing specifically, we are trying to make sure that we
bring this broader global settlement effort to improve the
foreclosure process down to earth on sensible terms to reduce
some uncertainty. And we are trying very hard to make sure
through the full complement of housing programs we have through
HUD, FHA and the ones authorized by Congress for the Treasury,
that they reach as many people as they can. They have helped
set a new standard for modifications that have helped two to
three million Americans stay in their homes who can afford to
stay in their homes, but they cannot reach everybody. But we
want to make sure they reach as many people as possible.
Mr. Critz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms.
Ellmers.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Geithner, for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, I have listened to all of your testimony and
especially your last few statements there. Obviously, the
answer to our economic problem here in this country is jobs. We
have got to get businesses hiring again.
Now, you, in your initial comments, kind of painted a
pretty rosy picture, certainly much rosier than what we see
back in North Carolina or in the Second District of North
Carolina. You said 15 straight months of economic growth with
about a million jobs created over the last six months. And yet
we are sustained at above nine percent unemployment for over 23
months. Overwhelmingly, the businesses back home and across the
country continue to tell us that regulation, lack of access to
capital, taxation, fear of taxation, and just the overwhelming
uncertainty that our businesses face is what is keeping them
from hiring. They just simply cannot. They have cut everything
they can cut. Our households have cut everything that we can
cut. And yet we are talking about doing some things in the
future. Right now we are at a standstill with the lending. We
have no guarantee, and as you have stated, you have no ability
to tell us when that will occur, especially with the small
business loan program.
Looking into the future, you are supporting the idea of
taxation, increasing taxes on those who make $250,000 or more.
Those are our business owners. Those are----
Secretary Geithner. They are three percent of your business
owners.
Ms. Ellmers. Three percent.
Secretary Geithner. Three percent of your small businesses.
Ms. Ellmers. Sixty-four percent of small businesses. Sixty-
four percent of jobs created in this country are for the small
businesses.
Secretary Geithner. No, that is right. I agree with that.
But just to put it in perspective, it is important to recognize
why are we doing this? You know, our deficits are 10 percent of
GDP, higher than they have been since any time in the post-war
period really. We have a big hole to dig out of and we have to
figure out how to do that in a way that is balanced, good for
growth, fair to people as a whole. We are not doing it because
we want to do it. We are doing it because if we do not do it
then again I have to go out and borrow a trillion dollars over
the next 10 years to finance those tax benefits for the top two
percent and I do not think I can justify doing that. And if we
were to cut spending by that amount to do it, you would be
putting a huge additional burden on the economy, probably a
greater negative economic impact than that modest change in
revenues. So that is why.
Ms. Ellmers. Then what is the goal? You stated it is only
three percent. What is----
Secretary Geithner. Of small businesses.
Ms. Ellmers. What is the goal then in increasing the taxes?
Secretary Geithner. Well, no, the goal is that, and I know
you and your colleagues understand this and you care about it
deeply, we are living with unsustainable deficits.
Ms. Ellmers. Yes.
Secretary Geithner. If we do not address them, they will
hurt economic growth and investment in the United States.
Ms. Ellmers. But if, as you stated, only three percent of
small businesses will be affected, how can that increase in
taxation be that significant to turn that around?
Secretary Geithner. Well, you are making our case in the
sense that----
Ms. Ellmers. The point is we need jobs.
Secretary Geithner. We are not doing it because we want to
do it. We are doing it because we see no alternative to a
balanced approach to reduce our fiscal deficits. And again, if
you do not--I think the House past demonstrates this, if you do
not touch revenues and you leave in place the tax cuts for the
top two percent that were put in place by President Bush, if
you leave those in place and you are trying to bring our
deficits down over time, then you have to do exceptionally deep
cuts in benefits for middle class Americans and you have to
shrink the overall size of government programs and things like
education to levels that we could not accept as a country. And
so to do a balanced approach to reduce our deficits you have to
make modest changes in revenues. There is no realistic
opportunity alternative to doing that. But, you know, we have
to be careful how we do it.
Ms. Ellmers. Okay. I would like to reclaim my time for a
moment. You, we all agree jobs are the answer. And yet you are
willing and more than capable of putting that excessive burden,
which we already know from our small business owners is the
issue, why would we go and--why would we do more? Why would we
harm them more? Why would we create more uncertainty in the
private sector?
Secretary Geithner. I am not sure we disagree
fundamentally. The economy needs to grow to create jobs. Our
basic challenge is to try to figure out how to make growth
faster, more sustainable, and translate into more jobs. Part of
that is expanding exports. Part of it is making sure that we
are investing in infrastructure, education, things that matter
to our strength. And part of it is a balanced growth-friendly
approach to deficit reduction over time because if we do not
fix that problem, you will leave a broader cloud in the economy
longer term. But we have to be careful how we do it so we do
not hurt the economy.
Ms. Ellmers. Well, Mr. Secretary, I would just like to
close by saying that on behalf of the business owners in North
Carolina and across this country, you are wrong.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Peters.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
Geithner for being here. And I want to take a moment before I
ask a couple of questions to tell you where you are right. In
fact, I had the opportunity yesterday before I flew into
Washington to be at a groundbreaking for a new Chrysler
facility. I represent Michigan. In fact, Chrysler is
headquartered in my district but I was at a groundbreaking for
a new factory, a new paint shop, an $850 million investment in
that plant, which is about 2,200 jobs just in that plant. And
as you know as well as anybody, those 2,200 jobs translate into
a lot of other jobs throughout the economy, not just the auto
suppliers but all of the small businesses that are located
through there. And I am a relatively new member of Congress. I
came in in 2009 at the height of the financial crisis. I
remember sitting in the boardroom with Mr. Nardelli, who was
the CEO of Chrysler at the time who said in very explicit terms
that if there is any assistance for Chrysler as they go through
bankruptcy because of the credit markets that had basically
seized up because of what had happened, the fiasco on Wall
Street, there simply was not money available for a company the
size of Chrysler or General Motors to get through bankruptcy.
They needed access to funds. He said very clearly that they
would go into liquidation. This company would just close,
liquidate, sell everything off.
And I was sitting in Chrysler headquarters, which is the
second largest building in the country next to the Pentagon.
And that building would have been shuttered. Thousands of
people would have been laid off. Grass would have been growing
in the parking lot. That money was necessary. The President did
a very courageous thing. Took a lot of heat from a lot of
people around this country. You took a lot of heat from people
around the country. Made that investment.
And now fast-forward two years. That building actually has
run out of space. They are going to be hiring an additional
thousand engineers. They cannot put them all in that building.
They are looking for additional real estate, additional jobs in
the community. And Chrysler has announced, as you know, paid
off the money from the taxpayers with interest. It is an
incredible success story.
Thank you for doing that. Thank you for believing in
American workers. Thank you for believing in the American
middle class because those are jobs that we are seeing, not
just in Michigan. Those are jobs throughout the country,
through suppliers all through the country, through auto
dealers. Our auto dealers, many of them would have been closed.
They would have been closed had that company liquidated. And
those are important small businesses in every one of our
congressional districts that would have disappeared. So that
was a courageous thing to do. Thank you for doing that. It is a
great success story. Now we need to continue to build on that
success, continue to build on those jobs.
And as you know, it is certainly something that I have
worked a great deal on with small business lending in
particular with my work on the financial services committee.
And one area that I worked in particular with was with Gene
Sperling, who is now with the White House Economic Council and
that is on the State Small Business Credit Initiative, which we
have heard. You have had some questions from folks on that.
And I wanted to just put in the record some of the
successes with that State Small Business Credit Initiative. Mr.
Chairman, you should have a letter that was submitted by our
governor in Michigan, Governor Snyder. I would like to have
that letter entered into the permanent record.
The Small Business Credit Initiative was really modeled
after what we are doing in Michigan, what we have been doing in
Michigan for a number of years, which is a collateral support
program that has been particularly helpful right now to those
smaller auto suppliers as the auto industry is recovering. And
yet a lot of those smaller auto suppliers are in a situation
where their factors are worth considerably less so they cannot
get loans that they needed. But this program, which was a
bipartisan effort, it was started by Governor Granholm, a
Democrat, and it has now continued to be supported by Governor
Rick Snyder, who is a Republican. In the letter that I have
entered into the record, he talks about the very successful
experience that we have had in the state of Michigan. Michigan
has not experienced since they started the program in 2009, not
a single loss. And I am quoting here, ``while generating nearly
$200 million in private loans with a very small public
investment. It is a good investment that has leveraged
considerably.''
Now, I know these programs are starting to get these
applications and you are approving them, but I would expect
because of the success we have had in Michigan and other
states, that this is something that should gear up fairly
quickly because of the experiences we have had. What is your
expectation? Now that that is occurring, applications are
continuing to come in. Is this a program where we are going to
get fairly quick results, particularly relative to other
components of the act?
Secretary Geithner. I think so. It depends, of course, on
how quickly the states are able to put the money to work. But I
think in California and North Carolina they are already making
loans. Missouri's fund has already been oversubscribed with 55
applications. So I think the speed will depend on how quickly
the states can put the money to work. But I think you are right
to point out the benefits of it. Again, the basic insight we
adopted with the support of you and many others is to work with
the grain of established programs that have a good record of
doing these things carefully. And that is the promise of the
program.
Mr. Peters. And I appreciate the effort. And Mr. Chairman,
I have another letter just in closing from the Michigan Credit
Union League. We also had credit unions and other institutions
that have participated and have seen this program as a success
in the past and are looking forward for the additional
resources. But thank you for your work, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary Geithner. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would just comment in
listening to the last presentation that an additional 1,000
engineers and the success of Chrysler, I bet the security
creditors that had their assets confiscated in the Chapter 11
filings have also been made whole and who had their assets
restored and received their dividend checks and that the shares
that have been handed to the unions have been handed over to
their rightful owners. I don't think any of that happened. And
that is the other side of the story from the gentleman's
comments.
But Mr. Secretary, aside from those disagreements we might
have here on the panel, I am curious about some things to lay
down a foundation. And when I listen to you speak and I
appreciate your testimony, I do not hear things I disagree
with. And often your analysis is accurate within at least the
scope of what you are talking about. So just a couple of
questions to help me illuminate your philosophy. On a scale of
one to 10, how would you rank Milton Friedman?
Secretary Geithner. That is an interesting question. I am
not an economist. I am not a trained, credentialed economist.
So I would say I probably agree on a lot of his things but not
everything.
Mr. King. You would not put a number to that?
Secretary Geithner. No, I would not do that.
Mr. King. Would you put a number to John Maynard Keynes?
Secretary Geithner. No, I would not do that either. I would
say sort of the same thing which is no perfect guide in either
to the challenges facing the country but things we can draw
from both.
Mr. King. Adam Smith?
Secretary Geithner. I am not going to give you a number. I
will say the same thing to you no matter what.
Mr. King. I am a little surprised because I would look at
you and I think this is a man that is a complete expert on all
three of these individuals who has a----
Secretary Geithner. You have got the wrong guy.
Mr. King [continuing]. An intuitive and an intellect and a
gut understanding of the flow of market capitalism globally and
historically going back a couple of hundred years plus. I do
expect you to have that basis of knowledge.
Secretary Geithner. I am a student of financial crises,
unfortunately, but not a credentialed economist. You know, the
philosophy I bring is a much more pragmatic test. What is going
to work? Ultimately, that is what matters.
Mr. King. Then I am interested in what is going to work as
well. And we discussed the burdens of regulation on business,
in here primarily small business, and there are a few things
that stick in my mind having founded and operated a small
business for not quite 29 years and it is a second generation
business today. And I would list three of the top regulation
burdens which we discussed as a small businessman by trade. And
I would list them IRS, Obama Care, Dodd-Frank. Can you come up
with any regulations or any proposals that are heavier, a
heavier burden on small business than those three?
Secretary Geithner. That is an interesting way of framing
your question. But I take a different approach. The tax burden
on small businesses, as I said in the beginning, is lower today
than when the President took office. Now, you are right.
Congress is now debating what should happen to tax policy in
the country as we try to dig out of our deficits. And we are
going to have to figure out a way to do that that is fair to
the American people, that can be passed by the Congress, that
is good for future growth. And people disagree on that. The
country is very divided on that. But the tax burden today is
lower than when the President took office. We have already
discussed the financial system at some length. I know a fair
amount about that. And again, I would say how good was it for
small businesses across the country that they were left with
this amount of damage caused by a failed financial system,
something we have to fix. And again, the bulk of that law is
not directed at raising burdens on small banks. That is a point
to avoid.
Mr. King. Mr. Secretary, let me just inject in this. And in
your earlier testimony you talked about the crisis was caused,
at least in part, by a country living beyond its means. And I
agree with that. And we have overbuilt in housing. And I agree
with that. And I would ask though that the solution for that
appeared to be TARP, economic stimulus plan, increasing a lot
of government spending. And now we have a government that is
living beyond its means. It seems as though from sitting here
as a member of Congress and a small businessman, that the
solution for the problem is to apply to the Federal government
the same problem that small business had. In other words, we
overspent with government. We lived beyond its means. Now, I
believe I heard some reference to you in that if you have that
kind of a solution it delays the recovery because we have to
pay interest and principal, some concept along that line. Not
your words, certainly.
Secretary Geithner. Well, let me tell you how I approach
this. You know, again, we have unsustainable deficits, long-
term, short-term. They are a product of a bunch of decisions
made in the last decade, the product of the recession. And the
principle driver over the long run is that Americans are living
longer, aging, health care is very expensive. Now, if we do not
address that then investment will be lower, growth will be
weaker, interest rates will be higher. The economy will be
burdened by that.
Mr. King. We do agree with that. I agree with that. But
when you apply the Federal government's debt, is it the same
concept of the equation as a business that is overleveraged?
Secretary Geithner. A little different in the sense that,
you know, governments are not a business, not a family. And in
financial crises and recessions, the lesson of history is that
when the markets pull back, the government has to step in
temporarily. But only temporarily, and it is very important to
make sure that the government pulls back as it is now doing.
And the government is starting to pull back now. That is
slowing growth a little bit so you want to be careful not to
overdo it. But the key lessons should be for us is the
composition of these reforms on the budget side have to be
designed in a way that they do not hurt growth short-term and
long run. That is why we believe you have to have some balance.
Mr. King. If I could ask unanimous consent for just an
additional question. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just, and again, your testimony is interesting to me, Mr.
Secretary. And one of the things you said was Roosevelt said
that one thing we need is bold experimentation. And I recall a
statement made to us by the President and that date was
February 10, 2009, in speaking to a Republican Conference when
he said that Franklin Delano Roosevelt's New Deal actually did
work. And that the problem was that he lost his nerve in the
second half of the `30s and got concerned about spending too
much money. And he pulled back, which brought about a recession
within a depression. Unemployment went up and then along came
World War II, the largest economic stimulus plan ever. That is
almost verbatim. It is conceptually exact. And so I am
wondering what you think of this bold experiment of President
Obama's. It seems to be committed to be substantially more bold
than that of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Secretary Geithner. I, of course, work for this President
and I believe in everything he is doing but I would not quite
compare it that way. I was using that phrase to refer to the
range of things we had to do to fix the financial system, put
out the financial fire, and you know, we did exceptional things
no one would ever want to do and would never want to do again
ever. And the things we are doing on the credit side, capital
side are very creative, no precedent for it. And they require
new approaches. That is what I was referring to.
Mr. King. Well, I like audacity when you are right. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. The gentleman from New York, Mr. Owens.
Mr. Owens. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Geithner, for coming today.
As I listened to your testimony and listened to the
questions from the floor, one thing seems to reach out to us
and that is the demand is really the key, both in terms of
product, that is sales. It is also generating demand for bank
loans. The critical issue then really is how do we generate
demand which will then flow through the economy and essentially
bring us out of this recession? I assume you agree that demand
is the key?
And one of the things that it appears to me that we have
not done here in Congress is really developed a real jobs
creation program. And I have to say that from my perspective it
does not appear that the administration has done that either.
You may disagree but that----
Secretary Geithner. I do.
Mr. Owens [continuing]. My perspective.
One of the things that we have on our plate that I think we
could do that would stimulate demand, and I hear this from my
small business owners back in my community, from my bankers, is
get the transportation bill passed which would push dollars
into infrastructure. Do you agree with that?
Secretary Geithner. I do. I am a very strong supporter of
the need for a very large, much more substantial level of
investment over the long term in improving the nation's
infrastructure. I think it is important for businesses. We have
underinvested in those. That raises the cost of doing business,
taking goods to market. There is a very strong economic
rationale for doing it. It would help get employment up, people
back to work in the parts of the economy most affected by the
crisis. Very strong economic case for doing it.
Mr. Owens. So then you would urge us as one of the positive
things we might do to stimulate demand is to make sure we pass
a transportation bill as quickly as possible?
Secretary Geithner. I would absolutely say that, you know,
we have to make sure we can pay for it, we do it responsibly,
but it is one of the most effective things we could do to help
improve the strength of recovery, breadth of recovery, job
creation.
Mr. Owens. Thank you. Just two other points. You also
mentioned during your testimony the Clinton era tax rates.
During that period of time, I believe if we look back
historically we also saw significant GDP growth in those years.
Secretary Geithner. We did. I think if you, again, if you
just compare most measures of economic success, if you compare
the record of growth, private investment, job creation, income
growth, productivity growth between those two periods,
employment growth, job growth, the period of the second half of
the '90s and the decade that followed, very good evidence for
the type of growth strategies that we are promoting today.
Mr. Owens. And so it would appear, one could also conclude,
that those tax rates did not impede either job growth nor GDP
growth.
Secretary Geithner. Absolutely. In fact, I think you can
say that the economy did very well during that period of time
by all the measures we choose to judge economic performance by.
Mr. Owens. And the final question I have for you goes to
working capital. Just by way of background, I spent 14 years on
a bank board and 10 of those years as a permanent member of the
loan committee. So I think I have----
Secretary Geithner. My condolences to you for that.
Mr. Owens. When we talk about working capital, there is
some confusion I think that goes on in the conversation. In my
view, the strain on the working capital issue is because
normally working capital is pegged to inventory and accounts
receivable. And because you have declines in working capital,
it is because you do not have AR and you do not have inventory.
And there is really not much that I can see that government can
do about that directly. That has to come as the result of
increased demand.
Secretary Geithner. I agree with you completely. I mean,
again, it is important to step back and remember what we have
been through. We had an economy frankly with too much debt,
economy was falling at a rate of about five to six percent a
year when the President took office. That was going to come
with it a substantial fall in demand for lending. That was
going to be magnified as the country pulled back and went to
living within its means. No surprise. You saw demand for loans
fall very, very sharply over that period of time. But that
decline would have been much, much worse if we let the
financial system burn and collapse. And the case for capital,
the case for the programs you put in the emergency is to make
sure you did not see the capacity of the system to support
lending contract unnecessarily. And we were very successful,
not just in putting out the fire at a very low cost to the
taxpayer, but in bringing rates of cost of lending down very
dramatically, opening up the credit pipes very quickly. And I
am very confident that this financial system today is now in a
position where it can finance a growing recovery within concern
that there will be a very substantial meaningful capital
constraint on the capacity of the system to lend. There will be
pockets of constraints and weakness, but for the system
overall, our financial system will be able to support a growing
recovery.
Mr. Owens. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. The chair recognizes the gentleman from
Ohio, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I think
we are now only beginning to comprehend the extent of the
compliance costs that will result from the passage of last
year's, what I would consider to be pro-bureaucracy, Dodd-Frank
bill. As with any regulation, the smallest firms are going to
have the most difficult time complying. They have the least
resources to deal with so it will take up a disproportionate
share of their available resources in that compliance, while
many of the larger financial institutions may be able to
weather the increased burden of complying with the act's
existing and proposed regulations. Small and community banks
are already scrambling to survive. How can the administration
claim to promote access to capital for small businesses when it
is smothering the very community banks that are the lifeblood
for small business entrepreneurs across this nation?
Secretary Geithner. Well, Congressman, I think you
understand my views on this. My view is, no surprise to you,
that a law was appropriately and carefully designed to reduce
the risk that it was putting an unnecessary burden on small
banks who were not the principle source of the problem and we
rely on a lot to be a source of lending to small businesses
going forward. Now, they were not left untouched by the law but
overwhelmingly the thrust of the reforms in the law are
targeted at parts of the system they are not part of. At
derivatives, at the complicated risk management challenges
facing large firms. And if we had not done that we would be
leaving this economy vulnerable to another crisis like this.
And again, this was a crisis exceptionally damaging to the
innocent victims among small businesses.
Mr. Chabot. I have only got limited time so let me just say
that I am hearing still from especially small community-type
banks and small business entrepreneurs and you have heard the
uncertainty that this is causing, et cetera. But let me move on
to----
Secretary Geithner. Can I just say I will try to be very
quick.
Mr. Chabot. Let me move on, if I can. Last year the
administrations' major initiative and its so-called jobs bill
towards increasing lending to small businesses was to push more
government spending. In this case, to create a $30 billion
mini-TARP, the Small Business Lending Fund out of remaining
TARP funds. Now, your Treasury is warning us that we are on the
brink of financial catastrophe unless we raise the debt
ceiling. In fact, you said in May that a ``default would not
only increase borrowing costs for the Federal government but
also for families, businesses, and local governments.'' If we
are indeed close to disaster that would severely jeopardize
lending, would you be willing to return the remainder of the
$30 billion in mini-TARPs so we can move towards paying down
the debt and therefore averting this disaster?
Secretary Geithner. Well, of course. The loans that we
cannot spend, the resources we cannot spend because we do not
have eligible banks for it go back to the Congress. But
unfortunately, they will not make a meaningful contribution to
reducing our long-term fiscal problems. But those funds, if not
used, go back to you. You can choose what to do with them. I
would recommend you put them to deficit reduction.
Mr. Chabot. All right. And I am for deficit reduction, too,
so we certainly agree on that. But let me ask you about that,
again, the debt ceiling question. The business about that we
are going to default, our nation is going to default, the
actual----
Secretary Geithner. We are not going to default because
Congress is going to do what they need to do.
Mr. Chabot. Yeah, we are not going to default. I would
agree with that. Let me ask you this. How much of the actual
expenditures goes towards paying down this so-called debt? Is
it 15 percent or thereabouts?
Secretary Geithner. Do you mean the interest costs?
Mr. Chabot. Yes.
Secretary Geithner. Well, you know, we borrow roughly 40
cents for every dollar Congress has authorized us to spend.
Mr. Chabot. I have heard up to 43 cents on a dollar.
Secretary Geithner. Roughly. Interest costs are a much
smaller fraction of it. But here is the basic problem. And I
think the best analogy is to use the business analogy or small
families' analogy which is if you stop paying your utility
bill, your credit card and just pay your mortgage, who is going
to lend you money? And if you had to refinance your mortgage
every month, like we effectively have to do, who would lend you
a dollar? So there is no responsible path that avoids default,
avoids cash offered to the economy that has us decide as a
country we are going to stop paying all our obligations so we
can pay interest. It does not work. It is not workable. And it
will not relieve Congress of the obligation of raising the
limit.
Mr. Chabot. I certainly agree that we should not default.
And I would just argue that a lot of the sky is going to fall,
we need to be careful about what is being said. And also it is
not only yours but Congress's determination.
Can I have an additional minute, Mr. Chairman?
The determination, you can prioritize where the money is
spent. You can say the debt continues to get paid, the Social
Security checks continue to go out. Perhaps our troops continue
to get paid. But other things, we are going to make substantial
cuts.
Let me move off that for one last quick question. It was
raised here a couple of times the 9.1 percent unemployment. It
went from 8.6 to 9.1, which is most unfortunate. We are heading
in the wrong direction. But it is really a lot worse than that
9.1, is it not? I mean, we are talking about the fact that
people who used to be full-time, some are now working part-
time. People are underemployed and they have a college
education and they are now perhaps working in the fast food
industry flipping burgers, although lots of people do that. It
is respectable work. But perhaps they did not need a four-year
college degree to do that. And the people are just--a
significant group has stopped looking altogether. And those
ones I just mentioned are not even included in that 9.1
percent, so really it is worse than that. Would you agree?
Secretary Geithner. My quick response. First, you are
asking whether my judgment is right about the consequences of
default. But what I would just ask you to quickly ask your
staff to show you are letters written by every President, every
Secretary of the Treasury, who has faced this problem over the
last several decades and you will see in Ronald Reagan and Jim
Baker and others, eloquent testimony to the risks of
contemplating what you are proposing. There is no responsible
path for making that work. On-the-job stuff----
Mr. Chabot. Let me just interrupt you for a second. And you
know your boss said that it was irresponsible to vote to
increase the debt ceiling and voted against it as well. And I
am referring to President Obama.
Secretary Geithner. He also said that that was a mistake.
As many people have said, it was a mistake.
Mr. Chabot. He said it was a mistake.
Secretary Geithner. But on the specific question you are
suggesting is go back and look at my republican predecessors.
You will see they have made the same judgment.
On the jobs front, again, I would say this. You are
absolutely right that, you know, the national averages mask a
lot of differences across country. Unemployment is much higher
in many ways. But remember, it is two million private sector
jobs since job growth started. Hours worked have increased more
than that. And incomes are growing because the economy is
growing as a whole. But we have a long way to go to dig out of
it. Our collective task responsibility is to figure out how
best to do that.
Mr. Chabot. And the population has increased as well. So we
have to put on jobs just to tread water.
Secretary Geithner. You do. You are exactly right about
that.
Mr. Chabot. Okay. And thank you, Mr. Secretary. We
appreciate you being here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. On behalf of the
Ranking member, and I might point out that the only reason for
her absence, she was managing amendments on another committee,
which was completely unavoidable. And so on behalf of the
Ranking member and myself, we appreciate very much you being
here and your testimony. And we are going to get you out of
here on time.
I would ask unanimous consent that all members have five
legislative days to extend and revise their remarks. And I
would also ask unanimous consent that the record for this
hearing be left open for 14 days in order to have members
submit questions and the Secretary respond. Without objection,
that is so ordered. And with that this hearing is adjourned.
Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 11:53 a.m., the Committee hearing was
adjourned.]


