- CAUGHT UP IN RED TAPE: THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS ON SMALL BUSINESSES AND CONTRACTORS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CAUGHT UP IN RED TAPE: THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS ON SMALL
BUSINESSES AND CONTRACTORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONTRACTING AND WORKFORCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 14, 2012

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-072
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-478                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENT

Page
Hon. Mick Mulvaney...............................................     1

WITNESSES

Colonel Charles O'Cain, USAF, Ret., Owner, Owl Business
Consulting, LLC, Rock Hill, SC.................................     4
Mr. Doug Meyer-Cuno, President, Carolina Ingredients, Rock Hill,
SC.............................................................    10
Mr. Monty Felix, CEO, Alaglas Pools, Saint Matthews, SC..........    16
Curwood Chappell.................................................    23
Jeff Carrington..................................................    23
Ken Speirs.......................................................    25
Warren White.....................................................    27

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Colonel Charles O'Cain, USAF, Ret., Owner, Owl Business
Consulting, LLC, Rock Hill, SC.............................    31
Mr. Doug Meyer-Cuno, President, Carolina Ingredients, Rock
Hill, SC...................................................    41
Mr. Monty Felix, CEO, Alaglas Pools, Saint Matthews, SC......    32

CAUGHT UP IN RED TAPE: THE IMPACT OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS ON SMALL
BUSINESSES AND CONTRACTORS

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 14, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Contracting and Workforce,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
the Rock Hill City Council Chambers, 155 Johnston Street, Rock
Hill, South Carolina, Hon. Mick Mulvaney (Chairman of the
Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representative Mulvaney.
Chairman Mulvaney. Good morning. I am going to call this
hearing to order. Thank you all for being here. I am going to
deal with a couple of housekeeping matters first.
First, I want to tell you why we are here and thank you all
for coming. A lot of folks do not realize, this is a formal and
official Congressional hearing. This has the same scope and the
same gravity that it would if we were doing this in the
Longworth House Office Building in Washington, D.C. It is just
that as the Chairman of a Subcommittee, I have the ability to
do this anywhere that I like. We have done one of these
hearings in Los Angeles, California, we have done one of these
hearings in Sumter, South Carolina. And I think it is a
tremendous tool to allow us to go outside of Washington, D.C.
and actually get input from real folks and from real people
about real world experiences and how the law relates to them.
So today, before we begin, I want to thank everybody for
being here, especially the witnesses. I appreciate their
willingness to be here. I do have a request, gentlemen, that
when you present your testimony, if you would do it, please,
from the podium behind you, because there is a microphone
there. We did not have three microphones for you up front.
The way it is going to work today, folks, because this is
part of the formal Congressional Record, is that you are going
to hear me read an introduction. You are also going to hear me
read some questions when the gentlemen are finished. Each of
the gentlemen will have as much time as they like to tell us
about the reasons that we are here, which is to try and look at
the ways that government impacts their business when it comes
to regulatory and health insurance issues. So with that, I will
begin with my formal introduction and my statement and we will
go to you gentlemen and we will take questions and stuff after
that.
The House Small Business Committee has kept a particular
focus on federal regulations and policies that are adding to
the assortment of uncertainties confronting small business,
particularly when those uncertainties add to our nation's
stubbornly high unemployment rate.
We have held numerous hearings in Congress related to
various regulations and have heard continuously that the entire
regulatory process is flawed and that it often punishes job
creators and stifles economic growth. Even President Obama
launched an effort to evaluate regulations that create
unnecessary burdens. The President has issued an Executive
Order mandating that agencies do more than the bare minimum
required to ensure that stakeholders have an opportunity to
communicate their views on agency regulatory actions.
Unfortunately, the regulatory agencies under his administration
have gone in the exact opposite direction from time to time.
On October 24 of last year, Gallop released a poll that
outlined small business owners' most pressing concerns, and
according to this poll, small business owners are most likely
to say that complying with government regulations is the most
important problem facing them today. That is more than taxes
and more than the overall economy. The Gallop poll is mirrored
by numerous trade association surveys, such as the one
conducted by the United States Chamber of Commerce in March of
2012. That Chamber study found that almost half of small
business owners said regulation is a greater threat to their
business than taxation and litigation combined. Similarly, a
poll conducted by the National Federation of Independent
Business found that 63 percent of respondents believe the rules
issued by the federal government have done more to hurt small
business and 74 percent believe that the federal government
should focus on creating jobs instead of issuing new rules and
regulations. The message is clear--small businesses need
Washington to stay out of the way.
Small business owners face unique challenges in navigating
federal regulations. According to the study, ``The Impact of
Regulatory Costs on Small Firms,'' published by the SBA's
Office of Advocacy in September of 2010, small businesses face
an annual regulatory cost of over $10,500 per employee, which
is 36 percent higher than the per employee regulatory cost
facing large firms. It is oftentimes more expensive for small
firms to implement regulatory rules and to abide by regulations
than it is for large businesses.
And while regulations certainly have benefits, they also
have costs that are barriers to entry, distort markets, and
divert scarce capital away from job creation. Small businesses
simply do not have the resources to navigate the ever-
increasing maze of federal regulations.
Take the new healthcare law for example. Between now and
full implementation in 2018, 46 new provisions of that
healthcare law will need to be implemented. This is on top of
the 46 that have already been implemented over the past two
years. The sheer number of things to track and comply with has
gotten to be so confusing for small mom and pop shops
struggling to get by in tough economic times, that many of them
have simply given up. It all goes back to the question, why is
Washington making things harder for small business and not
easier.
EPA, another federal agency that has consistently drawn the
ire of the small business community, has proposed rules to
regulate greenhouse gases, the proposed utility maximum
achievable control technology rule, and the potential
regulation of coal ash. All have the capacity to increase the
cost disproportionately on small businesses. Each of these
rules on their own and in combination could directly and
indirectly lead to substantially higher energy costs and
reductions in employment.
Direct costs incurred by small businesses when complying
with regulations present a significant problem, but it is not
just direct costs that hinder growth. Dodd-Frank is an
excellent example of how indirect costs can hurt small
businesses as well. While very few of the 500 rulemakings
required by Dodd-Frank will apply to small business, these new
rules will have the potential to hit them where it hurts them
the most, their access to capital. In the last few years,
lending to small firms has plummeted to record lows. The
stricter regulatory environment created by Dodd-Frank and the
new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau combined with the
uncertainty brought by many of the law's main provisions could
very well be the reason why we have seen such weak growth in
small business lending.
Unfortunately, these are but a few of the regulatory
burdens facing America's small business owners. Washington must
do a better job of helping small firms grow to become
tomorrow's big businesses.
I look forward to listening to the testimony from each of
the gentlemen today and hope you can help me and this Committee
identify these regulatory barriers and discuss options that are
available to us. Again, I welcome you.
And what we will do is I will read a brief introduction for
the record for each of you gentlemen, and then we will start
with you, Colonel O'Cain, and move down the table and take your
testimony. Please take as much time as you like. If we were in
Washington, we would be limited to five minutes, but the nice
thing about doing these hearings here is that we have got as
much time as you like. So please do not feel rushed at any
time.
I know you have all submitted written testimony, which will
be part of the record. Feel free to go beyond that in your
verbal testimony. Again, what we are trying to do here today is
take the story, take the real world stories of what happens
when small businesses try and deal with what Washington gives
them, and take those stories back to Washington to try and see
if we cannot improve things.
The introductions. Our first witness today is retired
United States Air Force Colonel Charles O'Cain. He spent 30
years as an acquisition executive on active duty and in the
Reserves working in various capacities from base level to the
Pentagon. He has also worked for 25 years in the private sector
as a contracts executive for Texas Instruments Defense Group
and for Raytheon. For the past five years, he has been the
owner of Owl Business Advisors, helping small and medium sized
businesses conduct business with federal, state, county, and
city governments as a consultant.
Thank you again, Colonel, for being here.
Next will be Douglas Meyer-Cuno. Mr. Meyer-Cuno founded
Carolina Ingredients in July of 1990 with a vision of creating
a customer-service driven and value-added distribution company.
After 10 years, Carolina Ingredients built a blending facility
which allowed the company to create even more value for its
customer base. And over the past two decades, the company has
evolved into a well-known regional blending manufacturer with
sales throughout the United States. Mr. Meyer-Cuno has been
actively involved in managing the sales department but now
dedicates the majority of his time to the company's vision and
planning. Today, the company proudly employs 37 people and is
located right here in Rock Hill. Thanks, Mr. Meyer-Cuno, for
your time as well.
Rounding out the panel is Mr. Monty Felix, owner and CEO of
the Alaglas Pools in Saint Matthews, South Carolina. He is the
immediate past president of the American Composite
Manufacturers Association, which represents composite
manufacturers across a wide variety of industries, including
aerospace, automotive, architecture, custom molding, marine,
recreation and transportation industries. Thank you again for
making the trip up the road from Saint Matthews, Mr. Felix.
So with that, Colonel, we will begin with you. I understand
you are going to talk to us a little bit today about the
difficulties that sometimes businesses face when contracting
with the federal government, something very near and dear to my
heart. Again, if you would not mind, perhaps moving to the
podium while you speak, that would be extraordinarily helpful.

STATEMENTS OF COLONEL CHARLES O'CAIN, USAF, RET., OWNER, OWL
BUSINESS CONSULTING, LLC, ROCK HILL, SOUTH CAROLINA; DOUG
MEYER-CUNO, PRESIDENT, CAROLINA INGREDIENTS, ROCK HILL, SOUTH
CAROLINA; AND MONTY FELIX, CEO, ALAGLAS POOLS, SAINT MATTHEWS,
SOUTH CAROLINA

STATEMENT OF COLONEL CHARLES O'CAIN

Colonel O'Cain. Good morning, Mr. Mulvaney and everyone
else who is attending the hearing.
Maybe I should start by explaining the difference between a
large business and a small business. A large business, all
these problems that Mr. Mulvaney has alluded to regarding
regulations are not a problem for large business. They are a
cost, but not a problem, because in each one of those areas
where a regulation has to be complied with, they simply have a
vice president or senior vice president or director with an
army of people who take care of all that. They make all the
right submissions and they do not get in any kind of trouble
with the government, because they have the resources to be able
to do that.
But mom and pop, they do not have these vast resources to
call to help them navigate their way through these shark-
infested waters. It is daunting enough that a number of small
businesses will not even try to do business with the government
because they see that it is too complicated, too complicated.
And then there are other small businesses who want to do
business with the government and they attempt to do business
with the government. Because resources are vital to them,
financial resources, they generally try themselves. So they
will go online and search websites and read this site and that
site and what-have-you. And normally after a few weeks, they
are more confused than when they started. They have no idea
where to start to begin doing business with the government, and
if they think they have begun the process, they have no idea
when they are done. How do you know when you are done. How many
certifications does it take before you can actually submit a
bid and negotiate a contract with the government.
This is what I do now as a consultant. As Mr. Mulvaney
pointed out, I have considerable experience on both sides of
the negotiating table, both on the government side and the
private sector side. I worked for large businesses--Texas
Instruments and Raytheon are huge billion dollar businesses.
And so, you know, we did not have problems with the
regulations, we just had a vice president that took care of all
that for us and we went on about doing our business.
What I do to help small businesses be in a position to do
business with the government is I guide them through the
process. I know what it takes. There are about 15 things that
you have to do in order to be able to do business with the
government, unless you want to do also business with GSA, which
adds another four or five. But the way the process is set up,
you cannot start with step six because you need--in step six,
you need the certificate you got from step five to go to step
six. And so when businesses try to work their way through the
process, they find something and say, look, I need to do this
in order to be able to do business with the government. So they
try to go do it. Halfway through the form, they find out there
is a code that they do not have. They have no idea how to get
that code, there is no step, there is no note out to the side
that this code comes from, you know, step five. And so on and
so forth. So you have to go step one through step X in order to
be able to do business with the government.
Most small businesses understand the reason that some of
this is difficult. I think all of us would understand that.
Would you like your government to do business with terrorist
organizations or convicted felons? Or how would your like your
taxpayers' dollar spent by businesses that have a long history
of providing terrible goods and services?
Part of the process that a small business goes through is
to vet those out, is to get the non-players out of the way so
that the legitimate, sound, honest, hard-working small business
organizations can do business with the government. So the small
businesses do not argue that yeah, this is necessary, some of
this is necessary in order to ferret out the non-players, but
there are other things that enter into a small business'
decision to do business with the government. There are a lot of
products and services where they are required to be done by
U.S. firms. A lot of small businesses get their base products,
their raw materials overseas because a lot of it comes from
overseas. And so someone has to advise them that you cannot get
your material from Taiwan any more, you are going to have to
get it within the United States in order to do business with
the government. The good thing is that everybody has to do
that. Your competitors also have to get their raw materials
from the United States and not outside.
There are certain countries that you cannot do business
with. Cannot do business with North Korea--not sure why you
would want to, but you cannot. Iran is also a country that you
cannot do business in, and there is a list of them, they are
all listed. You just have to know where to go find them, you
know. Everything you need to do in order to be able to sell
goods and services to the government is online somewhere. And
the problem is that small businesses do not know where to go to
start and they do not know when they are finished with all the
processes that are necessary in order to do business with the
government.
There is what is called a CAGE code, it is an
identification code that without that, you cannot do business
with anybody. Well, how do you get that? How do you know you
need that? And then how do you go get it? Well, that is like
step four, so you have got to have gone through one, two and
three before you can get to a CAGE code which comes
electronically from the government. Back in the old days, it
was all done by paper and this process could easily take a year
and a half or two years in order to be able to do business with
the government. The good news is that the government has all of
these regulations and requirements online, it is just a matter
of finding them and knowing what step to go through, the order
to go through in order to be able to do business with the
government.
I do not have solutions for all the problems that Mr.
Mulvaney brought up, with regulations and that sort of thing,
but again, a lot of these regulations are good regulations.
OSHA, you know, do you want to have a safe work environment. I
have gone into clients and gone into their warehouse and just
walking around, looked up and seen a heavy item up on the top
shelf just teetering up there waiting on a thunderstorm to send
that crashing down on somebody's head. And as I walk through,
now I am an OSHA rep--not really, but I am trying to help them
stay clear of violations that when the OSHA rep comes in they
are going to find. These make sense. I say you are going to
have to move that box back because it is going to fall on
somebody and kill them and if the OSHA guy comes in here, he
will shut you down. And so a lot of these have practical
reasons for being there, you know.
The government gets over-zealous though, you know, and
there's this reason and that reason and the other reason and
what-have-you. Unfortunately, I do not have the answers to all
of that--I do not. What I do have answers to is how can we make
it easier for small businesses to be able to do business with
the government, to be able to submit proposals, submit bids, go
in and negotiate contracts. That I can do. The good news is
that it is easy to do in that there is a light at the end of
the tunnel, the solution is there and it is a matter of
implementing that. I am not a computer whiz, but I can sit down
with a computer whiz and knock this thing out in a short period
of time. So what you would have then maybe is a flood of small
businesses coming in trying to do business with the government
and now they are learning about OSHA and healthcare and all the
other stuff.
But the way it is now, they do not have to worry about
that, because they never can get to the table. What I can do is
bring them to the table. And that is my expertise.
All the other regulations, I am sorry, I do not have
answers to them.
Chairman Mulvaney. Colonel, let me interrupt you and ask
you a question because you have hit on some of the key items.
Thank you, by the way, for mentioning the fact that
taxpayers do not want the government dealing with terrorists
and felons and folks who have a reputation for really shoddy
materials and there is a public interest in making sure that
folks that are dealing with the government are following all
the OSHA regulations, for example. I think it is important to
remember that we are not here today, there is no movement in
Washington to get rid of those types of regulations. There are
some that all of us accept actually are helpful to the process
and also protect the taxpayers in the long run.
However, at the other end of the extreme, I am reminded of
the hearing that we conducted in Sumter and in Sumter, there
was a $103 million government contract to build the new Third
Army Headquarters at Shaw Air Force Base. Third Army moved from
Fort McPherson in Atlanta up to Sumter, and they did so with a
$103 million contract. We found out as a result of the hearing
down in Sumter that less than $250,000 of that money actually
went to small local businesses. And when we asked why, we heard
a lot of what you just talked about, which is it was simply too
hard for folks to get qualified. You mentioned that there are
15 steps plus another four if you are GSA. You did not talk
about the additional 10 steps if you are trying to be an 8A
minority owned business or something like that.
Colonel O'Cain. That is actually in there. That is part of
the 15 steps because with a client, I asked them, I said, you
know, you are a man, but does your wife own this business or
own 51 percent or does your wife work in the business and could
you convert to being an 8A contractor and that sort of thing.
So part of those 15--I cover a lot of that with them to give
them the best advantage. But yeah, that is part of----
Chairman Mulvaney. If you and I sat down with that 15-step
list and I said, Colonel, help me streamline this, what would
be the first place you would look at to maybe either combine a
couple of steps, skip a couple of steps, what are the
opportunities you have got to make that easier?
Colonel O'Cain. Well, actually, Mr. Mulvaney, I can step
someone through the 15 steps in about two weeks, and that is
submission time and receipt time for the various codes and all.
All those codes have a reason in the government, there are
reasons for those codes that go to the efficient operation of
an organization as large as the United States government. So to
combine those steps, it would take someone smarter than me to
go do that.
The point is, if those steps are there, how can you get
through them as quickly as possible. That I can go do. It is
like how do you do away with OSHA.
Chairman Mulvaney. You and I were talking beforehand,
before the hearing, about what it used to be like before the
internet and how the internet actually has created the
opportunity to try and improve things that used to be done by
mail back and forth, which I think was much longer. We also
talked about the fact that there is so much information
available on the internet that it is sometimes difficult to
navigate.
Could you talk about what the advantages or disadvantages
or the online system are?
Colonel O'Cain. Yes. First of all, that is a vast
improvement. When I was a second lieutenant, I was telling Mr.
Mulvaney, someone would submit a written form and the checker
of the form would get down to box three and there is an error,
so they would mail it back to them and there is mail time, you
know, a week, 10 days, whatever. And then when the small
business gets a chance, they would get the form at night and
would go through and correct the error in box three and
resubmit the form. And then the checker would get all the way
down to maybe, you know, box eight and find an error and mail
it back to them, and so on and so forth, and a year and a half
later, you know, they finally are able to do business with the
government.
All of that can be done in two weeks now, can be done in
two weeks if you know where to go and you know what the boxes
mean--two weeks. So we have gone from a year and a half to two
weeks. So I see that as a vast improvement. The problem is is
that there is no place out there on the internet that will take
a small business and say here are the 15 things you need to go
do with little notes out to the side, you know, click on this
and we will tell you what this step is.
Chairman Mulvaney. Have you tried the SBA website for that?
Colonel O'Cain. Have I tried what?
Chairman Mulvaney. Is there an SBA--Small Business
Administration--website?
Colonel O'Cain. Oh, yes, and a lot of the stuff is in
there. In fact, a lot of the codes and the things and what you
have to do is in there. But you have to know which little tab
to go to to click on to work on step two and so on and so
forth.
The point is is that somewhere there ought to be some key
phrases like ``Doing business with the government'' or ``How to
do business with the government'' or ``Government business'' or
something that will take you to a table and say, you know, if
you want to just do business with the local base--Army, Navy,
Air Force, Marine base--here are the 15 things you need to go
do and here is the order that you need to go do them in,
because you need a code from step one to go to step two and the
code from step two to go to step three and so on and so forth.
And when you get through, you will be able to do business with
the government.
If you want to do business with GSA also, then here are the
four or five other steps that you need to go through. And this
is why they are there. One of the steps with GSA is you have to
take a course, you have to take an online course that will take
an average person several hours to go complete. And the reason
for that is that GSA--their base is so big, they do business
with the entire federal government, most state, county and city
governments are able to order some things from GSA. And so in
order to be able to do business with GSA, they do not have time
to call up every small business that does not know what they
are doing and say you cannot do that. And so what they do is
they require anyone who wants to do business with GSA to take
this course and you have to successfully complete that course
and get a certification that you have finished that before you
can go on to the other three steps. That is not bad.
Chairman Mulvaney. We just did an entire hearing last week
on the GSA schedules and the process by which you can get your
materials on the schedule. It was scintillating, I can assure
you.
Colonel O'Cain. Yeah.
Chairman Mulvaney. I am going to ask you one last question
and then I am going to ask Mr. Meyer-Cuno to step up.
Colonel O'Cain. Okay.
Chairman Mulvaney. I am going to ask all of today's folks
the same question, which is one of the things that we are
charged with in Washington is trying to prioritize. And with
the limited amount of time between now and the end of the year
and the election, I was really stunned by the Gallop poll
numbers, the ones that said that small businesses considered
regulation to be their biggest concern, above taxation and
litigation. And my initial reaction to that was that wait a
second, but we spend all of our time on taxation in Washington,
D.C. and if we fix taxation, we'll fix small business and so
forth. But then I thought back to my days owning and running a
restaurant, while the tax code was certainly something that I
paid attention to, I did not actually worry about the tax code
until after I started making money. And litigation, I felt like
I had a handle on it, if I did things right, that I knew were
right, I was fairly convinced I was not too worried about being
sued over something. But I lived in constant fear of forgetting
to check a box on a piece of paper some place that would
subject me to some type of fine or fee or penalty from the
federal government.
So I will just ask you, Colonel, if you think--are the
results of that Gallop poll consistent with what you have seen
with your customers?
Colonel O'Cain. Yes, it is. And you know, there are two
types of small businesses, one of them is already doing
business with the government and they have had some problems
somewhere for something; and then the other one is the ones who
are afraid to do business with the government because of all
the horror stories they have heard and they have gone into the
internet and hit a brick wall and have no idea, you know, how
to proceed forward in order to do business with the government.
The thing is most reasonable people and small business
owners, if they ever get the chance to get in there, they can
figure a lot of that out. Okay? Depending on the type of
business, you mentioned restaurant, you know, obviously you are
going to be inspected to make sure it is sanitary. Is that bad,
you know, that people do not get diseases from eating in your
restaurant? I do not think that is bad, you know. Most
restaurants are cleaner than my wife's kitchen, because it has
to be, you know. But, you know, those are not necessarily bad,
but somebody starting a restaurant needs to know that there are
going to be inspectors coming around and these are the kinds of
things they are going to look for. They are not going to
inspect it like it is your home kitchen, they are going to
inspect it far beyond that. You know, crawling underneath the
stove to see if they can find a little crumb of bread or
whatever, you know, and all these count against you.
So yes, regulations can be daunting and that sort of thing.
There are places where a small business can go to get help.
Right here in town, Winthrop University has mentors or
something like that.
Chairman Mulvaney. The Small Business Development Center.
Colonel O'Cain. Exactly. And these people have various
levels of experience in different kinds of business and that
sort of thing. And sometimes you can go there and maybe get a
question answered or that sort of thing. Or you can hire
someone like me.
Chairman Mulvaney. Colonel, thank you very much. We may
have some follow-up questions at the end, but I will ask Mr.
Meyer-Cuno to step up now and tell us a little bit about----
Colonel O'Cain. Thank you very much.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Colonel.
Mr. Meyer-Cuno, you are going to talk today a little bit
about your business and how it is going to deal with the new
healthcare law.

STATEMENT OF DOUG MEYER-CUNO

Mr. Meyer-Cuno. First of all, thank you, Chairman Mulvaney
for inviting me today.
So a lot of what you have heard I am going to repeat but
try to give you a story. First of all, I am not a governmental
policy wonk and I am not an expert on public healthcare.
However, I am a businessman and I know a few things about
managing a company, creating jobs and perhaps most importantly
keeping my employees employed.
So when I was asked to testify on the impact of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act, otherwise and
affectionately known as Obamacare, I thought I could provide a
business perspective.
First, and you mentioned this earlier, I respect the
government's role in prudent legislation that provides a
template for businesses to function, pay taxes, and establish
laws which create the boundaries for our citizens. We need a
balance of laws and regulations and taxes. We have to have
that, it creates long-term sustainability. So I am not
advocating we do not need that kind of scenario.
So I am going to give you a little bit about my story.
Carolina Ingredients was started in 1990 as a food ingredient
distribution company out of my home. The first 10 years of
business, we grew to 12 employees--not very many. Then we
created additional value by adding a spice and seasoning
manufacturing plant. Fast forward two decades to 2010, we built
the first LEED certified seasoning manufacturing company in the
country, here in Rock Hill. That was at the end of 2009. We
employed 21 people at that time. Now we employ 37 people. So
why do I share this with you? Well, I humbly submit our company
is an example of the American dream.
I would like to talk a little bit about the country's core
culture because I think we are getting away from that and it
goes to the legislation. Our model that this country was
founded on over the last 200 years was based on
entrepreneurship, based on self-reliance, independency,
creativity and individual accountability. The first 200 years
of this country's success, this phenomenal success we have had,
is based on these core cultures. And there are many others, but
that conversation is not for today.
It is no secret that the regulations our governments have
in place today are much different and far exceed what existed
in 1776, not even to mention 1976. And frankly, that is not a
bad thing. We talked about that earlier, we need regulations in
all aspects of our lives. Balance must be created to ensure
long-term sustainability. However, the Obamacare swings the
pendulum to the extreme and destroys the balance. And that is
what I would like to talk about.
So I mentioned, I am a small businessman. It was a slow
transition, it emulates the success of many small businesses.
You mentioned this earlier, Chairman Mulvaney, according to the
Small Business Administration, small businesses employ 59.7
million workers, with large corporations employing 60 million,
so it is about 50/50. Out of that, the small business community
supplies 43 percent of high tech work force. That includes your
scientists, your engineers, your computer programmers. We also
hire a large percentage of the non-skilled workforce. So
overall, from 1993 to 2009, we supply 65 percent of all jobs in
the private sector.
Well, why is this important? Only 30 out of 100 companies
that are created today will survive their first two years. Out
of the remaining 30, half will survive the first five years and
only five will make it to their tenth birthday. Of those five
companies, only a quarter will make it to their 15th birthday.
So the reality is, two percent of the corporations will meet or
exceed their 20th birthday. So let us take it back a little, 70
out of 100 companies that are created today will not see their
second birthday two years from now, and only two percent will
be around in 20 years.
So we have this Obamacare. The legislation is over 2000
pages and to be precise, it is 2074. For all of the Senators
and Congressmen, I respectfully suggest or say, really? Are you
serious? Do we really need a healthcare program or a bill that
is 2000 pages? And can frankly anybody tell me what is in it,
accurately? It just cannot be done. It is a quagmire.
So my question would be what are the long-term costs to the
citizens and to the government? And who knows? Here is what I
do know. All government regulations cost small business time,
money, and manpower--without a doubt. The more time you
allocate towards compliance, the less time you have to create
jobs, manage our businesses, and compete in the global market.
Regulations are costly. We talked about this too. For small
businesses with less than 20 employees, regulations cost
$10,500, a little bit more than that, per employee. And you are
right, large corporations, it is less than that. So for young
corporations or small corporations, it is 36 percent more than
it would cost a large organization.
That does not even include Obamacare here. Now in
Obamacare, there are multiple regulations that have nothing to
do with healthcare. There are items like the tanning tax, the
1099 reporting forms, the Cadillac tax, the employer mandates,
the individual rebates. Oh, by the way, if you survive all
those regulations, we have a bonus, it is called the healthcare
insurance tax, just cannot get enough of those. In the end, the
legislation is evasive, it is punitive and overwhelming to the
business community.
Ever heard of death by a thousand cuts? This is the type of
things that are death by a thousand cuts. My best guess,
Carolina Ingredients' healthcare cost will increase between 100
and 150 percent. These are annual healthcare costs today of
$125,000 will eventually range between $200,000 and $300,000.
That is based on a payroll of about 51 people, because we are
growing. It is based on the healthcare tax of $500 per person,
the Cadillac tax of 40 percent, Medicare payroll tax, employer
mandates.
With such cumbersome regulations and costs, I predict many
small businesses will default to the government managed
healthcare insurance plan. They do not want to be subjected to
penalties and they do not want to be subjected to mandates. In
truth, we do not know the real costs because we do not know
what type of healthcare plan is going to be the benchmark that
the government sets to compare to the private sector. That is
not established yet. So in reality, the potential cost will
continue to escalate and we really have no idea what the cost
will be. And this frankly is not the model that our country was
built on.
The unknown. We cannot predict our future. And if we cannot
predict our future, the cost to employ hard-working Americans
becomes a guessing game. Already the CBO projects the
healthcare law will now cost $1.8 trillion, which is twice what
was predicted by them two years ago. Okay? To date, the current
administration is unable to articulate the cause of this
increase. Where is the accountability? As the years progress,
does anybody truly believe the cost will stop or decline? No,
it will not.
Back to the penalties. There is a serious concern the
employer and the individual mandates will be so intrusive,
companies will defer to government healthcare plans as to avoid
potential penalties. Frankly, we would rather spend our time
building businesses, not tackling insurance mandates. I thought
we were a partnership. You, the government, create the rules,
the laws, the regulations that are specific, reasonable, and
understandable. They are not meant to be punitive, they are not
meant to destroy the backbone of America's small businesses. In
return, we take calculated risks. We hire people and build
businesses that are profitable and we pay taxes on those
profits. And I realize in today's political environment, we
have the have-nots and haves apparently, according to President
Obama. I know that using the word profits is a dirty word and
we should not murmur such a phrase. But the truth of the matter
is this, without profits, companies do not survive. Without
companies, employees are not hired. No employees, no tax base;
no tax base, no money to fund legislative policies. This is
fact, no doubt about it. You can follow world history, no
government created a sustainable society by the government
creating jobs and then becoming a global economic model to
emulate. I might remind you of countries like Cuba, Russia, the
entire Soviet Bloc countries, North Korea, and even China until
the last 25 years.
So what is the moral of this? The moral is do not cook the
golden goose. If you regulate us to death, surely you will
suffocate us all. At best, Obamacare will weaken our
entrepreneur fortitude, thus minimize the country's
sustainability as the world's greatest economic engine--and we
are the greatest economic engine. At worst, we will become a
society dependent upon the government to make our decisions
that they think are in our best interest, much like countries I
mentioned above. This is not the model our country was founded
on and it has not been the model we followed for 200 years.
Or perhaps our politicians think they know what is best and
then we will fall under what history demonstrates happens to
all governments, eventually they all fail under this
philosophy--that is a fact. Do I want Obamacare to fuel the
government's desire to mandate me and our business through
unaccountable regulations? No, thank you.
I will take my two percent chance of creating a company and
surviving 20 years over our government regulating me to death.
Historically speaking, the odds are on my side.
Thank you, sir.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Meyer-Cuno. Let me ask
you a couple of questions specifically about the healthcare
bill. There is a part of the bill that has gotten some
attention. It is the 35 percent tax credit for employers'
health insurance costs if they meet certain criteria. According
to a study the GAO just did, there were four million small
businesses that qualified for that program but only 170,000
took advantage of that. Some said they did not know about it,
some said they knew about it but it was too hard for them to
qualify for it or do the paperwork for it, others said it was
simply not worth it in terms of the amount of money.
Let me ask you a question. Were you aware of the tax credit
program that was part of the healthcare bill?
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. We are not, we were not aware of it. And
probably the reason would be, again, we have 37 employees. My
controller is our HR person, we only have so much time in the
day. For us to labor through such a maze would be very
complicated and at this time, we do not have the manpower to do
it. So we just simply do not know.
Chairman Mulvaney. And no offense intended to Colonel
O'Cain, who I understand runs a business doing this, but one of
the options would have been to hire somebody to look into that,
but that would have had a cost that you would have to factor
into the overall profitability of the operation, right?
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. That is correct. But not only that, you do
not know what you do not know. So if you do not know it exists,
you cannot go hire somebody to find something that you do not
know is out there.
Chairman Mulvaney. Colonel.
Colonel O'Cain. Mr. Mulvaney, a number of these regulations
exempt certain size businesses. In other words, if you have
less than 500 employees, you are exempt; if you have less than
100 employees, you are exempt; if you have less than 50
employees, you are exempt.
Chairman Mulvaney. Correct.
Colonel O'Cain. If you have less than 10 employees, you are
exempt. So there are varying levels of who it applies to. This
particular part of the Obamacare, I have no idea, but it could
be that because he has only got 37 employees, maybe he was not
eligible for it, I do not know.
Chairman Mulvaney. Sure. But to his point, I think you
would have to actually do the research to find out if he's
exempt from it in the first place.
Colonel O'Cain. Exactly.
Chairman Mulvaney. You know, when my family ran a small
business, Mr. Meyer-Cuno, and I ran a business, I wanted to
give my folks healthcare and we did for a long period of time.
One of the reasons we asked you to be here, your company is
in not a unique situation but in an interesting situation where
you have got I think it is 39 employees, you have grown over
the last couple of years from 22, you are on your way to
getting to that magic 50 number. And you know where I am going
with this question, which is would you take the impacts of the
healthcare law into consideration as you go from hiring that
49th and 50th and 51st employee. And conversely, if you had 52,
would you take into consideration the cost benefits of going
back down to 49 in order to get one of those exemptions that
the Colonel talked about?
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. The quick and easy, down and dirty answer
is water seeks the path of least resistance. Right? So
companies--look, we are here to make money, we are here--we are
out working every day. We just do not have the time and the
bandwidth to deal with all these things. So you will take the
path of least resistance if it comes--the short answer is we
would do what we can to minimize our healthcare costs but to
take care of our employees the best way we can.
Chairman Mulvaney. At the end of the day, you are going to
do whatever makes you more profit.
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. We are going to do what we can to be
profitable and take care of our employees the best way we can.
So for example, we might consider setting up a separate
organization to take 10 employees and put it in that
organization and call it ABC Company in order to prevent what
you are just talking about, in order to stay away from the 50.
Chairman Mulvaney. I remember when we ran our business, we
would go from 50 to 52 if we thought that was the best thing
for the company and for the shareholders. Never did we have to
consider that growing the company might actually make us less
money because of the impact of something like the healthcare
bill.
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. And on top of that, we have to go--well, if
I grow to 52 and we have an economic downfall, a recession,
what happens if I lay those people off? What is the healthcare
cost to me at that point? For example, COBRA. So you have to
take all of those into consideration. But the easiest thing we
will do when we are running eight, nine hours a day, we are
busy, we are going to take the path of least resistance because
we just do not have the time or bandwidth to try to figure out
all these answers.
Chairman Mulvaney. One of the stories I have heard from
small businesses and big businesses alike in South Carolina, in
fact all over the country, is that--they hit on something you
mentioned and something that we dealt with in my family
business, which is that we wanted to provide our employees with
healthcare. It is one of the things that we felt a moral
obligation to do, especially being a family-owned business--
that may be a stronger connection. And several of them said
that while it might be cheaper for them to discontinue
healthcare entirely, to simply pay the fee, the fine for not
meeting employer mandates, but they did not want to do that.
Then I asked them, I said well what if your competition
does not feel the same moral compulsion to provide that
healthcare program and your competition thus acquires a
competitive advantage by dumping their employees onto the
public exchanges. And obviously that changed the character.
What are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. I would first like to say our employees
have full coverage. We used to pay 100 percent of their
coverage until a year or two ago and they pay--last year, they
paid 85 percent--we paid 85 percent, so they cover 15 percent.
First time ever. We have a program called Target Care, which is
an independent company that actually comes in once a month and
meets with every single employee and reviews their statistics.
Once a year, we do a complete blood work on them at our cost,
we do it at our cost. And they meet with them and go over their
blood pressure, their BMI, cholesterol, potential for diabetes.
The reason why I bring that all up is because we feel compelled
to take care of our customer. At the end of the day--I mean our
employees, sorry. At the end of the day, we have to compete.
And if we have all of that and if we take care of our employees
at the end and our competitors are not, eventually we will have
to compete. If we have to drop the coverage, we will have to
compete.
So, you know, we do not want to do that. We do not want to
not take care of our employees and we want to offer healthcare.
We just do not feel that the government should be frankly in
our shorts doing it. Let the markets take care of themselves
and frankly maybe it should go strictly to the individual.
Chairman Mulvaney. Let me ask you one more question. You
mentioned the fact that because of the rising cost you had to
switch from 100 percent coverage to 85 percent.
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. Right.
Chairman Mulvaney. I am no longer a small business, I had
to sell my business, so I do not employ anybody any more. We
have all been told that once the Affordable Healthcare Act
passed, that the cost of providing healthcare would go down.
What has been your experience the last 18 months since that
bill has passed?
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. It has not gone down. I think our increase
last year was just a tad over five percent and in order to
achieve that--and we use Blue Cross-Blue Shield--we offer an
HSA program and another program which is----
Chairman Mulvaney. HSA is healthcare savings account?
Mr. Meyer-Cuno. Savings account. So we offer that program
and then we offer a standard full program. But we changed the
dynamics by saying, okay, if you, the employee do not meet five
of these characteristics, your BMI, your cholesterol levels,
your heart rate levels, other things, if you do not meet that,
then we pay 75 percent; if you meet three, then we pay 85
percent; if you meet four, we are going to pay 90 percent. So
there is an incentive program for our employees to stay healthy
and we cover more of their insurance. But if they do not want
to--they are assets, employees are assets and we want to take
very good care of our employees. But if they do not take care
of themselves, it is just like a machine that breaks down. If
they are unhealthy, it is a cost to us.
But at the end of the day, in order to keep at that five
percent increase, that is what we had to do. But we do
incentivize our employees on a positive side, not a punitive
side, to stay healthy and then we will--you know, long term,
that helps us.
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Meyer-Cuno, thanks very much for
your testimony today. If you stick around, we might have some
questions at the end.
Mr. Felix.
And by the way, I am going to do something--one of the
advantages that we have in doing these field hearings that we
do not have in Washington, D.C. is we have a lot more
flexibility over the hearing, and I thank everybody. I see a
lot of unfamiliar faces, I imagine there are a lot of other
small business people here. When Mr. Felix is finished with his
testimony and I ask him a couple of questions, it is my
intention to go ahead and open the microphone up to anybody
else who wants tell what their business is going through, to
tell their experiences so far, so that we have a chance to get
as much information as we can today before we close the
hearing.
So, with that, Mr. Felix, please proceed.

STATEMENT OF MONTY FELIX

Mr. Felix. Chairman Mulvaney, thank you for the opportunity
to speak today. My wife and I bought Alaglas Pools in 1999.
Some of you may know where it is, it is right off I-26 as you
go from Columbia to Charleston. The business was started in
1987.
Prior to that I was President and Chief Operating Officer
of a local company here in Fort Mill, CCC, the garbage company.
And prior to that, I was President and COO of a power
distribution company up in Richmond. So I have had kind of a
broader sense in terms of business experience.
We bought it in 1999 and we grew it ten times up until
about 2007, 2007 was our best year and then we came into 2008--
we are a very seasonal business, so I pretty well track the
bell curve. We came into May, business was half what it was
before. We went to the bank and said hey, we have got some real
problems here and of course in September 2008, everything
tanked. My wife and I liquidated all of our personal assets to
keep the company alive and over the course of the succeeding
three years, we lost two-thirds of our revenue and 80 percent
of our people. It was a matter of survival.
I also served for seven years and was appointed by the
previous Governor of the State of South Carolina as Chairman of
the South Carolina Small Business Regulatory Review Committee
which is patterned after the federal RFA. And previous to that,
I was also appointed by the previous Governor for a one-year
stint as the Deputy State Director for the Department of Social
Services. I had all the operations in the state, about 3500
people. So I have been on both sides of the aisle here relative
to agencies and regulations and then on the business side.
And I currently serve as past president of ACMA and
continue to sit on their board. And I am a retired United
States Marine Corps Colonel. I had to put that in when I saw
the Colonel's tag over there. Add some dignity to this.
Colonel O'Cain. Semper Fi.
Mr. Felix. Semper Fi.
I have some prepared statements and then I have got some
additional statements that I would like to share.
As an owner of a small company, I depend on the federal
government to regulate industry based on valid and transparent
reviews of the scientific, economic, and other relevant facts.
Unfortunately, recent regulations and other actions by EPA and
the HHS are not based on valid assessment, but appear to be
driven by policy decisions that hide the real facts.
For example, in April of 2011, the National Academy of
Sciences released a major peer review of EPA's Integrated Risk
Information System, commonly known as IRIS. The NAS was very
unhappy that EPA had failed to implement many longstanding NAS
recommendations aimed at improving the scientific quality of
EPA's decisions. EPA's IRIS program can have profound impacts
on our economy. As just one example, municipal drinking water
system managers are very concerned that recent EPA risk levels
will bankrupt city budgets, without any health benefit. In my
written comments, I include a summary of the potential impacts
of EPA's IRIS program.
Congress also recently ordered an NAS peer review of the
HHS Report on Carcinogens, commonly known as the RoC, to
address similar concerns about scientific quality. My own
company is dealing with the fallout from an RoC assessment that
was mismanaged by the HHS staff and ignores the best science
and the many international experts who concluded this chemical
is safe--talking about styrene. I also provide a written
summary of the problems with this RoC assessment in my handout.
Americans are being misinformed about health risks and good
manufacturing jobs and innovation will continue to move to
other countries.
On April 23rd, the Small Business Committee held a joint
hearing with the House Science Committee to look into the HHS
Report on Carcinogens. Business owners at this hearing
testified that they are having trouble with increases in
insurance costs and employee turnover as a result of biased and
incorrect HHS assessments. And scientific experts testified
that HHS fails to employ the modern valid assessment methods
long recommended by the NAS. And I ask the Subcommittee to
refer to the record for the April 23rd hearing for more
information.
Biased, policy-driven analysis will also lead to increased
electricity costs for manufacturers in South Carolina and
across the country, which will also send jobs offshore. EPA's
Utility MACT rule justifies a requirement for utilities to
install very expensive control equipment by pointing to claimed
health benefits. Yet according to expert testimony before a
February 8th hearing of the Energy and Commerce Committee, EPA
based its benefits estimate on a small number of cherry-picked,
non-representative and flawed studies, and double counted
emission reductions already achieved under other rules. I
encourage the Subcommittee to refer to the record for the
February 8th hearing for information. As a result of the bad
analysis, EPA grossly over-estimated the rule's benefits.
When President Obama first took office, he made a
commitment to the use of sound science and sound analysis.
However, it seems this administration believes that an analysis
is sound as long as it supports this pro-regulation agenda.
I strongly encourage the Small Business Committee to
continue its efforts to promote business viability, innovation,
and job growth by holding the administration to the President's
promises to base regulatory and other decisions on sound, fair,
and transparent analysis of the relevant facts.
Couple of things. When I was Chairman--I was Chairman of
the South Carolina Small Business Regulatory Review Committee
for seven years. That Committee, five appointed by the
Governor, three by the Senate Pro Tem and three by the Speaker,
all business people. The purpose: to look at every single
proposed South Carolina agency regulation that comes out, to
ascertain whether or not there could be a potential for an
adverse economic impact on small business. And we did that for
seven years. And by and large, this is a very small-business
friendly state. It may be 50/50 in people, but 90 percent of
the businesses in this state are small businesses.
What did we do when we ran across a situation with an
agency? And this gets to your last question, I am going to hit
it right here. What can be done? There are a couple of things
that can be done. When we had a situation with an agency that
created or had a proposed agency regulation that we felt could
have an adverse business effect on small business, we required
that agency to do an economic impact analysis and a regulatory
flexibility analysis. And there was a series of things they had
to go back to, they had to look at what is the market we are
talking about in small business. Agencies do not do that. I was
in that agency of DSS for a year. Business is business, there
is no differentiation between a small business and a big
business.
In the Regulatory Flexibility Act that was passed by the
Governor in 2004, it actually lays this out, it's law in this
state. And there is also an interesting part of that law that
says if a small business is--if there is a notice of violation
to a small business, that small business can rectify that in 30
days and the agency has the authority to issue no fine. There
is one, sir, that you can do.
Another one is reporting. I take chemicals, I take resins
and catalysts and fiberglass, and I make stuff. And as a result
of that, I have to report to EPA under Title 5, which is a
certification. But every month I have to report to SC DHEC, you
know, exactly my emissions and what-have-you, et cetera, et
cetera. And I am a one-man guy too, you know, death by a
thousand cuts is a beautiful way to say it because if something
gets done, it is me. Yet I have to report every month. Well,
look, if you take my total emissions on a yearly basis and you
double them, I will not even be in the .01 percent of the total
emissions in the state. So where am I going? There should be
different reporting standards for big and small companies. I
should only have to report on an annual basis. Big guys, you
know, if you are five percent or more, or two percent or more,
in terms of emissions, then your reporting standard should be
more credible because if you screw up in a month because of
your volume, you are going to have an adverse impact. But small
business can be dealt with differently.
Those are two concrete ways.
Tax credits versus revenue. I love this one. I get a call
from Department of Commerce. Monty, if you hire 10 people, we
will give you a tax credit. I said I do not need a tax credit,
I need somebody to buy a swimming pool. You know, it amazes me
how bureaucrats have this misunderstanding that everything
happens below the line. Okay? It does not. Nothing happens
until somebody sells something. When we sell a swimming pool
and we sell a bunch of them, then I will go out and I will hire
somebody to go build more pools. But I can tell you right now,
sir, that going forward, and all the small business owners I
know, we are holding onto our cash and we are not hiring
anybody unless it is absolutely essential. And a tax credit is
nice, but if you are not making money, what is a tax credit? It
is a loss carry forward, it means nothing to me, but I still
have to make that guy happy.
I think in my closing comments here, it really comes down
to a couple of things. Mr. Meyer-Cuno mentioned it. I think we
have evolved to a point in our country where we have to take a
real hard look, are we going to be a society of self-reliant
people or a society of government-reliant? And until we answer
that question, we cannot get a handle on regulations because if
we continue to drift towards government reliance, then there
are going to be more and more regulations because if we are
government reliant, then there is the acceptance of the
philosophy that government has to be involved in everything.
But that is where this balance has to come from, there has to
be a balance.
And one last comment when it comes to EPA regulatory and
what-have-you. There is always a balance--as businessmen, there
is always a balance between, as I see it, safety concerns and
what I will call operational practicality. The health insurance
thing was a great example, right? In my market, when I go to
hire people, and we went from 95 to 12 and now we are back to
17, healthcare is not an issue in hiring. I might want to give
it, but why should I? I am not being penalized for it, I am not
losing people to other companies because everybody is out there
just scrambling for a job. So I am not saying it is not
important, and there will come a time in the next two, three,
four years, as we continue to grow back where it will become
important and then I will have to take a hard look at it.
But I think that is the fundamental issue, sir, relative to
regulations. And that issue is if you are government-reliant--
if you believe in government reliance, then your bureaucracy
will always look for rules and regulations to maximize complete
safety, let us say, at whatever cost. And that is not healthy
for the United States and that is not healthy for big or small
companies, and to be quite honest with you, we need to get back
to a self-reliant philosophy. Once we begin to do that, I think
you are going to see businesses flourish. And like I said, you
know, it really comes down to, when people start buying
swimming pools, that is a good thing and I can start hiring
people.
Thank you.
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Felix, thank you for that. I have
got a couple of questions all over the board and I think I know
the answer to this one, but I want to just be clear.
You said that you and many other folks you know in small
business are not investing their capital and not hiring people
right now. And like I said, I think I know the answer, but tell
me why.
Mr. Felix. Uncertainty. I mean what is going to happen with
the Bush tax cuts? My gosh, you know, if those are not renewed,
there is going to be a huge tax bill. Why am I going to take
working capital, cash, and go hire somebody or put it in a
piece of capital equipment if I am going to be faced with a
huge--I am a Sub S, everything flows over to my 1040. You know,
according to our President, I am a super-millionaire. And this
is what is going to happen. My belief is that people are going
to hoard cash. If you do not believe small companies, look at
big companies, everybody is looking around the corner. They
want to see stability and I think that is the key issue. Until
there is a comfortable feeling on my part and others where I
believe that I can invest a dollar either into a human asset or
a fixed asset, knowing that the dollar of investment is going
to return to me something and I will not have to go back and
take that dollar away a year from now, until we get back to
there, my belief is that we are going to hoard cash.
Chairman Mulvaney. I will tell you one of my experiences,
one of the things that you do not--there is no analog to, there
is nothing to compare it to in the whole world, is firing
somebody. I have had to do it before, and it is one of the
least enjoyable things I think I have ever done in my entire
life. And unless you have had to do it before, I do not think
people realize how you might be slow to hire somebody if you
really are afraid that you might have to lay them off. It is
easy to fire somebody if they goof off, that is not what I am
talking about. I am talking about laying off people because
business has taken a downturn. That is an extraordinarily
difficult thing, because to a certain extent, you have to admit
your own failings as a leader, as a business owner. I am sorry,
I was not good enough at what I did to keep you here and I have
to let you go. That is something that until you have to do it,
you do not realize how difficult it is and wanting to avoid
that and be extraordinarily cautious in hiring people,
especially when you talk about--you know, it is uncertainty.
Folks think that means uncertainty in the market.
Uncertainty is part of the marketplace. Whether or not I can
find the customers or you can find the customers, that is the
uncertainty that we are made to deal with. It is the
uncertainty to talk about healthcare and tax rates and
government regulation. That is the type of uncertainty that I
think you are talking about and that I experienced when I was a
small business. It is not the uncertainties of the market, it
is not whether or not we can make a product that folks will
want to buy and will buy. That is what we are programmed to
deal with as businesspeople. It is the other stuff that made me
pull my hair out.
You mentioned something that got my attention early on, on
a different topic, about how the Report on Carcinogens--and I
am assuming now we are talking about styrene in particular----
Mr. Felix. Yes, sir.
Chairman Mulvaney [continuing]. Would have an impact on
municipal water services. Tell me about that. Am I making that
linkage correctly or are those two separate topics?
Mr. Felix. The implication of any additional regulation has
a financial impact and that is the implication on city budgets.
Chairman Mulvaney. But you specifically mentioned water;
why is that?
Mr. Felix. Because with enhanced regulations relative to
water purification, the city or the county government is going
to have to go buy additional capital equipment and it is going
to take cash and money.
Just like in my business, in my business when I deal with
styrene, if I am a big company and I do more than 100 tons a
year, I have to put a thermal oxidizer out there. That is a
five or six million dollar non-value-added cap ex that I have
to put in that draws down cash but I have no value from that.
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Felix, you just mentioned something
that I think a lot of folks are not familiar with. Tell me the
difference between a non-value-added capital expenditure and a
value-added capital expenditure.
Mr. Felix. Fair question. I am a manufacturer of swimming
pools, build swimming pools. As my business grows, I need
another spray unit, because I have got more--I need to add
capacity because I have got more business. So I go out and I
spend 25 grand and I buy a spray unit, and that is a value-add.
Why? Because when I use that, I build more pools and when I
build more pools, I sell more pools, I make more money.
What is a non-value-added? Let us say--by the way, I was
involved with the EPA in setting the MACT standard for our
particular industry, and it took us about seven years to work
through that. But what is a non-value-added expenditure? Let us
say, for instance, the EPA came out and said, Monty, you are a
small business, but you know, you spray this and you spray that
and there is some styrene here, and you are going to have to--
we are going to require you to go spend $2.3 million to put in
a thermal oxidizer, because we do not want styrene anywhere. So
in order for you to have your Title 5, you are going to have to
make that capital expenditure. Well, first of all, I am a small
business, I am a private company. I cannot go to the capital
markets, I cannot go issue stock. If I want money, I have got
to go to a bank and sign a note. So getting capital is
exceedingly difficult for a small business. Number two, let us
say I get it and I put that $2.3 million thermal oxidizer in.
It provides no value. Does it help me build more pools? No. It
costs me cash, yeah, but it is non-value-added. The value-
added, to me, is something that I buy that provides for me
capacity, let us say, to do more pools so I can sell. Non-
value-added is a requirement, a regulatory requirement, which
in many cases is nothing more than a regulatory tax, that
requires me, in order to stay in business, to buy this thing
and it provides no value add in terms of my capacity.
Chairman Mulvaney. Who ultimately pays for the price of
that particular piece of non-value-added capital expenditure?
Mr. Felix. Sir, you know and I know, the customers. But
then again, what happens if you have a company out there that
is under the radar and they are making swimming pools but they
are not being regulated because they are small or they choose
not to comply with the law. Now their cost structure is less
than mine; I cannot compete.
You see, that is the problem. I think that there needs to
be some sensible regulations that do not inhibit what I call
the operational practicalities of running a business and being
successful. And what has happened now is that practicality has
been overshadowed by too many regulations.
Chairman Mulvaney. You mentioned utility MACT and I want to
talk about that for a second. MACT, by the way, is an acronym,
M-A-C-T, and there are actually several of these initiatives
going through Washington right now. I am more familiar with
boiler MACT and cement MACT. Again, maximum achievable control
technology. And what it really means, especially in the boiler
circumstance, for example, the federal government is trying to
regulate a standard that cannot yet be hit. The technology does
not exist yet to achieve the containment or the control
technology that the standard requires. And the impact here
locally, where we have large wood and paper products
industries; for example, Resolute Paper, Chesterwood Products,
boiler MACT is a big deal for those kinds of folks.
We talk about cement MACT. I remember the discussions in
Congress about cement MACT which was going to do the same thing
for the cement industry and someone opined that we would not be
able to make cement in this country any more if this rule went
into place and one of the responses from the proponents of the
cement MACT rule was that was okay, there was plenty of
capacity in Mexico, where they do not have those types of
rules. I was stunned by that admission.
Let me ask you, Mr. Felix, about the impact of utility MACT
on consumers and businesses in South Carolina if it goes in
place.
Mr. Felix. The utility MACT?
Chairman Mulvaney. Yes, sir.
Mr. Felix. I'm not familiar with the utility MACT. I am
familiar with----
Chairman Mulvaney. I am sorry, I must have asked----
Mr. Felix. Must be the other guy. In my industry, because
we use resins, it is regulated and there is a MACT for that,
maximum achievable control technology for that. And again, what
it is is one huge algorithm that says if you do X, Y, Z, then
you cannot do A, B, C. And if you are going to do A, B, C you
have to go by this and what-have-you. So I imagine--and I am
only guessing--that any MACT is going to be some regulatory
effort to control emissions or flow or something like that. But
I am not familiar with that one.
Chairman Mulvaney. I appreciate it and it was one of the
other witnesses, who actually was not here today. So thank you
and my apologies.
Mr. Felix, thanks very much.
Mr. Felix. Thank you.
Chairman Mulvaney. At this point, I am going to open the
podium up to anybody else who wants to come up and ask a
question of the panel or of me or anybody else who has had an
experience that they want to share. This is a public hearing
and if you want to take the opportunity to tell us what is
happening with your business, please do.
There is a gentleman in the back who I recognize, a young
man.

STATEMENT OF CURWOOD CHAPPELL

Mr. Chappell. Do I need to come up to the mic?
Chairman Mulvaney. No, sir. You are blessed with a voice
that carries, Mr. Chappell.
Mr. Chappell. Thank you, Mr. Congressman and the panel here
and the people that are asking the questions. Where I come at,
talk is cheap, it takes money to buy land. You have got to
start somewhere, we have gotten too much control.
You know who I am. Mr. Mick, I want to take a minute to say
that I have done this in the county, with the help of
councilmen. We can cut out a lot of red tape for small
businesses with our bureau, we want a bureau. We are going to
try to get one for small business. We cut the red tape and we
have got small business, convenience stores and other things
and paint shops and so, so, so, so and repair shops. We cut our
county regulations down to get that. You have got to do the
same thing in Washington. Do not let me give you advice, but
let me make statements. I am no authority on the subject, but I
am opinionated on most. [Laughter.]
I appreciate what you are doing and we started back here
and we just killed a couple of bills that was damaging to our
people and our business and we are going to probably kill some
more and promote what you are promoting. I admire your spunk in
that and I appreciate you very much, and come back to see us
sometime.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Councilman.
Anyone else? Yes, sir.
And if you could give your name for the record, please. The
first gentleman was Curwood Chappell, who everybody here except
the court reporter knows. [Laughter.]
She is not from here, Curwood.

STATEMENT OF JEFF CARRINGTON

Mr. Carrington. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate this
opportunity. My name is Jeff Carrington, I am the president of
a startup company here in South Carolina. The organization is
Crown Sea Brands, LLC, we are former combat Marines who have
formed a service-disabled owned company.
Colonel O'Cain. Semper Fi.
Mr. Carrington. Semper Fi, Colonel.
We have a few others in the audience here, it is a secret
society. But my purpose today--I will make it brief, with the
Chairman's indulgence and the other attendees' indulgence, I
want to flip the coin slightly and tell you a little bit about
a case of under-regulation. And it specifically relates to--and
let me start first by expressing my gratitude and appreciation
for Mr. Mulvaney's work on H. 3893--is that correct, sir?
Chairman Mulvaney. We do not track them by the number. I
apologize.
Mr. Carrington. The STAR Act.
Chairman Mulvaney. Yes, sir, thank you.
Mr. Carrington. Your bill, which apparently I think the
long title was the Subcontracting Transparency and
Responsibility Act, do I have that right?
Chairman Mulvaney. I think it is Reliability.
Mr. Carrington. Well, Title 2 specifically relates to
enforcement of the regulations--and this is my point--that are
written into the Code concerning subcontractors, to promote the
utilization of subcontracting capacity by major federal
contractors. There is a whole string of legislation, U.S. Code
stuff and SBA rules and regs and executive orders, and it all
cuts to the idea of promoting opportunities for veterans and
service-disabled veterans.
We are obviously in that latter category and we have formed
this company really under the understanding that the
opportunity is valid and challenging but rewarding. I am really
a serial entrepreneur, this is my fourth startup. Just a
stipulation for the record. I do not need really a handout, we
are really looking for a handup. My last company was an
acquisition by Berkshire Hathaway, so I know the rules of
business, I know the survivability issues that Mr. Meyer-Cuno
talked about, the mine field of growing a business, getting it
on the board and, ultimately in my case, getting Berkshire
Hathaway to buy my little company. It sounds grandiose, it is
probably the smallest acquisition they ever did.
So I am not here looking for really a handout, we are
really looking for a handup. And let me be specific. The large
contractors--we are in the agricultural products and food area.
The large contractors that supply DoD, particularly, four to
five billion dollar annual expenditure, are organized, it is
almost an oligopoly and it is done so for valid reasons,
because of concentration and streamlining and cost-saving. I
understand that, I am perfectly okay with that. But built into
the regs that are supposed to stimulate opportunities for
service-disabled veterans are explicit requirements where there
are subcontracting opportunities that, I think the magic phrase
is ``maximum practicable opportunity,'' exists or should be
created to benefit service-disabled veteran-owned companies, if
we just focus on my specific category for a moment--maximum
practicable opportunity.
Well, I have been out there for two years, I have done
everything that I think ought to be required to do the due
diligence, to make the rounds, to meet the people, to assert
our bona fides in terms of our products, our qualifications,
all of that, if you will just accept that on faith for the time
being is in order, and I can tell you, and here is my bottom
line, that the major contractors out there, I will name names--
U.S. Foods would be one, Sysco another, Sodexo another, SoPakCo
another, the big South Carolina based company, are paying
virtually no attention to those rules and regs.
I will get back to my conclusion and why I appreciate your
legislation so much, your bill. The Title 2 of that Act is
exactly what is required. This is the point about flipping the
coin and the under-regulation versus non-regulation. These
major contractors are not being held to account for providing
maximum practicable opportunity for service-disabled veterans.
I am a big guy and I can take the hard knocks, I am a
former Marine, but what really sticks in my craw is I am a two-
time Vietnam veteran, I spent the better part of two years over
there, that homecoming was less than good, but we dealt with
it. And now, fast forward and we have the opposite situation
where there is all this encouragement and sentiment and
positive rhetoric about helping veterans and it is almost like
Alice in Wonderland. It is deja vu all over again because I am
being killed with kindness. I am being encouraged that there
are these opportunities and the reality on the ground is those
opportunities are really----
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Carrington, I appreciate that. I do
not mean to cut you off, but I do want to point out, and you
did not know this, that that Act actually came out of the
hearing that we had in Sumter. That is why these things are so
inherently valuable to us as lawmakers, because we went down to
Sumter and talked to some of the local businesses down there,
and they told us exactly what you just said, many of them
veteran-owned. You can imagine in Sumter, a large retired
veteran population.
Mr. Carrington. Yes.
Chairman Mulvaney. And they said look, we do not mind not
getting the bids. We do not mind submitting our bid and getting
beat, that is what we do as business people, sometimes you win,
sometimes you lose. What we do not like is the fact that we
never get a chance.
Mr. Carrington. Amen.
Chairman Mulvaney. And what was happening is that large
businesses were--on their contracts with the government were
formulating the contracts, manipulating the contracts in such a
fashion to where small businesses could not get them. For
example, the contract for concrete was ten times as large as
any local concrete company could provide. So by manipulating
that contract, the large contractor was able to effectively cut
out the local businesses. And that is what gave rise to the
STAR Act, which we would not have known about if we had not
done that hearing.
Mr. Carrington, I appreciate you being here.
Mr. Carrington. I appreciate the opportunity.
Chairman Mulvaney. No, I appreciate you doing this.
Anybody else before we wrap up? The gentleman in the back
and then the gentleman in the front.
Yes, sir. And I am sorry, was there a young lady behind?
No? Okay, all right.
Yes, sir, and if you could tell us who you are.

STATEMENT OF KEN SPEIRS

Mr. Speirs. My name is Ken Speirs, I am a general
contractor here in Rock Hill. I apologize, I have been out
working today, so I am not properly dressed for this. But I
wanted to come in and speak. We actually spoke when you were
running for election.
Being a contractor in this area, a small contractor, we
have really been hit hard. A couple of things, talking about
regulation, I will give you one quick thing that you can think
about and everybody here will really understand part of what we
are facing.
DHEC regulated us several years ago. I have been doing this
work for over 30 years. You can do a septic tank anywhere for
$3000 to $3500. That same septic tank now is an engineered
system which has gone up a minimum--minimum--$18,000-$19,000.
Chairman Mulvaney. Eighteen thousand or hundred?
Mr. Speirs. Eighteen thousand. And we are putting one in
now at a school that may run into $35,000, for a school that
has less than 50 systems for an engineered drip system. So the
government is regulating us to death.
When the economy hit, the federal government gave the banks
big piles of money to bail them out. What did the banks do?
They turned around to people like me that had credit scores of
800 and better, and said we are going to cut your line of
credits out. At the time I was doing metal buildings. Well, for
those that do not build metal buildings, you order the metal
building, you put a deposit down. When the building is
delivered, you give them a check on site for the building in
full before they unstrap and unload the building. So we live on
credit. We live on credit from the banks and the banks came in
and cut our credit, cut our credit cards, not because we were
late, it is because we, quote, were contractors.
At the same time, for years I have bought properties,
different properties, slipped them, rent them, do different
things to them, sell them, a lot of bank foreclosure properties
and things like that. Used to be you could go in and do these
properties, some of them, within 20 days you could do them,
regulate them out, sign them, do a good job. That same work
that was taking us two months, some of it takes you two years
because of regulations. The banks are not working with us.
So they come to me, and this has happened, and they come to
me and they say, Mr. Speirs, I would like to upfit this
building, $150,000-$200,000 upfit. Well, everybody says okay,
that is no big deal. The people cannot get the loans to do the
work. It is not because they have bad credit, it is not because
they are a startup business. It is they cannot get the loans.
Rock Hill has a great thing for small businesses, they try,
York County has a small business association, South Carolina
has. But the problem is if the banks are not willing to work
with them, then the people cannot get the money, then that
comes down to me, it comes down to your larger general
contractors and we cannot get the work. And what happens, and
what has happened around here is I am a small general
contractor, I do not do million dollar type things. But the
million dollar jobs are not out there now. Your big jobs are
not there, they are not going, so what happens when those
contractors do not have work, they come down the line.
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Speirs, before you move on, I want
to pick your brain on a specific. Oftentimes, it helps us to
have a specific example, as opposed to general concepts.
Tell me one thing that changed about septic tanks that
drove that cost up from $3000-$3500 to $20,000.
Mr. Speirs. I will be glad to give you one. I am working
with a school now with Dennis Gooch out on Board Road. There is
a field beside him that has cows in it, the cows do their
business on top of the ground. Years ago, he had a septic
system put in there and what you would do is you would dig this
system out, depending on the soil type, on an average you would
dig it out and put two foot of rock or two foot of fill, some
parts of South Carolina use tires. You would put drain pipe in,
level it out, put your rock, your grass--not grass but straw--
on top of it and cover it up.
Now that same system, they are coming up with an engineered
system, you pump it out into a tank that pumps it through a
filter that pumps it through another system that pumps it to
another system versus draining out in the ground like we did
here for years and years. You actually run it through a
filtering system and it is what they call a grid system, and a
lot of these systems will only do up to 450 gallons a day. So
they have come in with a system and come in with these
companies that said you will use these systems, you have no
options.
So where the average person would say okay, I am going to
spend $3000-$4000 on a system, now they have to have this new
engineered system and they cannot come in and dig it out and
bring red dirt in or whatever, bring rock in and do it. So now,
they are like, I cannot do this.
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. Speirs, I appreciate that. What we
will do in my office is try and figure out--oftentimes even
though that is a DHEC issue, oftentimes it is actually driven
by federal regulation. So we will try and figure out if that is
something that the federal government is mandating that DHEC is
simply implementing, and see if we can look at it from that
perspective. So I appreciate that input.
Anything else?
Mr. Speirs. If the people from your office--I would make
this invite, if I can do this, I would like to bring you out to
the one project that we are looking at and let somebody in your
office look at the system and see exactly how silly I think
this is. If somebody in your office would be willing to meet
with us, I will be willing to leave a card and I would be
willing----
Chairman Mulvaney. Actually I would like to do that myself.
We used to build septic systems, it would be interesting to see
how they work today. So if you want to give your name to the
gentleman in the back, we can do that.
Thank you, Mr. Speirs, I appreciate it.
Chairman Mulvaney. The gentleman up front.

STATEMENT OF WARREN WHITE

Mr. White. Good morning, my name is Warren White, and I am
the Chief Operating Officer of a company called Komet USA. We
are a wholly owned subsidiary of Gebr. Brasseler, which is a
large German manufacturer of dental and medical cutting tools.
I will give you a good example of what we do. We are
actually the people who make the tools that dentists cut your
teeth with. We are the largest in the world.
Chairman Mulvaney. Does this make you a popular person?
Mr. White. Absolutely. [Laughter.]
Makes everybody look great, those smiles look really good.
I am going to give you a little company history before we
get to our problem. Our owner started our company in 1923 with
two brothers, so it was the Brasseler brothers. They took their
mother's sewing machine, retooled it, put it in the garage and
actually started making little cutting tools out of steel in
the garage, and the one brother was, we will say the
manufacturer, the other two brothers were the sales people.
They put their goods in a wheelbarrow and they sold them door
to door in Dusseldorf and became a pretty big regional
manufacturer in Germany. It grew and grew and became the number
one manufacturer of cutting tools in Germany.
Well, in 1939, things changed a little bit. They became
manufacturer of dental rotary instruments for the German Army,
which made them very productive. However, in 1944, the American
Air Force had relocation plans for them. They went over the top
and bought them out and they actually had to move to a small
village and Lemgo, Germany is right now where our headquarters
is. We employ about 1000 people there and we manufacture
everything from the smallest cutting tool to the largest
cutting tools or blades that an orthopedic surgeon would use or
an ENT surgeon would use or oral surgeon, dentist, for example.
In 2005, we moved here to Rock Hill and we employ about 100
people now in various positions, primarily sales and marketing
and we are now one of the leaders in sales of rotary
instruments in the United States and we are definitely a
worldwide leader, market leader, in rotary instruments. So
there is the background.
Here is the problem. We are becoming competitively
disadvantaged to our competitors because of a federal agency
and that federal agency is the FDA. The FDA is holding import
packages as we send our inventory to the United States--and by
the way, we ship directly to our end user from Germany FedEx
every day. We send 500, 250 to 500 packages every day to our
end user, whether it is in San Francisco, whether it is in
Dallas, Texas, these packages are going there. And when they
get hung up by the FDA, a two-day delivery is quickly a ten-day
delivery and that ten-day delivery puts us at a tremendous
competitive disadvantage to our competitors.
This situation changed from one day to the next. One day
the switch was turned from a two-day delivery, to a five to
ten-day delivery.
Chairman Mulvaney. Mr. White, what was the justification
for the delay?
Mr. White. Mr. Mulvaney, we have been in contact with FedEx
who is our agent in this, with the FDA and we have had no
answer, none, except we have inadequate amount of staff. Well,
I could accept an inadequate amount of staff if it happened
over a period of time, but from one day to the next when the
light turns on and off, somebody--they cannot explain that to
me. It is too fast. Business does not happen that way. Business
is an evolution, not a light switch. Something happened in
their system.
And by the way, this is not happening just to Komet, this
is happening to the dental industry from China, the implant
business. By the way, people probably do not realize this, but
about 30 percent of prosthetic work, that is the teeth that are
coming in like if you need a crown, that is coming from China
now, that is not coming from the U.S.
And so companies in China actually ship that product one-
day air, two-day air, back to the United States and it goes
into your mouth as an American product, which frankly, I am not
very proud of that. But it goes back to the simple fact that
our government is in our way and that the FDA is a tremendous
competitive disadvantage to Komet and to my other colleagues in
the dental industry.
And I appeal to you to somehow loosen this up. This is
unbelievably restrictive to us. I have sent Mr. O'Neal a number
of correspondence, I have sent you some and we have talked
personally about this. This issue is not going to end until
somebody puts their foot in it. And I appeal to you to take
care of that, because we are a contributing entity in South
Carolina, we have choices of a lot of states that we could move
to, but people like Kelly and Mr. Chappell, I mean we have got
a great community here, but if we are going to be profitable
and if we are going to stay profitable, we have to get the
government out of our business.
One other point that I think is important. I know Mr.
Meyer-Cuno said something about--quite a bit actually about the
healthcare. I do not know if everybody realizes that starting
next year, your dental costs--I can only speak for dental and
medical--because of President Obama, the price of dental
instruments, medical instruments, will go up at least two
percent because everything that is coming over now will have an
additional two percent tax on every dental instrument, medical
instrument that is sold in the United States, just as a premium
for this wonderful healthcare act that they have passed into
law.
Chairman Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. White. I appreciate you
taking the time to let us know. And my staff is telling me that
they have spoken to you and we will talk to you further on your
specific issue after the meeting.
Mr. White. I appreciate that. Thank you very much, and I
enjoyed today's meeting, I think it was very fruitful for me.
Chairman Mulvaney. This gives me an opportunity to mention
the medical device tax, which the House passed a bill on last
week that would actually repeal that medical device tax which
is part of the healthcare bill.
Thank you to everybody for coming. We will go ahead and
read a statement for the record as we close.
Before we end, I want to state that I do not feel that all
regulations are bad. Regulations are necessary and could be
beneficial to society, as several of our witnesses today
acknowledged. They protect our food supply, ensure that drugs
work and to keep financial markets transparent. But they also
have costs by erecting barriers to entry, distorting markets,
diverting scarce capital. What we were talking about today are
regulations that go above and beyond just serving the public
interest and disproportionately hinder small businesses in a
multitude of ways.
Responsive regulations require agencies to balance the
intended benefits against the economic costs of the rules that
they impose. Historically, federal agencies appear to have been
much better at uncovering the benefits of the regulations than
they are at calculating the costs of those.
Of course, this makes selecting the appropriate balance
needed to protect the public much more difficult, but
particularly since most businesses subject to regulation are
small and therefore not always capable of making their concerns
known.
It is a very important issue to me and that folks I know in
both parties are very passionate about and we will continue to
work on back in Washington. Small businesses are in fact the
foundation of our economy.
You heard one of our witnesses talk about the fact that
half the people in the nation work in small businesses.
Actually in South Carolina, it is closer to 80 percent. And the
large majority of our new jobs created every single month
nationwide are in small businesses.
I want to thank each of you gentlemen for coming up today.
I want to thank everybody for participating, especially those
of you who came from long distances. There is a formal
opportunity that I have and other members will have. By the
way, other members will have the opportunity to read the
transcript and to submit questions for the record, statements
for the record, and so forth. So just because I am the only
member of Congress who is here does not mean that I am the only
member of Congress, number one, that is interested in this; and
that, number two, will participate in this hearing, albeit
after the fact. So with that, I will ask for the record that we
have five days to submit additional questions.
Unless there is anything else, I thank everybody for
participating and we will call this hearing of the Small
Business Committee to an adjournment.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


