- THE PATH TO JOB CREATION: THE STATE OF AMERICAN SMALL BUSINESSES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PATH TO JOB CREATION: THE STATE OF AMERICAN SMALL BUSINESSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
FEBRUARY 1, 2012

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-050
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-458 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, General Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Sam Graves..................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Dr. Dennis J. Jacobe, Chief Economist, Gallup, Washington, DC....     3
Mr. Peter Ferrara, Senior Fellow, Entitlement and Budget Policy,
The Heartland Institute, Chicago, IL...........................     5
Dr. Martin Neil Baily, The Brookings Institution, Director,
Initiative on Business and Public Policy Senior Fellow,
Economic Studies, Bernard L. Schwartz Chair in Economic Policy
Development, Washington DC.....................................     7
Dr. Michael J. Fredrich, President, Manitowoc Custom Molding,
Manitowoc, WI..................................................     9

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Dr. Dennis J. Jacobe, Chief Economist, Gallup, Washington, DC    36
Mr. Peter Ferrara, Senior Fellow, Entitlement and Budget
Policy, The Heartland Institute, Chicago, IL...............    44
Dr. Martin Neil Baily, The Brookings Institution, Director,
Initiative on Business and Public Policy Senior Fellow,
Economic Studies, Bernard L. Schwartz Chair in Economic
Policy Development, Washington DC..........................    67
Dr. Michael J. Fredrich, President, Manitowoc Custom Molding,
Manitowoc, WI..............................................    80
Questions for the Record:
Rep. Owens Questions for Dr. Jacobe..........................    86
Answers for the Record:
Dr. Jacobe Answers for Rep. Owens............................    87
Additional Materials for the Record:
CompTIA Statement for the Record.............................    88
Marine Industries Association of South Florida Careers for
Veterans...................................................    96
MCM Composites Letter........................................    98
National Association for the Self-Employed Statement.........   100
The Financial Services Roundtable Statement on Record for
House Small Business Committee Feb. 1, 2012................   101
Credit Union National Association Letter for the Record......   103
The Financial Services Roundtable Small Business White
Paper--Nov. 2011...........................................   105

THE PATH TO JOB CREATION: THE STATE OF AMERICAN SMALL BUSINESSES

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1 p.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Sam Graves (chairman
of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Chabot, King, Mulvaney,
West, Walsh, Schilling, Velazquez, Schrader, Clarke, Cicilline,
Richmond, Hahn.
Chairman Graves. Good morning. We will call this hearing to
order. I want to thank everyone for joining us today to examine
the state of small business economy. Some of our witnesses have
traveled here from a pretty good distance and we appreciate you
being here very much. Thank you.
Being a small business owner in America is a tough job. No
matter what your business is you must wear a lot of different
hats. In addition to doing what you do when you went into
business in the first place you probably have to tackle
responsibilities like being a tax accountant, advertising
executive, regulations expert, fund-raiser, and human resources
expert as well. Yet throughout our history entrepreneurs in
America have done all these things and a lot more.
Recently, the business if being in business has gotten a
whole lot more difficult. Last year, Gallup released a poll
outlining the most significant concerns facing America's small
businesses. Small business owners have a very simple message
for Washington--get out of our way. Entrepreneurs in this poll
pointed to excessive government regulation, lack of available
capital, and low consumer confidence as the biggest hurdles
small businesses have to overcome. And this poll mirrors
numerous trade association, think tank, and national media
polls that say the same thing. Small businesses want Washington
to let them do what they do best.
Earlier this year the U.S. Chamber of Commerce released a
poll showing that the vast majority of small businesses believe
that the national economy is on the wrong track. Nearly two out
of every three do not plan to hire in the coming year due to
regulations and the general uncertainty of the national
economy. Seventy eight percent of small businesses surveyed
reported that taxation, regulation, and legislation from
Washington makes it harder for businesses to hire more
employees. The uncertainty is coming at them from all sides and
I think we need to be doing a better job of restoring
confidence to entrepreneurs and consumers alike.
Adding yet more doubt to the economy is the rising federal
deficit and the financial crisis abroad. We see firsthand how
out-of-control debt can destroy economies all over in Europe.
This can impact our economy through decreased exports and
exposure of American investments to losses overseas. Small
businesses remain uncertain not only about the U.S. economy but
about trouble in the world economy as well. This economic
uncertainty disproportionately impacts small businesses more
than larger businesses because larger businesses have the
resources to deal with a rapidly changing economic environment.
We have a real opportunity to enact changes that give small
businesses the tools they need to lead an economic revival.
Government does not create jobs to produce long-term economic
growth; the private sector does. The faster Washington releases
the reigns, the faster we will see Americans back on the job
and put our nation back on the path of economic prosperity.
And again, I want to thank all of our witnesses. I look
forward to hearing your testimony. And now I will turn to
Ranking Member Velazquez for her opening statement.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Chairman Graves.
By almost any measure conditions for small firms are better
today than any time since the recession ended in June of 2009.
According to the Federal Reserve, banks losing credit
restriction for small businesses every quarter in the last
year. Similarly, the Thomson Reuters Small Business Lending
Index showed an increase in borrowing by small firms for five
straight months through the end of 2011. There has also been a
steady decline in delinquency and defaults on small business
loans for much of the past year. These conditions are a
significant reason why the NFIB index of small business
optimism registered the fourth straight monthly increase in
December. Last month, 9 percent of small business owners
reported plans to increase employment, the second strongest
reading since 2008.
Even with this progress a great deal of work remains to be
done. Despite adding 1.6 million jobs to the economy in the
last year, federal policies have not been sufficient to
overcome job losses incurred in the recession. The unemployment
rate which has fallen over the past year is only projected to
reach the low 8 percent range by the end of 2012. Clearly, our
optimism must be tempered by the reality that we still have a
long road ahead of us with millions of Americans who are
seeking jobs unable to find it. Members of this committee know
better than most that small businesses will be critical for job
growth. In particular, one group excels over others. Startup
businesses grow faster, create more employment opportunities,
and are more innovative than older, more established firms.
While startups account for only 3 percent of U.S.
employment, they are responsible for nearly one out of every
five jobs created year over year. And according to the Kauffman
Foundation, the net new jobs from startups can be credited for
all the job growth in the U.S. over the stretch of roughly 30
years. If we want to accelerate the recovery, steps should be
taken not only to assist small businesses but also to target
help to high growth startup firms. Unfortunately, this is one
area where federal policy continues to lack. While general
credit conditions have improved, lending to startups and early
stage businesses remains tight. Last year the number of small
loans to smaller firms, those of 250,000 or less in the SBA
7(a) program fell by over 50 percent compared to pre-recession
lessons.
With that said, small businesses of all varieties remain
critical to our economic health. Today I look forward to
hearing both anecdotal accounts, as well as empirical evidence
about the state of the economy. In doing so this committee can
identify what is working as well as areas where we still face
challenges.
Let me thank all the witnesses who traveled here today for
both your participation and insight into this important topic.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

STATEMENTS OF DENNIS J. JACOBE, CHIEF ECONOMIST, GALLUP; PETER
FERRARA, SENIOR FELLOW, THE HEARTLAND INSTITUTE; MARTIN BAILY,
SENIOR FELLOW, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION; MICHAEL J. FREDRICH,
PRESIDENT, MANITOWOC CUSTOM MOLDING

Chairman Graves. All right. Our first witness today is Dr.
Dennis Jacobe, who is the chief economist at Gallup with 20
years of experience working with some of the world's best known
financial firms. He leads several of Gallup's key economic
tracking measures. Dr. Jacobe received a Ph.D. in economics
from Virginia Tech with major areas of specialization in money
and banking, public finance, and public choice. Thank you for
being here today with us, Dr. Jacobe.

STATEMENT OF DENNIS J. JACOBE

Mr. Jacobe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a pleasure to be
here, Chairman Graves, and Ranking Member Velazquez.
What I will do is just quickly go through some of the key
points of my testimony. We have a lot of data moving very
quickly. What I want to do is cover five quick points, the
first being that I think we are at a critical juncture for the
economy from our behavioral economics data and it provides us
with an opportunity and also a risk, of course.
Second, we just completed a poll with Wells Fargo Gallup
Poll that we do quarterly every year and we found the highest
optimism we have found since July of 2008. So that is a really
good opportunity in that context. We found their hiring
intentions to be the best they have been since January of 2008.
So it is another kind of opportunity where people are looking
forward to 2012 in a very optimistic way.
We also found in our survey some key obstacles to their
doing that hiring and to expanding, and then I have a
suggestion for you from our sort of behavioral economics and
polling analysis.
So what we do is every night we ask about 1,000 Americans
across the country their opinions on the economy. We ask a lot
of other things but we are the only polling firm that goes and
does that every night. We have done that consistently since
January of 2008, so now we have a pretty good behavioral
economics database. From that, for example, we create a
consumer confidence index of our own we call Economic
Confidence. And unlike what you heard from the conference
board, our numbers show that consumer confidence remains as
high as it was prior in May of last year. So it is not the
downturn that you have heard recently, and we think our
numbers, about 30,000 interviews a month, are pretty impressive
in that kind of measurement process.
In terms of job creation, we created something we call a
Job Creation Index and we ask firms' employees whether they are
hiring or firing. In that process we measure over time their
intentions to hire. What we are finding is employees are saying
that hiring intentions are the best they have been since 2008.
Again, another surprising number. Actually, September of 2008.
We also measure unemployment, and what will happen Friday I
do not know because there is a lot of change taking place with
what the BLS does on an annual basis. But our number comes out
to be, as I have in my testimony, at mid-month it was 8.3
percent, which is seasonally unadjusted. Just today our number
comes in at 8.6 percent in terms of the unemployment rate. More
important, if you see in my testimony on the first chart in
there, I have 18.1 percent underemployed. Our underemployment
measure takes the people who are unemployed and adds to the
number of people who are working part-time but want to work
full-time. That number just over the last two weeks has gone up
to 18.6 percent. So again, a critical kind of junction and a
big jump in a short period of time.
If you look at our index, which is a couple charts further
into my testimony, you see that huge jump in terms of small
business optimism. That number, the 15, as I said, the highest
since July of 2008, and on the next page I sort of outlined for
you the gap in terms of hiring intentions, which again is good
at January 2008.
When we survey small business owners, which we do
routinely, we ask them why they are not hiring. And I outline
in my testimony a sequence of different questions as to why
people are not hiring right now. And obviously, they always
come back--small business owners come back they would like more
revenue, they would like more cash flow, that kind of thing.
But one of the key items that they continually repeat no matter
how we ask the question is that they are concerned about
government regulation. Whether that is true in reality or
simply true in perception, they continually repeat that as one
of the reasons why they are not hiring.
So that leads me to sort of two quick conclusions. One is
that I think that given the juncture of small business with
their optimism right now, anything that you could do to help
that optimism and that psychology would be beneficial, and
simply a moratorium on regulations so you do not discuss what
is good and what is bad but simply taking away that
psychological constraint I think would give a boost to small
business at this point in time.
And then I also mentioned, and we are very concerned about
the high level of unemployment and underemployment, so we think
that we should consider something that helps get small
businesses into the process of bringing in interns and those
kind of works to learn because we are afraid that a lot of
people are not getting the skills they need. And when we keep
surveying small businesses they tell us that they need skilled
workers.
Thank you very much. I will be glad to answer any
questions.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Dr. Jacobe.
Our next witness is Peter Ferrara, the senior fellow for
entitlement and budget policy at the Heartland Institute. He
served in the White House Office of Policy Development under
President Reagan and as associate deputy attorney general of
the United States under the first president Bush. Mr. Ferrara
is a graduate of Harvard and Harvard Law School. Welcome to the
Small Business Committee.

STATEMENT OF PETER FERRARA

Mr. Ferrara. Mr. Graves, Ms. Velazquez, members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify this
morning--this afternoon, actually. I have sort of a macro view
of the economy and as it affects small businesses and everyone
else, actually.
Even President Obama's budget projects that the federal
government's gross federal debt will soar to 100 percent of GDP
by 2020. The Bank for National Settlements estimates that this
gross debt will accelerate even faster, hitting 200 percent of
GDP by 2022, and 300 percent by 2030. Under current policy, CBO
projects that even the smaller national debt held by the public
would rocket to 185 percent of GDP by 2035 and to 200 percent
by 2037, twice as large as our entire economy. This national
debt would explode further to unprecedented levels of 233
percent of GDP by 2040 and to 854 percent of GDP by 2080.
What this means is that America is almost at the same
disastrous level of debt as Greece, and on our current course
we will soon be there. Indeed, in our current course we will
rocket right through that level and well beyond. Now, most
people do not know that soon after World War II, federal
spending as a percent of GDP has been fairly stabilized and has
remained stable at around 20 percent of GDP until recently.
Official U.S. government projections have shown for some time
now that over the next 30 to 40 years federal spending as a
percent of GDP will double to 40 percent or more. Financing
that will ultimately require at least doubling every federal
tax. Adding continued state and local spending growing towards
15 percent of GDP and government in American will consume more
than half of the economy. In fact, it will be more than that
because the economy will collapse under that burden and the
percent of spending as a percent of GDP will be even higher.
This would fundamentally transform America into a static, low
growth, socialist European state. America's traditional world-
leading prosperity and opportunity, the American dream, would
be gone. And of course, small businesses would be the first and
chief victims of that economic future.
But there is good news if we would open our minds and think
anew. As I showed in detail in my recent book, America's
Ticking Bankruptcy Bomb, by modernizing our old-fashioned tax
and redistribution entitlement programs to rely instead on 21st
century capital labor insurance markets, we can achieve all the
social goals of these entitlement programs far more
effectively, actually serving seniors and the poor far better
at just a fraction of the current cost of these programs. Such
reforms would involve powerful market incentives driving the
programs to contribute further to boom the economic growth and
prosperity rather than detracting from it. Ultimately, these
reforms all together would reduce federal spending by half or
more as a percent of GDP of what it would be otherwise solving
the long-term fiscal problem. Yet, because these reforms would
involve fundamental structural changes that actually serve the
poor and seniors far better, rather than simple-minded benefit
cuts they would be politically feasible. Modernizing the
programs to the remarkable benefit of the populations they
serve, which the book shows is possible by harnessing markets
and incentives to achieve the social goals of the programs far
more effectively is the political key to unlock the door to
unnecessary entitlement reform.
Exhibit A, the first example of this, would be the 1996
Welfare Reform that reformed the old AFDC program. That program
previously was based on a matching federal funding formula. The
more the state spent, the more the federal government would
send to the state, basically saying the state to spend more.
That form was transformed into finite block grants. The federal
funds for the states were fixed by a formula fixed finite
amount. If the states spent more, the states had to spend it
out of their own pocket. If the states reformed, the program
spent less. They could keep the money.
With those incentives we had remarkable results. Two-thirds
got off the program within a couple years and went to work.
They saved the taxpayers about 50 percent of what it would have
cost otherwise after a period of about 10 years. Yet, the poor
gained. Their incomes are documented to increase by 25 percent
because so many more of them were working. There are nearly 200
more federal means tests and welfare programs. This same reform
could be extended to each one of those. They are estimated to
cost $10 trillion over the next 10 years. I estimate that
extending those same reforms would save $4.1 trillion. See,
again, the poor gain; the taxpayers gain as well.
Another key example, personal accounts for social security.
You would shift the spending from its enormous reduction in
federal spending. You shift the spending from the public sector
to the private sector; yet the seniors in the future would gain
higher benefits rather than lower benefits because the long-
term market investment returns are so much higher than what
social security can even promise, let alone what it can pay,
which is based on no savings and investment at all but just tax
and redistribution. So again, seniors gain and taxpayers gain
because the tax burden, eventually you could expand those
personal accounts to displace the payroll tax entirely,
financing all the benefits through that are financed by the
payroll tax today through those personal accounts.
So that is another example that modernized programs serve
seniors far better and solve the long-term fiscal problem. The
same would apply to Obamacare and I could go into that. Thank
you very much.
Ms. Velazquez. Yeah. It is my pleasure to welcome Mr.
Martin Baily. He is a senior fellow in economic studies at the
Brookings Institution. He is also a senior advisor to McKinsey
and Company and an advisor to the Congressional Budget Office.
Dr. Baily previously served on the Council of Economic
Advisors, including as chairman from 1999 to 2001. Dr. Baily
earned his Ph.D. in economics from MIT. He has taught at MIT,
Yale, and the University of Maryland. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN BAILY

Mr. Baily. Thank you, Chairman Graves, Ranking Member
Velazquez, and members of the Committee. It is a real privilege
for me to be able to speak here today.
Let me start on the overall economy. It is still fairly
weak, although I think it is doing better than it was. I think
we are going to see so much stronger growth in 2012 than we saw
in 2011, and I think the report from Dr. Jacobe supports that.
Optimism is beginning to rise both among consumers and among
small business.
Nevertheless, I would not expect to see more than about 2
to 3 percent growth in 2012. Why are we having such a slow
recovery? Housing, housing, housing. It has got an awful lot to
do with the fact that we ended up in this housing bubble. We
spent too much money thinking that we were richer than we were.
We built too many houses, and as the bubble burst we lost a lot
of household wealth and so we really are still experiencing the
legacy of the housing bubble.
Also, recessions develop their own kind of inner dynamic.
You get a loss of jobs, a loss of income, then consumption is
weak. That means that sales are weak so hiring and investment
are weak because sales are weak. And so that goes around again
and we end up in a fairly deep hole and it has taken a long
time to get out of it. I think it would have been helpful
actually if everyone, policymakers and economists, had realized
just how long it was going to take to get out of this mess. It
really was the most severe recession in a long, long time and
that is just not solved very easily.
I think there is an upside. I think we could get more than
2 to 3 percent growth if confidence begins to build. This is
about the time when you might expect to see the recovery really
begin to break out on the upside, so I do have some confidence.
On the other hand, we have some risks, too, including Europe.
If Europe goes down, if we get a lot of financial failures in
Europe, I think that will be very hard for the U.S. not to get
dragged down. We have tensions in the mid-East. If oil prices
were to jump that would be another serious problem.
Turning to small business, as you know it has been very
hard hit. I have some charts in my testimony. There were fewer
startups and a lot of stress among existing businesses. Why are
there fewer startups? Well, obviously when you go into
recession it is just not as attractive to try to start up a new
restaurant, a new drycleaner, whatever it is, a technology
company. Those things have been much less attractive in these
recession conditions that we have had.
Another issue is the loss of homeowner equity. Of course,
we have all experienced that but small businesses typically
will take money out of their homes or they will pool together.
A few partners will get together, get a loan against the value
of their home to fund a startup. And so that money has not been
available. Also, bank credit, which has been tightened and then
loosened as Ms. Velazquez said but it is still more difficult
to get funding if there is a lot of uncertainty if you are a
small business. So lack of sales, lack of credit, those have
been the things that have hurt on the startup side.
Now, there are concerns about regulations, taxes and the
deficit. I have concerns about all of those things, so those
are important issues. Let me talk about the regulation issue.
The one that has gotten the biggest hit has been the Affordable
Care Act. And there is just tremendous opposition to that which
seems out of proportion to the content of the act itself. There
are no requirements on businesses with 50 or fewer employees to
provide health insurance, nor are they required to pay a
penalty if they do not. And that is actually most small
businesses. So they are not really affected that much.
Not only that, there was a report, which I had not seen
when I wrote my testimony, by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Of
the companies between 50 and 100 employees, 92 percent of them
were already providing some kind of health insurance benefit.
So we are not telling them, start anew and do something you are
not doing. And many small businesses, those under 50, could get
some subsidies and actually help them along. So the Urban
Institute study, for example, argues that actually small
business on balance might be helped by the Affordable Care Act.
I understand why small businesses say, this is a problem.
This is terrible. This is all this regulation. That is what
they hear all the time. That is what everybody is saying.
I am running out of time. Let me just say what could be
done. Obviously, if we can improve the overall economy we will
improve small business as well. So some modest continued
stimulus. I think it was a good idea to do the payroll tax cut
and we should extend that for the whole year, find a way to do
that. I think on the credit side we should work with bank
regulators. We do not want to give away money and have a lot of
bad loans again. So let us not go back to that. But I think
banks and regulators, there is some demand for credit from
sound businesses and so more could be done in that area.
I think the SBA has done a good job and I think we should
think about maybe ways to get a little more money to the SBA to
provide guarantees or to do some direct lending. I would also
mention that the Startup Act of 2012 has been proposed in the
Senate. It has got a number of different things, and I do not
agree with everything in it, but it does suggest we should
simplify and streamline some of the permissions and
regulations, some of which happen at the state and local level.
That is an area where maybe the federal government and state
and local governments can cooperate. I think it would be good
to get more visas for skilled people because I think they are
job creators, and we need to do more to help the skills of the
American population so that small businesses can find the
people they need.
Thank you. I will stop there.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Dr. Baily.
Our next witness finishing up today is Mr. Mike Fredrich.
He is president at Manitowoc Custom Molding. Did I say that
right?
Mr. Fredrich. No, but that is okay.
Chairman Graves. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. Fredrich. Nobody says it correctly. It is Manitowoc.
Chairman Graves. Manitowoc.
Mr. Fredrich. Yes.
Chairman Graves. Manitowoc. He is testifying on behalf of
the Small Businesses and Entrepreneurship Council. Mr. Fredrich
has owned MCM, a custom molder of precision thermoset plastic
parts for 10 years. He received his degree in nuclear
engineering and his MBA from the University of Wisconsin in
Madison. Thank you for being here today.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. FREDRICH

Mr. Fredrich. Thanks a lot. I am not a doctor, by the way.
Just a regular guy.
Chairman Graves. Mike is pointing that out to me. I
apologize for that.
Mr. Fredrich. Thanks a lot for having me here. It is an
honor to come and speak before the Committee.
As the chairman said, I have owned the company for 10 years
and the company was started in 1983. It has had two owners. The
guy who started it and I bought it from him in 2001. And none
of our products show up in anything that you would ever notice
because they are all products that go into somebody else's
product. But we have a good diversity of industries that we
sell to. We have in consumer products maybe 25 percent of our
business; industrial, 35; aerospace, 20--that is growing; and
defense, 15. And then we have some cats and dogs.
So we have a pretty good view of how the general economy is
doing. And I can tell you that last year, 2011, we had the best
year we ever had. So you would think everything is rosy. I am
happy. I am here to report to you that the psyche of small
businesses is good and I just cannot say that. I have to say I
have never been more concerned with our prospects as a company
than I am right now. And I used to worry about all sorts of
things that are related to the business--customers, serving
customers, on-time performance, quality, things like that.
But now I spend the majority of my time worrying about the
country because we are here. And unlike multinationals we
cannot diversify out of here and we are stuck and we have got
some bad, bad things going on in this nation which will affect
everybody, not just small businesses but everybody. But it will
affect small businesses. So when asked to do this I highlighted
some of them, some of the areas which are going to affect us.
And, you know, regulation is an issue and you say, yeah,
everybody is worried about regulation but here are some things
that affect us. Dodd-Frank, for example. We deal with a bank in
Green Bay. It is a privately held community bank. So I called
the owner, who I know. I have known him for 20 years. I said,
``Bob, how is this Dodd-Frank thing going to affect you?'' He
said, ``You know, I do not know. They are still writing it.''
The obvious question is what did everybody vote on? But it
is not going to be good. They have one compliance officer for
the entire bank and this is just more red tape compliance that
will make it difficult for small businesses whose primary
source of capital by the way are banks, commercial banks. And I
like dealing with community banks because at least the people
make the decision that you are talking to. So that is one area
that I am worried about.
Health care is another one. We just pre-priced our health
care insurance and you are right. A lot of the small businesses
between 50 and 100 people have insurance. We have a high
deductible HSA plan and this year--it is hard to go out and
replace these things and get quotes because you have to do a
survey of everybody. But we did that this year because we
wanted to try and get a better deal. So we went to five new
companies that were not--that were new to us and asked them to
quote on our business. Every one of them, all five quoted 85
percent premium increase, which is the maximum they can quote.
I do not know if that is a Wisconsin law but in Wisconsin they
can quote 85 percent which means they did not want the
business. The company carrying it right now raised the price
14.5 percent for the premium and the maximum they can raise it
according to state law is 15 percent. So they raised it the
maximum.
So what we have is a situation where we have no competition
anymore from carriers, from insurance providers because they
are just not going to quote. I think there is so much
uncertainty with that that they are holding firm. And the
people who are stuck with us, the one company, they can raise
it 15 percent a year and that is probably what we are going to
see. So that is a concern.
The other issue I have is--I am running out of time--
inflation. And there has not been much but there is going to
be. Has to be. If you look at what the Federal Reserve has
done, they have created a bubble of money which eventually will
flow into the system and create inflation. It will raise our
prices of raw material. Our raw material is 45 percent of our
cost and you can say, okay, well, just pass it on to your
customer. It does not work that way. Sometimes we have
contracts and they often have other opportunities to source
that either domestically, change the material, or source it
internationally which is more likely going to be the case. So I
am worried about inflation.
Dependency. We have a country that is becoming dependent on
the federal government. I have seen this in our business and
there is a new dependency class that I call the ``happily
unemployed.'' Their job is to stay on unemployment. And I know
this because every Friday they come into our place because they
have to show that they are actively seeking work and what they
are really actively doing is trying to stay on unemployment.
And they are very happy there. You know, they work part-time.
They work for cash. They get food stamps. Why work? And I know
jobs are available in Manitowoc. Good jobs. Manufacturing jobs.
Cannot fill them. Cannot fill them. They are $11, $12, $13 an
hour jobs. Cannot fill them. No applicants. That is a problem.
And finally, my biggest fear is the federal debt because
that has the potential to get us all. Forget all the
regulations. All the little nibbling around the edges. If you
do not get a handle on federal spending and deficit spending we
are all gone. We are past Greece. Do not use Greece as an
example. We are past Greece. People will still lend us money.
That is the only difference. But if you look at the statistics,
we are worse than Greece.
That concludes what I have to say. And thank you very much.
Chairman Graves. We will start questions and we will start
out with Ranking Member Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Baily, in your testimony you highlight the important
role that startups play in driving economic growth. And
according to SBA data, less than a third of SBA lending goes to
startups. Are there ways to change this trend and encourage
lenders to make more credit available for startup businesses?
Mr. Baily. Yes, I think there is a case. Startups are
really important because a lot of small businesses fail. There
is a lot of turnover in small business. They create a lot of
jobs but there are also those that do not succeed. So we need
that flow of startups to keep employment growing.
It is obviously difficult to get money if you are a startup
because you do not have a track record. And as I mentioned
earlier you used to be able to use real estate collateral and
now it is more difficult to do. So I think if it is done
through either loan guarantees or through the direct lending
program, a small business bank would be a possibility, which
would not take a lot of money but could provide much needed
additional funding for potential growth companies that would
help our economy.
Ms. Velazquez. Yeah. You mentioned, Dr. Jacobe, that we
have not seen the number of startups this time around during
this last recession as we saw in the '80s, '70s, and '90s. And
a lot has to do with access to capital. You mentioned in your
testimony that real estate represents the single largest source
of collateral for loans to startups. And the drop in real
estate prices has significantly affected the availability of
credit for these firms.
So with housing prices unlikely to recover in the immediate
future, what should be done to take the place of this asset in
securing capital for startups?
Mr. Jacobe. Well, that is a hard question. I do not know if
we can operate on a very different model. I do think that there
are many small businesses that provide a good opportunity for
the private sector so I think private sector banks. I know some
folks on Wall Street that are actually making money by
packaging loans from small businesses. So we do have other
resources, people willing to take risks on a small business if
it is a good bet.
Ms. Velazquez. Would you see--what we have seen and the
senior survey of loan officers and the fed report that was just
recently released show that credit standards have been eased
and that more credit is flowing to mid-size and large firms.
Mr. Jacobe. Right.
Ms. Velazquez. The problem and the gap is on startups.
Mr. Jacobe. On the smaller size.
Ms. Velazquez. And they are the ones that really create the
jobs in this country. So would you see a direct lending role
for SBA?
Mr. Jacobe. Yes, I would.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. Mr. Baily, according to a Kauffman
Foundation survey, 40 percent of the respondents said that the
biggest obstacle in the way of high growth companies is finding
qualified people. Twenty-one percent said that managing fast
growth; accessing capital 16 percent; and the sluggish economy,
13 percent. They mentioned that those are all obstacles.
Regulatory uncertainty and taxes were only 3 percent and 4
percent, respectively. Why do you think there is such a
disparity between this poll and the Gallup poll about the top
conditions facing companies?
Mr. Baily. I mentioned what I would point to as the main
reason and that is that everybody is talking about regulation.
We have a lot of discussion on regulation in this election
year. I think there are things that one could do to improve the
regulatory environment, so I am not saying I want to dismiss
the potential for streamlining regulation and making it easier
for small business to operate. We probably all support that.
But I do think this regulatory issue has been blown out of
proportion.
I have done a lot of comparisons between the U.S. and other
countries and the U.S. is still pretty high on the list of
countries where it is relatively easy to start a new business.
If you look at the World Bank data, it is much harder in China
or places like that. So we are still a good place. I still have
a lot of confidence in this country as a place to start a
business and where enterprising people will be able to. And
yes, we should do whatever we can to make sure that the
regulatory environment is doing its job properly and not
getting in the way of growth. But I think the reason it becomes
such a football is because that is what people want to make it.
Ms. Velazquez. Dr. Jacobe, will you care to comment?
Mr. Jacobe. Well, polls will differ. And what we have done
is we tried to ask a series of different questions over time
since last year. And I think it is clear that there is a
psychology that has developed. And you can argue about the
reality. The psychology is that, and we have actually done some
individual interviews with small businesses just recently on a
sort of long-term, sort of long interview. And they come to
this without urging. So whatever the psychology is, it seems a
positive if that fear could be halted for some period of time.
Normally, regulations do not play this big a role.
The problem is that this sector is so threatened, so weak.
We have been four years in this process and people are
recovering but it is a slow recovery and small businesses are
struggling. And so things that they normally would be able to
go through and work their way through are much harder right now
and I just think that has raised the issue.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. And I do not know but maybe
anyone who would like to answer this question, but again it
might be the psychology explanation because people are saying
that community banks--and your community bank, you just
mentioned--do you know how much assets does it have? You are
from United Bank?
Mr. Fredrich. I do not. I consider it the largest
commercial bank in Green Bay. I do not know how many millions.
They have to be $300, $400 million. I am guessing though.
Ms. Velazquez. So no more than $1 billion in assets?
Mr. Fredrich. No. No. No.
Ms. Velazquez. Right? So am a member of the Financial
Services Committee. I was involved with a Dodd-Frank regulation
and every place we go when you listen to bankers the first
thing that they say if they are community banks is that it is
having a negative impact in their lending practices because it
is creating uncertainty. But the fact of the matter is that
community banks for the most part are exempted from the
regulations of Dodd-Frank. Those banks who have assets less
than $10 billion are exempt. So community banks are the ones
lending to small businesses. So when we hear that small
businesses are not getting access to capital and we blame Dodd-
Frank, I want to invite people to really go to the law and
review if those regulations will apply to those banks.
And I yield back.
Mr. Fredrich. It is not that----
Chairman Graves. Go ahead.
Mr. Fredrich. It is not just Dodd-Frank. I mean, I would
not want to be in the banking business based on the amount of
regulations and control that they have. And I will give you a
good example of the same bank. They did not need to but they
took some of that TARP money and they tried to pay it back.
Would not let them. No. You cannot give it back. Your ratios
were good. Did not have to take it. You cannot give it back.
Ms. Velazquez. Well, the TARP money for those community
banks was to provide access to capital to small businesses, not
to pay back.
Mr. Fredrich. They did not need it. They have plenty of
access.
I will give you another one. There used to be a publicly-
held bank and Sarbanes Oxley converted them from public to
private which also restricts their access to capital which
restricts their access to lending to small businesses.
Mr. Ferrara. Can I address this since she asked if anybody
could answer this? I do not think psychology has anything to do
with it. You have got to create a booming economy and the
psychology takes care of itself. But the recovery is--the
problem is the recovery is long overdue and whatever signs of
life in the economy there are it is too little too late.
The National Bureau--the statistics show that since the
Great Depression, recessions in America on average have lasted
10 months. The longest previously was 16 months. Here we are
more than 48 months after the recession started and there is
still no real recovery. Moreover, you cannot say, well, it is
because the recession was so bad. Historically, the worse the
recession, the stronger the recovery. So based on these
historical standards we should be nearing the second year--the
end of the second year of a booming economy by now. And it is
the fact that it has not--there has been no real recovery. That
is what is destroying the psychology of small business. If you
follow pro-growth economic policies you will get a booming
economy and small business will have fabulous psychology.
Ms. Velazquez. So, Mr. Ferrara, what you are saying is that
this administration did not know how big a hole was dug by the
previous administration. Right?
Mr. Ferrara. No, that is not what I am saying.
Ms. Velazquez. And the stimulus package that we put in
place was too small to produce the kind of results that were
needed given the big hole that was dug.
Mr. Ferrara. No, that is not what I am saying. My estimate,
well, no, I would never say that. My book, America's Ticking
Bankruptcy Bomb shows just the opposite.
Ms. Velazquez. I understand. I understand.
Mr. Ferrara. I can tell you exactly how many jobs were
created by the stimulus. It was 0.000 because if you take a
trillion dollars out of the economy and spend a trillion
dollars back into the economy, you have not done anything for
the economy on net. It is old fashioned, outdated Keynesian
economics which is a proven failure. In fact, it is probably a
drag on the economy because the private sector will spend that
trillion dollars more efficiently than the private sector.
Chairman Graves. Mr. West.
Mr. West. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member. And thanks for the panel for being here.
It is very interesting what I heard at the beginning and by
the time we got to the end when we talk about psychology. You
started out we are talking about optimism. By the time we got
to the end we are talking about uncertainty and lack of
confidence. So my question is, especially I have Christina
Hebert here who is a chief operating officer of a small
business as part of the marine industry of South Florida. She
is also an executive director there. Let me read you a summary
of a report that she just gave to me that follows up from the
Fort Lauderdale Boat Show, which is the largest boat show in
the world, as a matter of fact. ``The recreational marine
industry needs assistance facilitating communications with all
agencies whose regulations affect the industry.''
Second summary point. ``The United States is unable to
attract 90 percent of the large yacht economy to this country
due to the onerous regulatory environment. Attracting this
business to the United States would mean a massive influx of
spending and jobs.''
So I hear about optimism. I hear about lack of certainty. I
mean, lack of confidence and uncertainty. What can we do up
here in Washington, DC to bridge the gap between those two
points?
Mr. Jacobe. Well, what I was trying to say is that right
now we have an opportunity and the optimism is very tenuous.
That is why I think it is a very fragile kind of optimism. We
had some of it a year ago and we need to do something to keep
the momentum of that optimism going. And that is why I was
saying just freeze regulations because whether you want to
agree with it or not it is having a behavioral impact and in
this sense perception is reality. And small business owners are
very concerned about regulation. And I think anything we can do
to help their psychology right now, we can start to overcome
some of these kinds of things and the kind of thing you were
just talking about.
Mr. Baily. I would just say that I think those regulations
about yachts have been in place for a long, long time. So I do
not think this is something new. I do not think it is something
that President Obama did.
Mr. West. I did not say anything about administration.
Mr. Baily. No, you did not.
Mr. West. I will talk about fixes.
Mr. Baily. I do not know enough about it. It may be we
should be able to simplify that regulation and make it easier
to build a yacht.
Mr. West. What I am saying is not just specific for this
industry. We are talking about an environment out there where
people are saying it is an uber regulatory environment that is
constraining the growth of our economy in this country. So what
I am asking you real smart guys because I was just a
paratrooper in the Army, what are the type of things that we
need to be doing coming out of Washington, D.C. to turn this
around? Because as Mr. Ferrara said, when you sit back and you
look at pro-growth economic policies, I do not want to see us
be like Japan and start down the path of 9 or 10 stimulus
packages and we have a lost decade. So what should we be doing
to go and build upon this optimism and get away from this lack
of certainty?
Mr. Ferrara. Can I address that?
Mr. West. Sure.
Mr. Ferrara. I discuss this in my book and I served on the
White House Office of Policy Development under President
Reagan. And I went back and looked at what did he do to address
the enormous crisis we had at the end of the 1970s which was
arguably even worse than this crisis. You ended up with double-
digit unemployment, double-digit interest rates, and double-
digit inflation. There were four components he campaigned on
and implemented once elected. One is reduced tax rates to
maximize the incentives for production. Two was reduce
regulatory burdens to reduce the costs on production. Three was
to reduce government spending to reduce the drain on the
private sector. And four was a strong dollar monetary policy,
which serves to enhance investment because investors are
confident they will not lose the money because of a declining
dollar or because of cycles of boom and bust due to unstable
monetary policy.
Those policies worked spectacularly. I call it the most
successful economic experiment in world history. By 1982, the
economy took off on a 25-year economic boom, what Art Laffer
and Steve Moore called in their recent book ``the greatest
period of wealth creation in the history of the planet.''
Twenty million new jobs were created in the first seven years
alone. Fifty million jobs were created from 1980 to 2007.
Recently that was reported in the Wall Street Journal. So if we
would restore those pro-growth policies the economy would take
off at another long-term boom within a year or so and that
would be a way to solve the problem.
Mr. Baily. We also had pretty good growth during the '90s
during the Clinton years, let me remind you. In fact, maybe
even slightly better growth. And President Reagan was a
practical man. You know, he cut tax rates very heavily. He saw
the big deficits that came about and he agreed to actually some
very substantial tax increases that followed when he realized
he had overdone it on the tax side and that is what we have to
do now. Obviously, we need to control spending. Of course we
do. But we cannot, I agree with you, we cannot run these huge
budget deficits and we have got to attack that from both sides,
the spending side and the revenue side as President Reagan did.
Mr. Jacobe. And let me just add that there is an immediate
situation and there is a longer term kind of situation. And
what I was trying to say with a moratorium is that we really
ought to take advantage of this opportunity with some
increasing optimism out there and try and do something
immediate. There are all kinds of other solutions, part of
which is housing. But the immediate situation is we will lose
it if we do not act quickly.
Mr. West. Mr. Chairman, if I could ask one quick one. Could
we have reinstated Glass-Steagall instead of going the
direction of the Dodd-Frank?
Chairman Graves. Yes.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Hahn.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you for holding this important hearing. And
I will tell you I am still sort of new around here. I was just
elected to Congress last summer in a special election. But I
love being on this Committee. I think the Small Business
Committee is one of the more important committees back here in
Congress because it really is critical, I believe, to the
growth of our economy, getting things back on track in this
country, creating more jobs. It is really about small
businesses.
And since I was elected last summer I have made a point of
touring and meeting with small businesses in my district,
probably close to 100 now individually, and talking to them
about what I think we are trying to get at in this Committee
and in this Congress, is what can the federal government do or
not do to really encourage growth in our small businesses,
encourage hiring, and really help them do what they do best.
And you know, as you all know there is a difference in small
businesses. I would like to ask Dr. Jacobe later in his polling
did you differentiate between the large-small businesses and
the small-small businesses because I do think they have a
different perspective, particularly when it comes to
regulations.
And I think you are right. I think all of us want to find
those regulations which may be burdensome, which may be out of
whack, which might do better to be tweaked or not in place. But
I for one am not interested in removing regulations that are
there solely to protect the consumer or there to protect the
health and safety of the worker. I am not interested in that.
But if we can look at other things that might be beneficial I
think we are all willing to do this.
One of the things that I kept finding out when I talked to
my small businesses, two things which your poll actually
pointed to. The second and third one was lack of consumer
confidence and lack of consumer demand which between the two of
them is about 27 percent. So regulations was 22 percent. So to
me that is really the bigger issue that we need to focus on.
What can we do to bring back consumer confidence and consumer
demand? I participated in the Small Business Saturday on
November 26th, which I hope we make that a bigger deal this
year. Every one of the businesses that I walked into, small
businesses, they said, ``Congress member, we need more
consumers. I want more people coming through my doors to buy my
products. Because when that happens I can hire more people and
I am willing to hire more people but I need people who have
their jobs. I need people who are not losing their homes. I
need people who are making decent wages. I want consumers. That
is what is going to help my small business.''
The other thing I found overwhelming was a lack of access
to capital. That seemed to be really just a common theme with
all my small businesses. They did not like the fact that we
required way too much paperwork to even apply for a loan so I
have introduced legislation which will cut down paperwork and
expedite approval process for loans under $250,000. And credit
unions. Community banks and credit unions. Credit unions, you
know, under regulations are not allowed to lend more than a
certain percentage of their capital. They would like to be more
on par with banks. So I have also co-sponsored legislation that
allow credit unions to loan more capital which I think will
benefit small businesses and I think it brings back that in our
community we know our community banks and our credit unions.
But beyond that, Dr. Baily, you touched on it a little bit.
I think it is the startup businesses. By the way, what we are
finding in new statistics is that some of these people that got
laid off through no fault of their own, they are now looking to
be entrepreneurs and innovators and start up their businesses.
I think it is terrific. But what else can we do to help these
startup businesses survive, thrive, and being to hire people
because we know that the biggest growth in hiring is going to
come from our small businesses, not our large businesses. What
else can we do specifically?
Mr. Baily. I am not sure I have got a lot that is different
from what we have already talked about and I think I would
agree with the things that you have said is what is needed is
access to capital and they need more consumers so we need to
follow a sound policy for the economy overall so that we begin
to get that overall growth and we get more people coming
through the door. Those are the main things that we need to do.
I said in answer to an earlier question, if we can get more
money coming from our small community banks, which are not so
affected by--not really affected by Dodd-Frank and I think the
Small Business Administration. It is not huge but I think that
is playing a useful role also.
Ms. Hahn. And Dr. Jacobe, and I know regulations, we are
tackling that issue in this Committee. I did not hear that from
one of my businesses that I have talked to. They were really
more about access to capital and more customers. Did you
differentiate in your poll between the large small businesses
and the small-small businesses in terms of the burdensome
regulations? And besides health care, are there some specific
regulations that you have uncovered in your polling that
businesses are pointing to?
Mr. Jacobe. Well, we did not really break out the
regulations by size. We call it sample size limitations on some
of those kinds of questions. What we know is that business
that, say, have more than $2 million in revenues or assets are
more optimistic and tend to be more optimistic about credit
than the ones that are smaller than that. The others tended to
be dependent on housing finance as part of their sort of
capital source and entrepreneurship and all that kind of stuff.
And taking the housing finance system as it stands now has
really hurt small business. Some kind of change to the housing
finance system would help a lot. We will look at that but
again, as I said, it is a sample size kind of problem and it is
not unusual that they would not necessarily mention regulations
because they have a whole lot of things on their mind when they
are talking to you.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Schilling.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Chairman.
I guess being a small business owner and actually currently
still having my family run the small business I have got to
disagree with the statements about regulations are not
affecting our businesses because I truly believe they are. And
just like the gal before me, the congresswoman, I just had a
small business meeting just this past Monday. And I had a small
business with 33 employees that they are in the process of
going under. They have had no deaths, no major accidents, the
business has been in place for I think 35 years. They do about
$3 million a year in business and OSHA has come out and fined
them left and right. The first one they had was taking their
forklift trucks and forcing them to switch from LP gas over to
electric.
But, you know, just to give you an idea. This is coming
from the real world. These are real numbers that I am going to
be telling you about and these are factual numbers coming
directly from my business. Back in January of 2009, I own a
pizzeria store and cheese has gone up 40 percent. Back in 2009,
mushrooms, from 2009 till today have gone up 44 percent. Pork
has gone up 32 percent. You know, the problem is that I cannot
in a downturn economy, I cannot turn that over to my customer.
And yet we have gas prices that are sitting at $3.50 to $4.00
per gallon and yet we will not allow for the Keystone pipeline
to be brought into the United States of America. We are going
to send that over to China.
But I guess the thing that I wanted to get at is with the
Affordable Health Care Act--some call it Obamacare, call it
what you will--but you indicated that a lot of the customers,
folks out there have less than 50 employees and they really do
not need to worry about being forced upon the plan. But my
concern is the fact that the people with 53 to 60 to 62, the
people that I have talked to have said, look, you know what? We
are just over the threshold. Guess what they are going to do?
They are letting people go. They are going to get under the
part that is going to force them to be on the plan. So I think
that we have got to take all that into consideration.
When we talk about the jobs created under the
administration, you know, the fact of the matter is under the
administration we have actually lost 1.6 million jobs since
this administration has taken over. You know, if you have a
dollar and you lose all of it and then you find a dime, well,
you have a 10 percent increase in what you had so we have got
to be really real. And I was happy to see that you, Mr. Jacobe,
that you were talking about the people that have quit looking
for work because that is important because we are closer to 20
percent. We can all point fingers back here and there but I
think something else that we have got to do is we have got a
bunch of bills that are bipartisan bills that are sitting over
in the Senate right now. And what we have got to do is all of
us take our democrat and republican, you know, we are here as
U.S. members of Congress and what we have got to do is we have
got to come for some solutions for the American people. And I
hate to go on a rant but this is--when I am hearing some of
this stuff, being right in what I call the final three feet of
the business and I hear people over here telling us that the
regulations are not adversely affecting small businesses in the
United States of America, I cannot disagree with that more than
anyone.
And another thing we talked about a little bit is the fact
that we have access to capital. You cannot have small
businesses if you do not have that access. I had a gentleman
this week that I talked to that basically what is happening is
they want him--he wants to start up a restaurant. They want 50
percent down. He does not have 50 percent down. So we have got
to figure out a way to find some solutions. We all know there
is a problem and I do not believe it is more stimulus. I am
sorry. You know, the administration told us that it was
spending $787 billion that we were going to keep unemployment
rates under 8 percent. They also told us if we did nothing that
today we would be sitting at 6.5 percent. So it is not working
and throwing more of my kids' and my grandkids' money to just
continue to spend it away I do not believe. What we have got to
do is what our job is is not to spend the taxpayer money. I
believe it definitely is to create certainty. And that is to
get all the ridiculous regulations. And we all want clean air,
clean water, and all that stuff, but what we have to do is when
they are coming out to regulate our farmers, the dust that they
are putting up in the air, we have got to say, hey, wait a
minute. Come on. Where are we going with this?
But I think the key here is to find solutions to the
problems and things that are going to really definitely help to
fix the United States of American and keep jobs here rather
than giving incentives for them to move jobs outside of the
U.S. So I do not really have a question but I had to kind of
speak my mind on that. And that is coming from a small business
perspective. So thank you and I yield back my time.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Schrader.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Small Business
Committee usually is a bipartisan committee or historically has
been and I am sure we will get back to that. Thank you all for
being here. I am sure you do not want to hear my political
talking points so I will just ask a few questions and take
advantage of the fact you all are here.
Mr. Jacobe, if you could go--your graphs are very
illuminating and I think very helpful to give us a perspective.
Do you have access to data that goes back further to get a more
historical? Because it looks like we are seeing the run-up. I
would like to see as we recover where we are getting back to
the historical norm because as you all have pointed out I think
perception becomes reality. Certainly it is in our business and
it is now becoming true for small and large businesses in this
country. Do you go back further in your data?
Mr. Jacobe. We have a lot of different data sources but the
daily measurement only goes back to January 2008. So my
reference is to 2008, the time just before or as the recession
started.
Mr. Schrader. That is kind of an unrealistic era and
obviously led to the crash. So I was just trying to get
perspective.
Dr. Baily, with regard to--you co-authored a Brookings deal
last year, I believe, or two years ago in 2010, and talked
about economic additions and not being precedent or conducive
to businesses being able to get back on their feet or start up.
Given this Committee and its area of expertise, what should be
we doing do you think with the SBA and some of these policies
and programs to really get things going?
You have to push your button, sir.
Mr. Baily. I have to push my button. Thank you.
Mr. Schrader. We are pushing yours but you might push ours
once in a while.
Mr. Baily. Oh, do not worry about my buttons. I am used to
having them pushed.
Mr. Schrader. All right.
Mr. Baily. With regard to the earlier questions, it is
important to take a hard look at the regulatory environment for
small business and make sure that we are not putting in place
or we do not have in place regulations that are really going to
discourage growth. So I think everybody can get onboard with
that. That is a bipartisan thing. I think it is part of the
startup act that I mentioned that is being sponsored in the
Senate and there are other bills being sponsored in the Senate.
So it is not like I am sitting here saying, oh, you know,
regulation is always just great. I think we can improve
regulations.
Mr. Schrader. How about my question, Mr. Baily?
Mr. Baily. I apologize.
Mr. Schrader. I have limited time.
Mr. Baily. You have limited time.
I think the things that we need to do right now are do the
best we can to get the overall economy going because that is
eventually what is going to help small business. So that means
dealing with the budget crisis and getting some modest stimulus
in 2012. I think for small business specifically we have talked
about access to capital. That, I think we are all agreed, is a
key item and that has to come from private banks and make sure
that they are doing what they need to do to provide capital to
small business and the money coming from SBA is adequate to
provide a supplement to that.
I think that if we could--I think there is more that could
be done to get more worker skills in place and I think we are
not doing a good job right now with the folks that do not go to
college. And there are some technological advances were we
looking for a quick fix. It is not a quick fix but there are
new ways of providing skills to workers. The Army is doing it,
for example. They are providing skills to some of their
recruits. I think businesses could learn a lot from that and
the government could act as a facilitator to get people
together and say let us find out how we can train these
workers, give them the skills that they need so that they can
perform the jobs that small business, and indeed, larger
businesses are looking for. Because skill shortage really is a
problem. I mean, we hear reports there are three million jobs
out there that are not being filled because the skills are not
available.
Mr. Schrader. Good. Those are very concrete. I appreciate
that.
Real quick answer if I can from each of the panel talking
about everyone has referenced the huge debt and deficits we
face when they argue over the causes and effects of those.
There are several different proposals out there to deal with
that and I happen to believe, and I am curious if you do, that
with all the money sitting on the sidelines not invested people
are concerned about where the country is going. Are we going to
end up like Greece? I think we are already there. I agree with
those statements, frankly.
The Bowles-Simpson plan has had a lot of bipartisan
support. Did not quite make the grade with supermajorities but
we have done a pretty good job bipartisanly in cutting
discretionary spending. We may not like the heavy hand approach
on the second cut here but discretionary spending is on a
course downward. Maybe not as far as some of us would like but
certainly more than others. But the big dogs are revenue and
entitlements. Do you agree that revenues in some form or
another have to go up a little bit and entitlements need to be
cut significantly to get our country back on track? Just a yes-
no from you guys if that is possible.
Mr. Fredrich. I think revenue is absolutely important. And
if you wanted to raise revenue you would lower taxes. It works
every time.
Mr. Schrader. Like their tax reform proposal? Talk about--
--
Mr. Fredrich. I do not know what it is but I will tell you
if you lower taxes at the margin, which is where it counts, you
would raise revenue. If you are worried about small business
startups and capital you would make the capital gains tax zero.
But I do not think there is any incentive to do that.
Mr. Schrader. If you could look at that report I sure--
because you are a good small business guy. I would really love
to get your opinion on their tax reform piece. If you could do
that for me at some point.
Mr. Fredrich. I would be happy to.
Mr. Schrader. If you do not mind. Big request, I am sorry,
but if you could it would be cool.
Mr. Fredrich. Sure.
Mr. Baily. I like the Bowles-Simpson proposal. Some of them
were not as specific as they might have been but I think it
would have been a great framework to deal with the budget. And
it proposes higher revenues and controlling the growth of
spending. And I think that is what we absolutely have to do.
I think they do propose lower tax rates, so lower marginal
rates. But in return for that you have to give up something
because that does not give you more revenue. You have got to
give up some of the special tax breaks or something like that
if you want the lower rates. And I think that would be a great
thing to do.
I also would say that there is a proposal by Domenici and
Rivlin, which I think in some ways I like even better than
Bowles-Simpson. But either one of those I would take as a basis
for dealing with this problem.
Mr. Ferrara. I think the Simpson-Bowles points in exactly
the right direction. The only way you can raise revenues in
this economy is by lowering the rates and stimulating, creating
incentives for economic growth. And I agree that you can go
along with that and reduce some loopholes and some of the--
because when you lower the rates, a lot of those loopholes
become completely unnecessary and can be eliminated. So that
does point us in the right direction but I think that I like
what Congressman Paul Ryan has been proposing in his budgets.
He has a tax reform. Ten percent for families below 100,000.
Twenty-five percent for families above that. And so I think
that that is a stronger measure but it goes further in that
direction. I think that is the right direction to go.
My entire testimony addresses entitlement reform and the
whole point of the testimony in the book is that entitlement
reform can be done in a positive way, that it does not have to
involve how much are we going to take away now from seniors and
the poor. That, in fact, if you do structural systemic reforms,
change the way these programs operate, they are so old. They
are so based on ideas from 100 years that you can produce
programs that actually serve seniors and the poor far better
but cost just a fraction of what the current approaches do. And
those reforms can involve pro-growth incentives that would
contribute to the economy as well. And we discuss that in
detail in the book and some in my testimony as well.
Mr. Schrader. Thank you.
Mr. Jacobe. I think the real solution is a very rapidly
growing economy. I think there is potential there and I know I
am not necessarily in sync with a lot of people on that. But we
have not recovered as we said earlier from the downturn in any
way like we should have. And that will change everybody's
perspective if we really start going like we did after the
Reagan recession. And to be direct, I do not agree with any
kind of tax increases.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Wall.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If there is anybody on the panel that disagrees with me say
something. Are any of you four gentlemen at all satisfied with
where we are at with this economic recovery? Is anybody
satisfied with how this recovery is going?
Mr. Ferrara. Absolutely not. It is the worst economic
recovery since the Great Depression. I have written on that
recently at Forbes.com.
Mr. Walsh. Dr. Baily, are you satisfied with where we are
at?
Mr. Baily. I am not satisfied but I would say that the
administration, the Obama administration should get a lot of
credit for having turned things around. The banking system, the
financial system did not fail. It was sustained.
Mr. Walsh. Are you, Dr. Baily, are you----
Mr. Baily. The economy stopped falling. It fell like a
stone.
Mr. Walsh. I will give you a chance. Are you satisfied with
where this recovery is at? Yes or no?
Mr. Baily. No, I am not satisfied. It is still too weak.
Mr. Walsh. Dr. Jacobe.
Mr. Jacobe. No.
Mr. Walsh. Mr. Fredrich.
Mr. Fredrich. I do not think we have had a recovery. So no.
And that is a common perception.
Mr. Walsh. And as Mr. Ferrara pointed out, historically the
more severe the recession the quicker and the more potent the
recovery. And again, I think it is fairly safe to say that when
it comes to economic growth and job growth, this is easily the
most anemic recovery we have had since the Great Depression.
And so what I want to figure out is why is that? What has this
administration done or not done enough of or done too much of,
we are all not satisfied with the varying levels of degree here
with where we are at. Be as concise as each of you can be why
do we sit here in the midst of a historically weak recovery if
you, in fact, want to call it a recovery? Why are we where we
are at? Try to be as concise as each of you can be. Let us
start down at that end.
Mr. Fredrich. I think we are actually living the 1930s all
over again because it was a recession that was extended through
government action. And there were just asinine programs started
during that time period that kept this country in a recession
until after World War II when there was a change in the
Congress.
Mr. Walsh. So to paraphrase, too much government?
Mr. Fredrich. Absolutely.
Mr. Walsh. Dr. Baily, why are we--what have we not done
enough of? What have we done too much of? Why are we where we
are at right now?
Mr. Baily. I think we are where we are at because this
recession is very different from the earlier ones in the post-
war period because it had this incredible housing bubble and
housing prices have dropped 30 percent. We lost $14-$15
trillion worth of household wealth. We do not have residential
construction as a lift to the economy. Consumers do not have
the value in their homes which allows them to feel more
confident and spend more. And so I think the only thing that
could have been done more was more emphasis on trying to turn
around the housing market, while the truth of the matter is
that is a very hard thing to do. And so inevitably we were
going to get a long recession.
The other thing was that if we had not had deficits coming
into this recession, in other words, when I was chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisors we had a 2 percent of GDP surplus
in the budget. And if that had not been squandered in two large
tax cuts we would have come in with more ammunition to deal
with this downturn.
Mr. Walsh. Mr. Ferrara.
Mr. Ferrara. I discussed in my testimony each of the four
components of Reaganonimcs. And the reason we have no recovery
is that Obamanomics is following the opposite of every one of
those four components of Reaganomics. I talked about Reagan
reduced the tax rates. Next year you have already scheduled in
current law increases in the top tax rates of virtually every
major federal tax. The only one left out is the corporate
income tax which is already virtually the highest in the
industrialized world and is already too high. Instead of
reducing regulatory burdens we have increases in regulatory
burdens. Instead of reducing government spending we have
massive increases in government spending. Instead of a strong
dollar monetary policy we have a weak dollar monetary policy.
So that is why we have no recovery.
Mr. Walsh. Dr. Jacobe.
Mr. Jacobe. The recessions since World War II and since the
Great Depression have had a housing cycle embedded in it. This
time we had a financial crisis. I do not think people have
adequately assessed the financial crisis and therefore have not
adequately assessed what needs to be done to change that. But
the big problem is the finance system is not working the way we
want, particularly in housing. I think that is the key to the
problem.
Mr. Walsh. Mr. Ferrara, one final quick question for you.
Dr. Baily testified that Obamacare will actually help small
businesses and will not increase their costs which I find
mindboggling. Would you care to comment?
Mr. Baily. Yeah, I think Obamacare is very detrimental to
small businesses, already increasing health costs. In addition
to the point that was made about companies just above the
threshold, there is also a negative impact on companies just
below the threshold that do not want to grow up to 50 and
above. And so it is reducing job growth in that way as well.
And what you have seen is instead of increases moderating they
seem to be accelerating which is what I predicted in my book.
Mr. Walsh. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back to
something that Dr. Baily talked about a few minutes ago and
that Dr. Jacobe also mentioned which is housing. I used to
build houses. One of the reasons I am here is that I used to
build houses.
I have heard a lot of different ideas. We have had half a
dozen or so federal programs designed to try and help the
housing industry. I agree with you, Dr. Baily, that this is a
crisis within this industry that we have not seen certainly in
my lifetime or my dad's lifetime. I come from three generations
of homebuilders.
So I guess since I have got fairly smart people on the
panel, some of whom I might agree with philosophically and
disagree with philosophically, I will ask you all the
questions. We will start with Dr. Baily and then anybody else
come in. What would you do? I am open-minded to ideas on how to
fix the housing industry and maybe a corollary to that if you
do not have any ideas of what to do is what should we not be
doing? But I will start with Dr. Baily and we will just take it
from there.
Mr. Baily. I wish I had a better answer to give you. There
have been a number of programs that have been tried, starting
with the Bush administration. And I think those were generally
good programs. The Obama administration has tried a number.
There is a new one that is being announced today. I support
many of those programs. I think they are trying to, I mean, the
problem is we have very low interest rates but people cannot
refinance their loans or they are underwater from it. So you
have either got to wait this thing out for another year until
the housing market really comes back or you have got to start
paying off the people who are underwater. And I think there is
a lot of, you know, a lot of reasons to be nervous about that.
You would end up paying--nearly a quarter of the money would go
to California since that is where a lot of the underwater
mortgages are. So I do not know that there are easy solutions.
I think the programs that have been tried are helping but they
can only do a limited amount. And unfortunately, we have got to
wait this thing through to some extent.
By the way, I agree with Dr. Jacobe that the financial
crisis also contributed to where we are now.
Mr. Mulvaney. Let me press you on that because I think that
may be where we are right now which is where the financial
situation is also hampering recovery in the housing market
specifically. You mentioned low interest rates. There have been
low interest rates now for the last two or three years. Folks
are not able to refinance in large part because of the
regulations that exist on banks and what limits they can do on
lending. So I hear what you are saying about waiting it out but
unless we allow banks to flush these products through the
system, allow housing to actually find a bottom, are we really
ever going to get to the end of it?
Mr. Baily. I agree we have to do that.
Mr. Jacobe. The housing finance system, it is a long
discussion. I go back to the days of the thrift lenders and the
community lenders and that kind of thing. And a lot of what has
happened had to do with the whole secondary market and the
disconnect between finance and the actual borrower in the
marketplace. And my solution is to tie those two together
again. I think you need to create some kind of active community
lending where it is profitable for a small bank or a credit
union or a thrift to actually make a home loan, deal with the
borrower, not have to send it off to some investor and all of
these different processes that go through that have created a
major disconnect in the housing finance system. And I do not
think you can do that with the current housing finance
structure which is with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. So
something has to be rebuilt in the private sector that will
allow homeowners and people to actually take some risk in the
housing market for some period of time.
What we have done is we have created a situation where
nobody profits from making a home loan. And that----
Mr. Mulvaney. Until you collateralize it, securitize it,
package it and sell it off.
Mr. Jacobe. Well, and you get a fee in that process. And if
you can do a lot of them you get a lot of fees perhaps and
refinance fees. But it is just a very difficult thing. You need
to have community lenders who are invested in the community and
who have an interest in making sure that you pay that mortgage
loan off and that you start the process over again because we
did that for many years and we destroyed it over the last 20
years or so.
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Ferrara.
Mr. Ferrara. What I would like to say is that if you try to
focus on just the housing sector then I think there are no good
answers. What government inventions will help the housing
sector, I think there is no good answer. What I want to urge
you to do is to focus on the general economy. If you create a
booming economy by following pro-growth measures then the
housing will take care of itself. So I think that is the basis
of the solution. And the bottom-line on that is to focus on
incentives for production. Incentives to maximize investment of
production.
Mr. Mulvaney. Mr. Ferrara, I do not want to cut you off. I
only have 19 seconds and believe me, you are one of the ones
that I would typically agree with philosophically. And I am
wondering if we are in a situation here where it is a unique
circumstance whereas, and I posit this just for sake of
discussion, that our ability to create this environment that
would lead to the economy that you have just stated, which is
what everybody up here wants--it is a question of how we want
to get to that--is severely hampered by the inability of labor
to move to where the jobs are. And the housing market is
saddling and anchoring this economic growth that we might be
able to find. And unless we are able to allow, to find a way to
allow capital markets to function again, to allow labor markets
to function again, that we are not going to get to that point.
I am not for government intervention for the sake of government
intervention. I am just wondering if there is something that we
could do to allow the natural force of the economy to do what
you have just described.
Mr. Ferrara. Well, you focus on--see, the four principles
of Reaganomics are based on fundamental economics. And that has
not changed. And so the key is to focus on the incentives--
taxes, regulations, monetary policy. What incentives are they
creating? And how does that affect the overall economy? The
fundamentals of economics remain. Businesses still start and
exist to make a profit, to act in their self-interest. And so
just take advantage of the fundamentals of economics and you
would create another economic boom if you did.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez. And I would also like to thank the panelists
for their testimony today.
You know, must today the America's Sustainable Business
Council in conjunction with the Main Street Alliance and Small
Business Majority released a poll indicating that consumer
behavior is the number one concern by far with 34 percent of
respondents pointing out that this is the biggest obstacle they
face. Government regulations were a distant third at 14
percent.
This coincides with what my constituent small business
owners tell me is their number one concern along with access to
capital. This meshes with the basic economic fundamentals. If
consumer confidence is low, industry has no incentive to add
fixed cost, which in this case would be adding jobs, which is
why I am having a little difficulty reconciling in the somewhat
vacuum-like argument being made today that government
regulations are hindering small business from hiring.
So I have two questions. My first question is to the entire
panel. Would you help me better connect the dots that point to
government regulations as a bigger detriment to the viability
of small business that would be stagnant or further dips in
consumer confidence? And then to Dr. Jacobe, can you explain to
me the difference between consumer confidence and a lack of
consumer spending as concerns for small business owners? And I
ask because if you add the two percentages, the sum of the
consumer behavior makes it the number one obstacle facing small
business owners in the Gallup poll.
Mr. Jacobe. Should I begin? A couple things. I think it is
arguable to say that major concerns on the part of small
businesses are a lack of revenue, lack of consumers, lack of
consumer confidence. And as I mentioned, we went through
several different kinds of questions trying to get at that. I
think it matters how you ask the question and it also matters
what the environment is, what people are talking about and all
those kind of things.
I think, however, that however we ask the question that
that comes up and that is something that, for example, you can
do something about, whereas I do not think you can do a lot
about some of those other factors that are affecting small
business. It is very hard for you to drive revenue to a small
business. However, all I am saying is that whether it is true
or not, whether people want to make factual arguments or not,
there is this perception that exists out there and in a
behavioral economics context I am just arguing if you can help
that perception, if you can help change that perception even
for a period of time until the economy gets going better, until
the small businesses are doing better, I think it is a plus.
Mr. Ferrara. Businesses look to the future, what is coming
down the pike. And you have, for example, a very activist EPA
that is on a regulatory crusade that is eventually going to
reach down to all businesses across the board. If they are
going to achieve what they say they are going to achieve,
sooner or later they are going to walk in the door and they are
going to say you cannot do what you are doing. And they do not
want to, you know, an investor does not want to put a million
dollars on the line or sign for a loan for a million dollars
you are supposed to pay back if they do not know what is going
to happen when it comes to----
Ms. Clarke. That begs the question why small business
owners did not just say EPA regulation. They said consumer
confidence, consumer spending. This is what they said. We are
not, you know, and I have yet to hear anyone in my district--
and I have a small business-laden--we are talking mom and pops,
who have said to me, ``I am so scared that the EPA is going to
come down.'' They are concerned about who is coming through
their doors each and every day.
Mr. Ferrara. Well, in your district they may not know about
that yet but it is affecting other businesses and that is my
opinion that you asked for.
Ms. Clarke. Okay.
Mr. Ferrara. There is also the employer mandates negatively
affecting businesses. We have discussed that before which it is
not only the requirement to buy insurance but it is like what
is coming down the pike and what is that insurance going to
have to be to satisfy what HHS is going to demand to satisfy
the mandate? And so that is a threat to even companies already
providing insurance. Is this going to raise my costs?
Ms. Clarke. Mr. Ferrara, I got your point but my time is
limited. I do want to hear from Dr. Baily.
Mr. Baily. Well, I think your sentiments are right. I
basically agree with what you are saying, that it is really
getting the customers in the door that is the biggest problem
for small business and I think that is what they say. Yes, they
have gotten concerned about the health care but actually
existing plans are basically grandfathered in. So I think you
should be reassuring your small business friends that they are
not necessarily going to face a big change as a result of the
ACA and they may even get some benefits. But basically,
consumer confidence, consumer spending. We look at what
consumers do and if we can get them spending, then small
businesses are going to feel better.
There is a chart in my testimony which shows--it is from
the NFIB, and NFIB is not a big fan of regulation or the ACA.
But if you look back at their chart, the level of concern about
regulation was high when the economy was weak in the early '90s
and it is high again now so I think if we can get the economy
going that concern is going to fade off. It is not going to
disappear but it is going to go down again.
Mr. Fredrich. I think you have to divide the types of
businesses. I think most of what you were talking about are
retail businesses.
Ms. Clarke. It is a blend.
Mr. Fredrich. It is a blend. But when you think about it,
for small businesses, especially retail ones, for people to
come in their doors and buy something, those people have to
have jobs. So the way I would look at it is how can I create an
environment in this country where it is not so expensive to
employ people vis-a-vis the rest of the world? And we are on
the high end of what it costs to employ people. If you look at
countries that we compete with, like China, Vietnam----
Ms. Clarke. Not for long.
Mr. Fredrich. There will be one right behind them. I mean,
Bangladesh, India, there are lots of poverty in the world. So
that is what you have to look at. You have to look at how could
I allow our people in this country, our employers, to employ
people? And let us reduce their costs. I am not talking about
wages.
Ms. Clarke. I was going to say you just implied that we
should be competing with the wages of like Bangladesh or India
which I do not think the average American could go for.
Mr. Fredrich. No, we do not have to do that because we have
an infrastructure here and we are much more efficient and
productive than any other part of the world. So we do not have
to compete on wages. We do not and we should not. But what you
do is the regulatory burden is cumulative. It just makes it so
expensive to employ somebody that it goes elsewhere.
I just bought the new iPod and I thought this thing is
really cool. It was developed here. It is the neatest product I
have seen. It is made in China. It was never made here. It went
right there. We did all the brainwork on it to develop and we
produce it in China.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, at first as I
open this up I regret the gentleman from Oregon is not here. I
hope someone passes him along the message. He seems to be
pretty thin-skinned about partisanship. I was listening to the
gentleman from Illinois' statement about running the pizza
place and even though I am kind of happy that pork rice is
going up 30 percent, I did not hear anything partisan in there
except the phrase Obamacare. And I point out to the panel that
to my recollection, and I think it could be easily referenced
that that phrase was given life and momentum and perhaps coined
by the president himself on February 25, 2009 at the Blair
House. Remember that health care summit that is there.
And so when I am looking through the polling results, the
Gallup poll results, I am actually surprised at these results,
Dr. Jacobe, in that I started a small business in 1975 and made
payroll for over 1,440 consecutive weeks. I sold that business
to my oldest son and it and a spinoff of it go on today dealing
with all these government regulations. I am pretty sure if I
asked two of my sons that are in that business now what the
number one issue was, we would have probably gotten Obamacare
as the biggest load that they would be facing. And I see that
down there. Well, wait a minute. It is the new health care
policy at 5 percent. Now, I am wondering if some of the people
that said complying with government regulations at 22 percent
are not also thinking of Obamacare at least as a comment of
that. But I would ask you to speculate. If that had been
phrased differently the way Mr. Schilling phrases it and I
phrase it, what kind of a response do you think there would be
a change up or down in that number of 5 percent on the new
health care policy concern?
Mr. Jacobe. Well, it is not real good to speculate on
question design and responses. My guess is there is some mixing
in that area. If you look on the testimony after those two
tables, I have a part that talks about the worries and when we
asked people why they were not hiring. And if you look down
that list you see that potential cost of health care is the 48
percent and then government regulations at 46 percent in terms
of where we allowed them to have multiple answers. Now, those
answers come after statements about revenues and cash flows as
major concerns of small business. But they are all there in the
top five.
Mr. King. Thank you, Dr. Jacobe. And I think you have added
quite already to this. Just a quick read of the poll does not
go as deep as what you have. And I would add to our background
on this the special election in Ohio that took place a month
and a half or so ago and was for the purposes of repealing the
collective bargaining legislation that was passed there and
signed by Governor Kasich. So I mean, we know that there were
tens of millions spent to get people to the polls. It was a
union-heavy turnout. Sixty-one percent rejected the collective
bargaining language and initiative No. 3, right behind the
initiative No. 2, which I have mentioned, was two exempt
Ohioans by amending their constitution to the individual health
care mandate. And that passed and they amended their
constitution with 66 percent. So I thought that was a pretty
powerful poll on the public's acceptance of Obamacare. Would
you care to comment on that, Dr. Jacobe?
Mr. Jacobe. I think that the way we phrased it in our
question was the cost of health care. And the way most
Americans and small businesses I think are perceiving whatever
you say about Obamacare is in the cost of health care to the
premiums.
Mr. King. What is the average size of the businesses that
were polled?
Mr. Jacobe. Businesses that have less than $20 million in
revenues or sales. Most of them are under a million.
Mr. King. The numbers of their employees, do you have that?
Mr. Jacobe. No. I can give that to you but it is relatively
small.
Mr. King. Thank you. And I turn then to Dr. Baily and ask
what would in your estimation be the grandest Keynesian
experiment in the history of the world? The largest, most
expansive, grandest Keynesian experiment?
Mr. Baily. World War II.
Mr. King. I did not expect that answer because I thought we
were fighting to defend liberty and freedom and it was not a
Keynesian experiment at all. And I have never heard it
expressed as a means for our economy to recover.
Mr. Baily. But it did.
Mr. King. It did. We got very large government spending.
That would be the president's theory as well.
How about we go with multiple choice here because that
Keynesian experiment did not begin at World War II. We know
that. It began with the initiatives of perhaps the Iowa
president and then certainly with the New Deal of FDR. There
was a follow-through of that under the same president all the
way through. And then I will ask you this. Do you know when the
stock market recovered from its peak in October 1929 when it
finally got back to that level?
Mr. Baily. No, I do not.
Mr. King. Does anyone on the panel know that answer?
Mr. Ferrara. I think it was after World War II, I think.
Yes.
Mr. King. Mr. Fredrich.
Mr. Fredrich. Well, I was just going to say 1946.
Mr. King. 1954.
Mr. Fredrich. Oh.
Mr. King. FDR had been dead for nine years by the time the
Grand Keynesian experiment came back ground to breaking even.
And so that is a depressing thing to think about the Great
Depression, how long it took to come back from the Great
Depressions.
Mr. Baily. If you give me a second crack at that I would
say Europe is providing a very good Keynesian experiment. They
are all trying to reduce spending and raise taxes and they are
all finding they are going into recession as a result. So that
is the other side of the Keynesian coin.
Mr. King. Well, the Germans are doing pretty well and have
all throughout.
Mr. Baily. Yeah, but they did not do any contraction.
Mr. King. That is true because they did not experiment in
the Keynesian fashion that the rest of Europe did because they
fear inflation and they fear interest rates.
But Mr. Ferrara, I wanted to ask you what--if we were to,
as a former Massachusetts governor has advocated, repealed
Dodd-Frank, the Community Reinvestment Act, privatized Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac, and repealed Sarbanes-Oxley, what do you
think would become of our recovery?
Mr. Ferrara. That would be a very good component on the
deregulation component of the four points of Reaganomics that I
mentioned.
I just want to say on the Grand Keynesian experiment, World
War II, check out the trends in consumer spending during World
War II to see if that really was a Keynesian experiment. I
think you will find that it was not having any kind of
Keynesian effect and that is why the recovery did not really
come until later.
Mr. King. And just in conclusion as my time is wearing down
here, does anyone have the answer to where are the unemployment
numbers. How many no longer are qualified to meet the category
of unemployment? Does anyone have the answer on how many
Americans are of working age who are simply not in the
workforce?
Mr. Baily. I think that is one up recently. I think that
has been going up.
Mr. King. Let me just respond to my own question then and
that is I have tracked this for six or seven years and there
are different ways to define it. So you say Americans of
working age not in the workforce. That number, roughly not
quite 14 million unemployed added to those from off the
Department of Labor's website, I started at 16 and I went to
where unemployment is no longer paid and where Walmart does not
hire. That is 74. Over 100 million Americans of working age
simply not in the workforce. I just think that is an
astonishing figure and worthy of consideration. I think your
book is worth reading, too.
Thank you very much. And I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member.
I do not want to oversimplify this but most of our
decisions and opinions are based on real life experiences. In
watched my parents operate a number of small businesses, one of
which was an electrical contracting company, if no one was
building they were not hiring. If people were not building
homes, they were not doing any electrical work. If government
buildings were not being built or retrofitted, they were not
hiring. So I understand the question about government
regulations and those concerns but are we overplaying the role
of regulations compared to opportunity and demand? And if you
can give a short answer to that I have another one also.
Mr. Ferrara. Well, you know, the thing is that if you get a
booming economy then the prices of the homes go up. People want
to buy homes. There is more demand for homes. And so the focus
needs to be--the regulation is just one component of a broader
array. It is one real component but it is a broader array. And
so the real focus needs to be get the economy overall booming
and you will solve the housing crisis. You will solve the
consumer confidence crisis. And that is the best way to solve
the fiscal crisis, too. You have got to have economic growth or
you are never going to deal with the deficit. You are not going
to be able to deal with the deficit until you get the economy
booming again.
Mr. Jacobe. Let me just mention one number. According to
our surveys, 29 percent of small businesses are hiring fewer
people than they think they need. They are holding back. And
there is a reason for all that caution. And what I am looking
for is anything that can ease that caution, at least
temporarily. Once they get more optimistic then I think what
you said has a lot more power to it.
Mr. Richmond. Now, since you brought up optimism, does a
dysfunctional Congress add or subtract to consumer confidence
in this country?
Mr. Jacobe. It clearly hurts consumer confidence. Our
numbers from last year as to what happened in August when we
almost talked ourselves into a double dip, clearly Congress can
have an impact on the economy directly.
Mr. Richmond. Mr. Fredrich. Did I pronounce it right?
Mr. Fredrich. You did.
Mr. Richmond. Quick question. I read some of your bio in
that you took a leap of faith after 9/11 to start your own
business. It reminds me of what my parents did. So my question
to you would be as you were purchasing that company was the
number of rules and regulations and the regulatory environment,
was that a part of your analysis when you looked at it? Or did
you look at balance sheet, the assets, the income, the debt,
and the revenue?
Mr. Fredrich. I did not look at the regulations. I can tell
you that. I should have but, you know, when you are not in the
business it is amazing what you do not know. And there are lots
of things. But it has gotten worse and it has accelerated.
But can I answer your first question?
Mr. Richmond. Absolutely.
Mr. Fredrich. About your parents and their business. The
amount of regulation that goes into building a new building is
just unbelievable. Not so much at the federal level but at
local levels, too. And it raises the cost of building to a
point where people do not build.
And the second point I would make is you should sponsor the
repeal of the Davis-Bacon Act which forces people to employ
union labor when I do not know if your parents, did they run a
union shop or a non-union shop?
Mr. Richmond. They ran a non-union shop and then they had
jobs that were also prevailing wage.
Mr. Fredrich. See, they got discriminated against because
they could have gone in at a lower price and said, look, we can
do the same darn thing at a lesser rate. Oh, sorry. Sorry.
Mr. Richmond. Well, you mentioned the regulations for
building. And I will just tell you as dreadful as 9/11 was and
it highlighted our policies on terrorism and inadequate
security at airports, being a survivor of Katrina highlighted
the fact that you need real building codes. And you need to
make sure that levies can withstand water and that we have some
very basic standards. Do I think we can simplify the language
we use in writing every document in this government?
Absolutely. And I think that that should be how we categorize
the conversation which is to simplify things as opposed to just
say overregulating. But we need to make sure that we build safe
homes that can withstand 100 mile per hour winds and things of
that nature. And I think government does have to play a role in
making sure that that does not happen so that we will have
homes that survive earthquakes and we, God forbid, would ever
have anything like Haiti. But building codes and those things
make a difference. But I think the conversation and what would
increase consumer demand and consumer confidence in this
country is if we could get together and have a conversation
about how we simplify stuff. How we make people really
understand why is the tax code bigger than the Bible. Those are
real conversations we should have. And I think we owe it to the
American people to do it because we talk a completely different
language than people every day just trying to figure out how to
build a home, how to pay for it, how to go for work and save
money.
So that would just be my two cents. And if you all wanted
to reply you can but I am out of time. And Mr. Chairman, thank
you for allowing me to go.
Chairman Graves. If anybody wants to reply they can.
Mr. Baily. I agree.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. I do not want to repeat what a lot of others have
already said so let me come at it a little bit differently. But
I am sure some of it has already been mentioned.
The president during his State of the Union address last
week called for regulatory reform. I would argue if you look at
the actions from this administration, however, any involvement
that they have had relative to regulations has been anything
but reform. It has been more and more regulations. And in fact,
last year the Obama administration proposed over $230 billion
in new regulatory proposals which would have--one survey showed
that it would have meant another 133 million paperwork hours on
businesses. And with that amount of paperwork it would have
taken close to 66,730 additional employees just to comply with
the law. And I guess you could argue there are jobs there but I
think clearly those are not the type of jobs that are going to
make this a more efficient economy and make us more competitive
around the world. So I think it is clear that these burdensome
regulations really remain a thorn in the side of this economy
and one of the reasons, only one that we have not seen in the
recovery that I think we would have expected.
Dr. Jacobe, in your poll it indicated that government
regulation remains the number one concern for small businesses
and I know one of my colleagues on the other side had another
poll that indicated something different. I know I have talked
to an awful lot of small businesses in my community and I hear
over and over and over again that government regulations is a
big deal.
And another one of my colleagues on the other side
mentioned a dysfunctional government and it clearly is that but
I would argue that dysfunction is in the Senate and not in the
House. When you look at regulatory reform and getting rid of
burdensome regulations, the House has passed something like 30
bills which are sitting over in the other body and absolutely
nothing is happening over there on these things. Or much of
anything else. As of last week they had not passed a budget in
a thousand days, which is almost three years despite the fact
we are supposed to pass the budget every year and the House
has. But once again not the Senate. But I think the dysfunction
is over in the other body.
Dr. Jacobe, if the Senate and this president perhaps would
push the Senate into actually passing some of those 27 to 30
bills--and I have got copies and could name what they all are
but I do not want to bore you with all those things--if we
actually passed some of this deregulation, getting the
government the heck off the backs of these small businesses
would that arguably have a significant effect on small business
creation in this country?
Mr. Jacobe. There are a couple of different factors
obviously in that process. What I was trying to talk about was
just a freeze because that to my mind would actually have a
positive effect immediately. I think when you talk about the
others it is a matter of what is being deregulated and all
those details that you talk about. It certainly should have a
positive impact. The question is how much depends on, you know,
everybody has used deregulation differently or regulation
differently.
Mr. Chabot. Okay. And also one of my colleagues indicated
the tax code being, you know, more than a Bible. And it is. It
is actually eight Bibles stacked on top of each other is how
complicated the tax code that both individuals and small
businesses have to deal with in this country. What a waste of
time that could be more profitably used to better run that
business and may actually hire some folks.
The other thing that I heard over and over again from my
small business folks was how tough it is to get access to
capital. And one of the things that that is attributed to among
other things is the Dodd-Frank legislation. What I have been
told is, you know, the banks and folks that would lend the
money are now--they have the regulators looking over their
shoulders even more and it makes it tougher for them to lend
out money. And so the businesses are not growing. Would anyone
want to comment on that? Any of the panel members? Yes, sir.
Mr. Fredrich. When I spoke, and I understand that maybe he
is not subject to Dodd-Frank, but in general what it does is it
makes it more of a process than a relationship in lending. And
ratios and statistics do not pay loans back. People,
individuals pay loans back. And it is a matter of honor that
you do it. And he thought that regulation, the Dodd-Frank
regulation was changing that dynamic. It was changing it more
from a relationship business, which it is, to just a numbers
business where, oh, you fell out of our statistical
acceptability range so you have got to go. We are recalling
your loan. We would have been long gone. Our company, long gone
early on in our lifetime. I would have lost everything. I would
have lost my house, lost everything. I personally guarantee the
debt and I still do. So I think it moves that. And if we did
not have a relationship I would not be here today talking about
it. So.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Mr. Baily. If you look back to the period of the boom I
think we did not have effective regulation of the financial
system and that contributed to the crisis that we got into and
contributed heavily to the recession and the unemployment we
have now. So I think it was necessary to revisit the regulation
of the financial system. I think that Dodd-Frank could have and
should have been a bipartisan bill. I think it came very close
to being a bipartisan bill but there was a decision at the end
of the day to say no. We are not going to go along with that.
Maybe it would have been a better bill if it had been a
bipartisan bill. So I think that is an example of a
dysfunctional Congress that we did not have a bipartisan bill
on that.
I do think that regulators now are looking over the
shoulders of the banks and probably being a little bit too
cautious. I think that would have happened with or without
Dodd-Frank because, you know, they were on the beach back in
2005 when a lot of these crazy loans were being made.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Ferrara.
Mr. Ferrara. Well, I think the answer to your question is
yes. I think the Dodd-Frank is one of the components that is
perpetuating the lack of any recovery. And I think a
fundamental factor, too, in the credit market is incentives as
well. You know, venture capitalists, for example, they are very
sensitive to all these tax burdens, the tax rates, and they do
look down the line. So it is hard for companies to get venture
capital. If they think the capital gains rate is going to go
up, historically that has proven to be a very powerful factor
affecting venture capital.
And the point about the dysfunctional Congress, I want to
note that one very good measure that the House passed is the
Reams Act which would reestablish constitutional control over
regulations and it is something that the other body really
needs to move on.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for holding this hearing.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Velazquez, do you have any more
questions?
Ms. Velazquez. Well, I do not know if my colleague was
referring to impacting access to capital for small businesses
as a result of Dodd-Frank. Were you referring the lack of
access to credit to capital to small businesses as a result of
Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Chabot. Yes.
Ms. Velazquez. And my argument before to that assertion is
the fact that Dodd-Frank exempt community banks who have assets
less than $10 billion. And for the most part those financial
institutions that are providing capital to small businesses are
those community banks that are exempted from the Dodd-Frank.
And here we have a chart from the Thomson Reuters/PayNet
Small Business Lending that shows clearly since Dodd-Frank was
enacted credit has been going up. So, you know, there is this
perception that is not based on the facts.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Well, I want to thank all of our witnesses
for being here. Obviously, small businesses are plagued by a
number of things--that lack of available credit that has been
there. Obviously, regulation that is hanging out over them. The
idea that they have got a tax increase that is coming very,
very quickly if something is not done about that. I think that
is having a huge effect. And when 7 out of every 10 jobs in
this country are created by small businesses that is where our
problem is with economic growth.
But I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here. I
appreciate all of your testimony and this hearing is not quite
adjourned.
I do ask unanimous consent that all members have five
legislative business days to submit statements and supporting
materials for the record. Without objection, so ordered.
With that the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:54 p.m., the Committee hearing was
adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


