- INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO MEETING THE WORKFORCE NEEDS OF SMALL BUSINESSES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO MEETING THE WORKFORCE NEEDS OF SMALL
BUSINESSES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 8, 2011

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-032
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

77-563 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
JANICE HAHN, California
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

Opening Statements

Page
Graves, Hon. Sam.................................................     1
Velazquez, Hon. Nydia............................................     2

WITNESSES

Ms. Jennifer McNelly, Senior Vice President, The Manufacturing
Institute, Washington, DC......................................     3
Dr. Robert Scott Ralls, President, The North Carolina Community
College System, Raleigh, NC....................................     5
Mr. Scott Watkins, CEO, Modern Tech Squad, Bonifay, FL...........     8
Mr. Roger Tadajewski, Executive Director, National Coalition of
Certification Centers, Kenosha, WI.............................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ms. Jennifer McNelly, Senior Vice President, The
Manufacturing Institute, Washington, DC....................    22
Dr. Robert Scott Ralls, President, The North Carolina
Community College System, Raleigh, NC......................    26
Mr. Scott Watkins, CEO, Modern Tech Squad, Bonifay, FL.......    31
Mr. Roger Tadajewski, Executive Director, National Coalition
of Certification Centers, Kenosha, WI......................    35
Questions for the Record:
Congressman Owens Questions for Ms. Jennifer McNelly.........    38
Congressman Owens Questions for Dr. Robert Scott Ralls.......    39
Congressman Owens Questions for Mr. Roger Tadajewski.........    40
Answers for the Record:
Ms. Jennifer McNelly, Senior Vice President, The
Manufacturing Institute, Washington, DC....................    41
Dr. Robert Scott Ralls, President, The North Carolina
Community College System, Raleigh, NC......................    43
Mr. Roger Tadajewski, Executive Director, National Coalition
of Certification Centers, Kenosha, WI......................    45
Additional Materials for the Record:
Rep. Joe Donnelly Statement for the Record...................    46
CompTIA Statement for the Record.............................    48

INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO MEETING THE WORKFORCE NEEDS OF SMALL
BUSINESSES

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:07 p.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Sam Graves (chairman
of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Chabot, King, Coffman,
Tipton, West, Ellmers, Velazquez, Clarke, Cicilline, and Owens.
Chairman Graves. Good afternoon, everybody. I call the
hearing to order.
I thank everyone for joining us. I also want to thank our
witnesses for appearing today. I look forward to hearing your
testimony.
The purpose of today's hearing is to examine the workforce
needs of small businesses and the newer, more innovative
programs that are being created to meet those needs.
The domestic economy has experienced profound changes in
the last generation. Advances in technology have made it
possible for firms across the industry to increase the
efficiencies of their workforce. Most agree that the future
health and competitiveness of the domestic economy is dependent
on continued innovation. These technological advances have also
increased businesses' needs for workers who can understand and
operate complex machinery and processes.
While the economy remains mired in recession and more than
14 million of our citizens remain out of work, a number of
firms, including small businesses, report difficulty finding
new workers with the requisite skills and knowledge for entry
level positions. According to a recent survey by the National
Federation of Independent Businesses, more than 33 percent of
small firms report vacancies that remain unfilled because of a
lack of qualified candidates.
The situation is becoming so acute that some are beginning
to question whether the skills gap is a contributing factor,
along with the future budget, tax, and regulatory uncertainty,
to weak economic growth and further job creation.
When firms can't fill a job opening in a recession, it is
clear that there is a problem. The United States spends
hundreds of billions of dollars a year on education and
workforce training programs, yet the current system is in many
ways too complex and is failing to meet the needs of businesses
and the students it educates. This is leading some to question
whether the alternative paths to education and training can
fill these programs.
As in the past, the private sector is moving into the void
and helping move forward with its own solutions to meet the
workforce needs. Unfortunately, most small businesses don't
have the resources or expertise to develop their own workforce
training programs and their ability to influence the direction
of existing workforce training programs can be limited.
Proponents of industry led credentialing programs claim
they help small businesses compensate for these limitations by
providing students and workers with a broad base of
occupational knowledge and skills necessary for entry level and
more advanced jobs.
The Committee is going to hear from four witnesses that are
intimately involved in these efforts. I appreciate again their
participation in this hearing. I know some of you traveled a
ways, and I appreciate that as well.
I now turn to Ranking Member Velazquez for her opening
statement.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As our Nation strives to regain its economic momentum, it
is critical that companies of all sizes have access to the
skilled workforce they need to succeed. In fact, in the next
decade, nearly two-thirds of all job vacancies will require
some postsecondary education, and this will only increase as
the pace of technological change accelerates.
For small businesses, a technically proficient workforce is
particularly essential, as they create 70 percent of all new
jobs. While this demand for skilled workers is increasing,
educational attainment has, unfortunately, begun to fall. For
the first time in American history, today's young adults risk
having lower educational attainment rates than their parents.
Although more than 70 percent of high school graduates
enroll in advanced education, barely half complete their
bachelor's degree within 6 years and less than one-third earn
their associates degree within 3 years. And despite progress in
improving high school graduation rates in the last decade, one-
fourth of all public high school students and nearly 40 percent
of minorities will fail to graduate with their class. As a
result, many employers find that graduates are ill-prepared in
both technical education and basic skills such as oral and
written communication and critical thinking.
For businesses, this reality has dire consequences. If we
are unable to meet the demand for trained workers, our economy
will be less able to compete globally. The manufacturing sector
in particular faces challenging obstacles due to this
deficiency. A recent report found that roughly 80 percent of
American manufacturers were unable to fill their vacancies with
qualified laborers, and many foresee increased shortages ahead.
For workers, this trend also has important ramifications.
While demand for higher skilled labor is rising, many
traditional lower skill jobs have been permanently lost during
the economic downturn. The jobs that will replace them will be
very difficult and require increasing amounts of skill and
training.
The Georgetown Center for Education and the Workforce found
that, of an estimated 47 million jobs that will be created by
2018, two-thirds of them will require workers with at least
some college education. As a result, it is increasingly
important not only for businesses but also the labor market and
the economy overall to address this skills gap.
Targeted postsecondary education such as skill
certification systems can assist small firms secure qualified
employees to help them grow. Novel partnerships among industry,
educators, and policymakers are also playing a role by
preparing the workforce and incentivizing school completion.
Such direct career pathways between students and employers are
vital. If proven successful, these efforts may be duplicated in
regions and States throughout the country.
Efforts such as these that we will discuss here today are
critical to our economic recovery. By preparing America's
workforce to compete in the global marketplace, firms will be
better positioned to succeed, paving the way towards stronger
growth. Prudent investment in training and education will also
reduce the unemployment rate, leading to higher consumer
confidence and demand. This is exactly what our Nation needs
now as we look to turn the corner, create more jobs, and ensure
that America's small businesses are prepared to move our
economy forward.
With that, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
all the witnesses for being here today.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. We are going to have a series of votes
coming up here before long, so are going to try to get through
our opening statements as soon as possible and recess and come
back. But in no way do I want you--you have each 5 minutes, but
don't rush yourself as a result of that. Because we definitely
want to hear what everybody has to say. Unfortunately, Nydia
and I don't make the schedule. They won't listen to us.

STATEMENTS OF JENNIFER McNELLY, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, THE
MANUFACTURING INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, D.C.; ROBERT SCOTT RALLS,
PRESIDENT, THE NORTH CAROLINA COMMUNITY COLLEGE SYSTEM,
RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA; SCOTT WATKINS, CEO, MODERN TECH SQUAD,
BONIFAY, FLORIDA; AND ROGER TADAJEWSKI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
NATIONAL COALITION OF CERTIFICATION CENTERS, KENOSHA, WISCONSIN

Chairman Graves. Our first witness is Jennifer McNelly, who
is the Senior Vice President of the Manufacturing Institute
that is headquartered right here in Washington, D.C.
In her capacity as Senior Vice President, Mrs. McNelly has
been responsible for developing the NAM-Endorsed Skills
Certification System which will be the subject of her testimony
today. We appreciate you being here.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER McNELLY

Ms. McNelly. Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Velazquez, and
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
I am Jennifer McNelly, Senior Vice President of the
Manufacturing Institute, a 501(c)(3) affiliate of the National
Association of Manufacturers. Our mission is to support the
Nation's manufacturers.
For a generation now, the common perception has been that
manufacturing in America is dying. But the facts show
differently. The United States is the world's largest
manufacturing economy, producing 21 percent of global
manufactured products; manufacturing supports an estimated 18.6
million jobs, one in six private sector jobs; manufacturing
employees earn above the national average in salaries and
benefits; and 93 percent of U.S. manufacturers employ less than
100 workers.
While manufacturing remains an important economic force in
this Nation, it faces serious challenges: a significant
increase in the structural costs; an absence of a coherent,
coordinated national trade policy; the lack of an innovation
strategy. And while these and other issues play out in the
front pages of the newspapers, there is another challenge, one
that threatens not only manufacturing but also companies in
every sector: the deteriorating condition of our Nation's
workforce. In our most recent skills gap survey just completed
last week, 82 percent of our manufacturers reported a moderate-
to-serious shortage in skilled production labor.
We have created an education system that is almost
completely separate from the economy at large. Traditionally,
it was the job of schools to educate children and companies to
train their employees. Jobs for individuals with almost any
education level were plentiful because companies would spend
time and resources to turn them into productive employees. We
don't have that luxury today. The only way to address this
monumental challenge is to align education, economic
development, workforce, and business agendas.
As representatives of the manufacturing industry, we have
found a solution that meets the needs of our businesses while
working within the existing secondary and postsecondary
structures. Our solution, the NAM-Endorsed Manufacturing Skills
Certification System, certifies individuals have the basic
skills to work in any sector of the manufacturing economy.
We joined with leading certification organizations in 2009
to create a system of nationally portable, industry recognized
credentials. We were also pleased to have the President of the
United States highlight our efforts a few months ago.
Our system takes certification to the next level by
organizing it, aligning it, and translating those credentials
into corresponding education programs that are integrated into
high schools and community and technical colleges across the
Nation. And while on the face of it skill certifications may
not seem transformational, it is in fact reforming education.
Our system is integrated into four credit programs of
study, so even if a student only takes a few classes but gains
an industry credential and enters the workforce they have a
pathway back into education for additional training and to
advance to a degree. The system creates on and off ramps,
allowing individuals to earn and learn as they progress in
their careers.
In addition to private sector alignments, we need to look
at Federal investments, programs such as the Workforce
Investment Act. They need to focus efforts on training
individuals for skills in demand of industry. That is why the
NAM supports H.R. 1325, the America Works Act.
From an employer perspective, nationally portable, industry
recognized credentials integrated into degree programs of study
transforms their human resource approach. It nearly guarantees
a level of quality in potential hires that does not exist
today. It greatly reduces risk, a risk that is most significant
to our small employers. Skill certifications enables small
employers to improve their hiring practices by giving
confidence that their employees can meet an industry standard.
Mr. Chairman, for too many years anything that looked and
sounded like skills development was not considered education. A
wall was built by parties on both sides. And we are breaking
down that wall today. The result will be more students in
school, more individuals gaining the skills they need to build
careers, and more employers finding the workers they need to
hire.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. We look forward
to working with you.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is my pleasure to welcome Dr. R. Scott Ralls. He is the
seventh president of the North Carolina Community College
System. With 58 colleges serving approximately 900,000 students
each year, the North Carolina Community College is one of the
largest systems of higher education in the United States. It is
internationally recognized for its programs to foster economic
and workforce development.
Prior to his current position, Dr. Ralls served as the
president of Craven Community College during a time when the
college achieved record enrollment growth.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT SCOTT RALLS

Mr. Ralls. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Velazquez, members of the
Committee, it is an honor to be with you today.
My name is Scott Ralls. I am president of the North
Carolina Community College System. I represent a system that
serves one out of every eight adults in the State of North
Carolina.
Our system originated as an innovation to foster Statewide
economic prosperity through workforce development. In the
1950s, North Carolina was one of the poorest States in the
country on a per capita basis. We were limited to textiles,
tobacco, and furniture production. During that time of economic
challenge, Governor Luther Hodges proposed two education
innovations to foster economic diversification and widely
shared prosperity, innovations that were initially met with
skepticism.
One was the creation of a research park in the middle of a
pine forest between three notable universities, what is now
known as Research Triangle Park, the hub of one of the fastest-
growing technology economies in the United States.
The other innovation was a system of industrial education
centers located around the State. These centers were created
for the sole purpose of training North Carolinians for jobs
they had not previously performed, and they subsequently
promoted the location and development of businesses not
previously in existence in our State.
Our current system of community colleges in North Carolina,
today the most comprehensive in the Nation, emerged from this
innovation, as did a mantra frequently heard in our State that
education is economic development.
Over the last half-century, a variety of workforce
development innovations have occurred through our system. They
have helped lift our State to a better economic place, but they
are also better equipping our citizens and our communities to
deal with what are now very challenging economic times for
North Carolinians and for individuals across the United States.
We were the first State in the Nation to pioneer customized
job training as an economic development incentive. Our
customized training programs have grown over the last 50 years
in sophistication. We have reached 251 companies last year,
trained 20,000 individuals.
Frequently, we are noted for the big companies we are
working with: Spirit Aerosystems in the east, Novartis, the
biopharmaceutical company in Research Triangle, or Siemens in
Charlotte. But in recent years our focus has turned not only to
companies creating jobs but also companies that are making
significant technology and productivity enhancements that
sustain jobs. Increasingly, our bread and butter has become our
State's smaller manufacturers and export-oriented companies, as
an example, companies such as Motion Sensors, a small family
owned business in the coastal northeastern corner of our State.
It turned to one of our colleges to provide the training and
support necessary to gain AS-9100 certification; and through
this coveted quality management certification for aerospace
they gained in October, they now are increasing their sales.
Our experience in North Carolina is that the road to
recovery we believe in our State is running right through the
middle of the community college system, and we think we have
data to confirm this claim. Since the recession began 3 years
ago, our enrollment has surged by 28 percent. Consequently, our
system faces significant simultaneous challenges, providing
meaningful workforce development opportunities in an economic
environment with significantly less job opportunity and meeting
head-on the challenge of a surge in students who queue up in
our registration lines.
Significantly increasing student success and program
completion rates is our primary strategic focus. Achieving
these goals in an environment of both exploding demand and
declining budgets offers a whole new level of challenges, and
these challenges are presenting opportunities for innovation
like never before.
A greater focus on industry certifications and licensures
is part of the answer, because they help us address the
simultaneous challenges of workforce opportunity and program
efficiency.
First, industry defined certifications means something.
When our students gain industry recognized credentials along
the way to an associates degree or diploma, they enter into an
ever-challenging job market with more industry defined
firepower to go with their education credentials.
Industry certifications also help us to address the
efficiency challenge. When employers collaborate to clearly
define their skills targets, as the National Association of
Manufacturers certification model does, it provides us a clear
target to focus our efforts and a framework to work across
multiple degrees and training programs.
That is what is happening in North Carolina right now.
Faculty members across multiple colleges are redesigning
curriculum standards in over 80 different degree programs using
the NAM-endorsed system as a model. Building on a foundation of
core academic and personal effectiveness competencies that cut
across industries and multiple degrees, we can layer or stack
core technical workforce competencies and industry
certifications. The bottom line, we can be even more responsive
to industry and more efficient in our operations, which we need
as well.
What we are also doing in North Carolina is we are working
across our programs, ways in which degree programs work with
non-degree, federally funded programs with State-funded
programs, and we are looking for innovations across program
areas.
One of those areas has been an effort called Jobs Now where
we have combined industry certification, career readiness
certification, workforce skills where students can gain those
skills in 6 months or less in core areas of need. In the last 2
years, 20,000 North Carolinians have participated in that
program and gained over 17,000 certifications.
Real quickly, I would like to just share a story about a
student that I met last year, one of the program participants
in Jobs Now that I met while touring one of our mountain
colleges.
At a makeshift outdoor pipe-fitting training lab, a most
unlikely looking college student named Tim Price stopped me to
say thanks, and that is the thanks that I want to pass on to
you today for your support of our Federally funded programs. A
big, burly mountain of a man, all layered in his work clothes,
Tim wanted to say thank you because, as he said with an emotion
in his voice, for the first time in several years both he and
his family were feeling economic hope.
Years earlier, Tim had been one of many victims of the
furniture company layoffs in our State, and his immediate
family had faced several medical challenges that would have
been difficult for someone of any economic circumstances.
A couple of months ago, I called back to Isothermal
Community College to check on Tim; and I was delighted to learn
that he had recently been employed as a pipe fitter with one of
North Carolina's energy companies making $16.40 an hour with
medical coverage for his family.
Tim's story illustrates something that I have heard one of
our greatest champions, Melinda Gates, has been known to say,
that the line between poverty and middle class today runs
through our Nation's community colleges. I believe that. And I
also believe it is why our mission and our focus as community
colleges, our focus on innovation and workforce development,
has never been more important for our citizens, our
communities, our State and our Nation.
Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Mr. Ralls.
Our next witness is Scott Watkins. He is the CEO of Modern
Tech Squad in Bonifay, Florida. Mr. Watkins is part of a three-
family member small business operation that provides computer
IT services to local businesses. He is testifying on behalf of
the Computer Technology Industry Association. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT WATKINS

Mr. Watkins. Good afternoon, Chairman Graves and Ranking
Member Velazquez and distinguished members of the Committee.
As mentioned, my name is Scott Watkins. I appear here on
behalf of my company, Modern Tech Squad, and as a member of the
Computing Technology Industry Association, also known as
CompTIA. My company is the only CompTIA Authorized Service
Center for computers, networks, and service support in the
Florida panhandle.
I want to thank Chairman Graves and members of the
Committee for holding this hearing on the value of the industry
led portable skills credentials. This is an extremely important
issue for both my company and for countless other small
businesses across the Nation.
Small businesses are the backbone of the American economy.
As I am sure you are aware, there are an estimated 30,000,000
small businesses in the United States which employ over half of
all private sector employees. An even more important statistic
for this hearing, though, is the fact that small businesses
hire 40 percent of all high-tech workers in the United States.
On behalf of my company, Modern Tech Squad and CompTIA, I
would like to share with you our perspective about the
importance of credentials in the IT industry.
CompTIA is a nonprofit trade association representing over
2,000 corporate members and 1,000 business partners in the IT
industry. Many of its members are like me, small businesses
that provide IT services to others. CompTIA is also the leading
global provider of vendor-neutral IT workforce certifications.
The CompTIA Authorized Service Center credential validates an
organization's level of technical certifications, resulting in
competitive differentiation and customer confidence. As I
mentioned previously, Modern Tech Squad is a CompTIA Authorized
Service Center.
First a brief word about CompTIA certification and why our
company values these certifications as an important market
differentiator.
The success of the personal computer led the computer
service and repair industries to commission CompTIA to create
its vendor-neutral CompTIA A+ certification examination program
back in 1992. Today, three-quarters of a million people hold
the CompTIA A+ certification. The continuing success of the
certification demonstrates an ongoing need to provide a means
of validating skills across a wide spectrum of computer
hardware and software.
Following on the success of A+, CompTIA developed and
introduced the CompTIA Network+ and the CompTIA Security+
certifications. Each of these certifications is industry
driven, validating technical skills and abilities both for the
individuals working in the IT field and for the people who hire
and train these.
By securing and validating core skills and knowledge, both
job seekers and established professionals can progress to more
complex and specialized credentials, such as vendor-specific
hardware and software training.
These certifications have played an important role in our
company, Modern Tech Squad. Together with my father and my
brother, we founded Modern Tech Squad about 3 years ago.
Typical services that we offer provide computer-based
diagnostics, repairs, network server support, break-fix work,
and remote IT support.
At the time that we started the company, my father was a
general contractor and my brother Matt worked with him in the
construction field. You may remember about 3 years ago as the
economy hit bottom in the housing industry and things were
pretty tough.
I had, on the other hand, been an IT manager at a local
hospital and had suggested the three of us start Modern Tech
Squad. The availability of industry recognized vendor-neutral
certifications through CompTIA made our business possible. With
a new-found passion and a good deal of study from both my
father and brother, they were able to transition from
construction to the high-tech field of IT.
It also interesting to note that the first time I went to
take the CompTIA A+ exam, I actually failed the exam. My years
of being an IT professional gave me a false sense of security
in my knowledge about computers. The adage you only know what
you know, that was a hard lesson that I had to learn. It opened
my eyes for the need for certifications. I needed to learn more
about computers and IT-specific areas, and I believe firmly
that that has made me a better technician and a better value to
our customers.
Many of our customers, over half of them in fact, are small
businesses just like us. These small businesses depend on IT
services but are too small to have a dedicated IT department.
We have heard horror stories of small businesses hiring an IT
person to come in and provide a solution, claiming to know what
the solution would be, only to realize that that was not the
case.
A small business simply cannot afford to spend their hard-
earned money on solutions that do not work. With a CompTIA
certification, I know that the customer will have the peace of
mind that their hard-earned money is being well spent on
someone who is trained properly and who provides the right
solutions the first time.
CompTIA's credentials also allowed us to chart a successful
business plan. There are over 3,800 registered IT-based service
companies in the State of Florida. In our rural part of Florida
in the panhandle, there are 11 such companies just in our area
alone offering the same services that we offer.
We felt that a great way to differentiate ourselves was to
highlight the fact that we are CompTIA certified. Our strategy
was dead on. In only 3 short years, we have not only held
steady but we have grown to now 10 employees; and nothing seems
to be in the way for growing more.
CompTIA certifications are just the beginning for us,
though. The concept of stackable credentials is essential to
provide an even higher level of service to our customers. My
brother Matt and I are currently studying for the Microsoft
Certified Professional IT Certification, and many of our
employees are also pursuing IT credentials in additional IT
fields. We see a lot of opportunity for expanding our business
based on stacking these vendor-specific certifications on top
of the CompTIA certifications that we already hold.
In conclusion, here is the bottom line. Industry
certifications are a necessity. They give companies like ours,
no matter where we are located, a chance to meet customer needs
and consumer needs, grow our business, and branch out into
various additional professional opportunities as technology
evolves. Our success proves this, and it is our hope that
others can learn from our success.
I want to thank the Committee again for the opportunity to
share my story with you and encourage you to support the broad
dissemination of stackable and portable industry credentials.
Chairman Graves. Our final witness is Mr. Scott Tadajewski.
Mr. Tadajewski is the Executive Director of the National
Coalition of Certification Centers in Kenosha, Wisconsin, where
he has been involved in establishing and implementing industry
led workforce skills certification systems in public education.
I appreciate you being here. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF ROGER TADAJEWSKI

Mr. Tadajewski. Good afternoon, Chairman Graves and Ranking
Member Velazquez and members of the Committee. Thank you for
this opportunity to appear here today and discuss this
important issue of how we can work with small businesses on
innovation approaches that can help with their workforce
development.
I am the Executive Director of the National Coalition of
Certification Centers. I am here today on behalf of Gateway
Technical College in Kenosha, Wisconsin, who is also a founding
member of the National Coalition of Certification Centers.
NC3 is an outgrowth of the relationship between Gateway
Technical College and Snap-On Tool Corporation. This year,
Gateway Technical College is celebrating its 100 years of
service to the greater southeast region of Wisconsin. Gateway
Technical College has been part of many business cycles over
the last 100 years and has always responded with innovative
approaches to meet the workplace needs of both small business
and national industries, and today is doing the same.
Our current business cycle is and has been very
challenging. Gateway Technical believes that working with
business and industry to understand new and emerging
technologies and their impact on the local and national
workforce issues is critically important.
For example, the transportation industry, the aviation/
aerospace industry, energy industries, and manufacturing as
well are bringing new technologies to the marketplace that
impact supply chain, manufacturing processes, commercial, and
retail service industries, many of them in the small-to-medium
business arena. The impact today for both the workforce and the
business owner is not only what do you know but what can you
do, and what can you do and how can you use technology to
improve productivity, process, and cost in a competitive
marketplace.
Opportunities exist for small business owners to engage
with colleges nationally to develop technical training for the
emerging workforce, the instructors that teach it, and for
small businesses. Additionally, these efforts will have a
positive cascading effect down to high schools and middle
schools, which is equally as well critically important as when
we think about our eighth graders out there today, within eight
semesters they will be graduating from high school, and where
will they be?
This, in combination with congressional efforts that focus
on increasing community college training for new and
transitioning workforce, provide even greater opportunities.
Many college presidents are proactive, as you have heard today,
to this need, but they cannot do it alone. What do I do, how do
I do it, and who can help me with it are some of the questions
that are being asked out there, not only by the college
presidents but by small business owners.
This is part of what NC3 International Coalition of
Certification Centers, driven by college presidents, small
business owners, and industry, are doing. The ability today and
in the future to provide guidance and engage in collaborative
efforts with small business are key to developing sustainable
workforce development systems.
Some key recommendations today:
Support initiatives that provide better long-range planning
for employers and employee needs. Many Federal programs, some
of what we have heard talked about today, address the need for
issues. However, there still exists a skills gap out there.
Training for today's required skills has been mentioned in the
opening statements. We have diagnostic equipment, we have
manufacturing equipment that are on high level. Some of the
research that we have done finds that some of this technology,
even with the very best professions out there, are only using
20 percent of the capability.
One of the things we have been focusing on is working with
colleges and college instructors to be able to show and so that
they become power uses of this technology and therefore that
can cascade and transcend into the students, the emerging
workforce, and, most importantly, our laid-off workers out
there that are in transition right now.
Support and encourage colleges to align academic
requirements with technology application requirements. Small
business owners need both to stay in business and compete.
Support and recognize investment efforts that small
businesses do make with local community colleges.
Entrepreneurship partnerships with community colleges and
small businesses are equally important. Ideas today will turn
into market leadership in 3 years, and that also creates job
growth in new areas.
One example that we are working with right now today is
with compressed natural gas and market leaders as well as small
companies. We are all familiar with our good old gas stations.
Well, one of the things that we are installing across this
country is compressed natural gas fueling service stations.
That is a whole new marketplace, a whole new set of job skill
sets, some historical, some legacy, but with some new ones in
there that are creating a whole new work effort.
Fifth, support for Carl Perkins type funding for education.
When we think about this, our small business owners are
investing in their local community colleges. Local community
colleges take State and local dollars and invest in buildings,
hire staff, and core equipment needs.
The use of funds like Perkins funding and other Federal
dollars to buy advanced technical equipment that the local
business owners are using and be able to train the emerging
workforce, the incumbent workforce, and especially the
transitioning workforce on how to use that equipment and how to
be able to go into the job site and be able to put that into
productive, proficient use immediately are all key to what we
have heard today on industry recognized certifications,
stackable credentials, and a process that leads to
sustainability in that.
Because the technology that we have today is going to
continue to change. It has to change for us to remain
competitive. So a sustainable workforce plan like this is what
NC3 is doing and working with other associations as well to
help drive this model to address it.
Thank you.
Chairman Graves. They have called two votes. So it is
actually not going to take that long. So we are going to take a
real short recess and go take care of those. Then we will be
right back to ask questions.
We will recess for, I am going to say, approximately 20
minutes, maybe 30 minutes.
[Recess.]
Chairman Graves. We will call this hearing back to order
and start right away with questions. And I have one, a fairly
simple one; and it is for everybody out there; and then I will
move on.
But, Ms. McNelly, you mentioned that training programs have
had a low priority in public education. And my question is, are
we placing too much emphasis in high schools or in our public
schools on preparing those students for 4-year college or 4-
year continuing education program and not paying enough
attention, you know, to those students who aren't bound
necessarily for college?
I guess that is the question; and I will start with you,
Ms. McNelly.
Ms. McNelly. That is a great question.
I think as a Nation culturally we have a sense that every
young person wants to go to college. What we haven't done in
fact is define what real college is with labor market value.
And statistically we all recognize that not every young person
is going to go and achieve a 4-year degree. In fact, our
dropout rates are astounding on the completion side. We
incentivize counselors to benchmark students towards 4-year
degrees, and parents equally play a role. And I think we have a
long way to go in helping parents understand that industry
based credentials that could be achieved in high school and in
postsecondary education are important tools that in turn allow
somebody to have good, family sustaining wages but also a
lifelong career that would allow them to enter back into the
education system when possible for them.
Chairman Graves. Dr. Ralls.
Mr. Ralls. I believe the short answer is yes.
You can look at data in our State. I think recent studies
have shown that the biggest skill gap is between those jobs
that require above high school but less than 4 years of
college. So I think there is that issue.
And I think everybody is in support of technical and
vocational education. The challenge is priorities, as some say.
Everybody is in favor of vocational education, just for other
people's children. So it can be a real challenge.
But I also think the longer answer is it is not that easy.
It is not so much either/or, and too often within education we
look at these either/or scenarios. It is not either industry
certification or a degree. It is really both. And it doesn't
have to be either 4-year college or technical certification or
technical degree. When degrees combine applied skill with the
rigor of, say, an engineering stem, those are the best
opportunities for students, when students can take applied
skills and move to a 4-year program.
And what we see more and more in community colleges is we
are becoming a new form of graduate school. Students gain 4-
year degrees and come to community colleges as somewhat of a
finishing school. Twenty-five percent of our nursing students
already have degrees before they enter into our programs. So it
is not as easy as either/or, and too often I think we create
these either/or scenarios.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Watkins.
Mr. Watkins. I think Dr. Ralls really nailed most of those
points on the head. You really can't downplay the benefits that
you get from college. Knowledge and skills that are earned in
college are vital for any potential worker. But I think it is
the combination of that with the credentials that make the
workers able to be the most viable asset to small businesses in
our case. I think that is----
Mr. Tadajewski. You know, everything that has been said is
right on. I think what I would add to that is a lot of--
especially for small business employers, whether they are
coming out with a 4-year degree or coming out of high school,
two things. A lot of students simply can't go on to 4 years
right away even if they want to strive to that because
financially they need some money. And if they don't have skill
sets that only allow them to go work at Taco Bell or some place
with minimum--they are never going to get the 4-year education.
So providing some of these skill sets that allows them to get
some jobs that are at small businesses, that want to develop
them and involve that young person is critical.
I think the other part of this is that--what has been
mentioned already--is a lot of 4-year students that are coming
out of colleges realize they have a lot of tremendous
knowledge, they know a lot of things, but in today's
marketplace--especially in this market that we are in now and
coming out of this--is going to require what can you do. Can
you actually put some things into practice? Although it may be
entry level but can you take that tremendous knowledge you have
and help us in the productivity side and bring those ideas and
put them to work in manufacturing processes, especially in the
supply chain, which is a big part of what we are here today
because our small businesses are key in that supply chain.
Chairman Graves. Thank you.
Ranking Member Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ralls, I would like to ask my first question to you,
but I will want to hear the comments from the other witnesses.
The success of efforts to tie workforce and economic
development will depend in part been upon how quickly they can
respond to rapid changes in technology and industrial
processes. We know that the marketplace is constantly changing.
So how can we build successful partnerships between educators,
industry, government that do not just adapt training programs
once but instead remain engaged to the constant changing
demands of the marketplace?
Mr. Ralls. I think you have probably hit on one of our
greatest challenges. I think the beauty of the certification
process that we have been talking about is community college.
Our role with education, I think we are probably the closest of
all educational institutions in terms of working with
employers. That is just the nature of who we are. And in that
regard, our role is to hit targets. If we have to define the
target and then hit it, that is a long period of time. That is
why we are working with certifications, working across multiple
employers in similar areas with industry associations helps us
in dealing with that issue of constant change. Because, as the
employers help to define the constant change, we can keep our
focus on the training programs and hitting the targets.
A real challenge for community colleges now, we were
talking about at the break, is the simultaneous challenges of
the increase in demand. As I mentioned, in North Carolina we
have a 28 percent increase since the recession started. The
budget challenges that we like everyone else is facing, but
then the real necessity to constantly be innovating in areas--
for instance, energy efficiency. We have to move energy
efficiency ideas into HVAC programs and into automotive
programs.
So a real challenge for us is to be able to fly the plane
and redesign the plane and insert new parts in the plane all at
the same time. And that is where we struggle. That is where
programs like the Perkins funding and others play an important
role in helping us to have some of that resource to be able to
do that.
Ms. Velazquez. Yes, Ms.----
Ms. McNelly. If I may. One additional aspect to
certifications that benefits particularly small businesses is
the ability to assess a set of knowledge. So that if technology
has in fact training, you are not going to go back and retrain
them on basic health and safety if they have been certified in
it. You are going to get them to what is actually that 20
percent change in technology. So in working through our
Nation's community colleges, which we really think are on the
front lines of redeveloping our Nation's workforce, it gives
them the opportunity to then customize and specialize what I
refer to as that 20 percent difference.
When 80 percent of the core has remained the same but 20
percent has changed, there is still a 20 percent barrier to
employment. Grounding in industry based credentials allows
individuals to step out of what they already know and really
train and accelerate back into employment with that difference,
and I think that helps with giving good guidance as Scott and
his team are trying to hit the target.
Ms. Velazquez. Yes.
Mr. Watkins. Just a quick point to add to that. Coming from
the small business sector and also from the IT field, it is
interesting that we actually provide services for local health
care and education systems. And I think the biggest thing in
the IT field especially, since it is a vastly growing market,
is getting it from the consumer to the people providing the
services to the people training the program. Streamlining those
targets and needs to each individual thing, I think that is
going to be one of the key factors.
Mr. Tadajewski. One of the things that we are working with
NC3 is we have centers of excellence around this country. If
you look at the middle part of the United States--Wichita,
Oklahoma, where I am from--there is a lot of aviation. The same
out in Seattle, North Carolina. But we also have community
colleges across the country that have a lot of small businesses
that support those industries. So this is one example to where,
when we develop some curriculum, training materials, knowledge,
how do we work with small businesses in these areas.
One of the things NC3 is doing is to make sure we share
that with these small businesses and other colleges around the
country so that they don't have to reinvent the wheel. So
whether it is certifications--certifications is one part of it.
But to sustain it, how do you help your instructor become a
power user? How do you integrate that model in there without
having to restart over? Because, again, that small business
owner has been mentioned. It has a lot of work to do, and they
need to be able to walk into that college president's office
and say, let us get this implemented.
Ms. Velazquez. And, Dr. Ralls, we heard how many--the
numbers are increasing in terms of people that lost their jobs
and they are going for training programs. Do you have any
metrics that measures success in terms of not the numbers
getting to the program but in terms of job placement and job
retention?
Mr. Ralls. Well, our primary focus within our system now is
student success. While we see huge numbers in terms of our
registration lines, what we believe is we need to have those
large numbers in our graduation lines, whether they be through
a certification or 2-year degree or moving on to a university.
So that is something we are working closely towards.
But, obviously, for community colleges, in a world where
the job opportunities are not as great, everyone is facing the
challenge of students completing programs and concern about
what they move into. But I do think we find opportunities for
success, and I will give you an example.
Two years ago, as I mentioned in North Carolina earlier, we
pulled together to design very quickly, pulling together
existing programs that we already had into a new form of
program. We called it Jobs Now. It was a way in which we took
existing things that we had and said let us provide a 6-month
opportunity where students can gain a recognized industry
certification, career readiness certification, which is part of
the NAM system, as well as employability skills; and we want to
design that all within 6 months.
Then we did research. Before the recession, what were the
jobs, where the gaps were, what could you do that in. And we
gave the opportunity to the colleges, too, to define what is
the most important opportunities that you think coming out of
the recession will be there.
Now, what we found is that colleges--if you looked at the
types of programs they were putting together, the five most
popular--three were health care, they were nursing assistant,
phlebotomy; the other two were welding and heating and air
conditioning programs, but a new way of delivering. And what we
found is that with the Workforce Investment Act students who
were funded through the Workforce Investment Act--and this has
only been within 2 years that this program has been in
existence--54 percent of those who participated are already
employed. We would certainly like for that to be 100 percent.
But in that environment, with a program that has only been in
existence in 2 years and rethinking that, we think that is
pretty good. And I think the focus was how do you accelerate
and how do you target to where you think the jobs will be,
tying the economic goals with the workforce development goals.
Ms. Velazquez. Do you have any comments on that?
Ms. McNelly. Just one enhancement. I was with a group of
community college presidents yesterday. These are self-
organized college presidents that represent auto communities in
transition, and it was Missouri and Wisconsin and Ohio. The
entire focus was on industry based credentials and how you, in
fact, take that acceleration market and apply it. There were a
number of presentations that as I sat and listened where they
were starting to track metrics associated with both not just
traditional academic metrics that Scott and his team are
accountable for legislatively but equally in certifications and
in job placements.
One of the presidents, Dr. Bryan Albrecht from Gateway
Technical College, talked about a boot camp model that they
have in Wisconsin. I think he said his placement was north of
90 percent of the individuals that went through the boot camp,
and it is because the boot camp was run like a business would
be run and you had to show up on time and you had to be
engaged.
So there are, in fact, metrics that colleges are starting
to look to that accelerate student success and hard-to-serve
individuals who have been unemployed for extended periods of
time back into the workforce grounded in industry based
credentials.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, also, Ms. Ranking
member.
I kind of want to dovetail off what Ranking Member
Velazquez just asked. Do we see any metric that is out there
that sees a correlation between the atrophy of skill sets with
the length of time on unemployment? Has anyone been looking at
that?
Ms. McNelly. I will say to the best of my knowledge it
hasn't been codified in research. I asked a research question
to our Department of Education representatives yesterday in
this forum on the automotive community, just seeing that there
have been significant Federal investments in job training and
retraining. And it gives us an opportunity to start to look at
that longitudinally, but, to the best of my knowledge, they are
not tracking them yet. But I do think the opportunity exists,
and there certainly is a willingness to get to a more
integrated participant support mechanism that allows for that
to happen.
Mr. West. Mr. Watkins, a question for you. In the IT
field--my youngest daughter just started high school, and the
things that she can do with a computer is unconscionable,
especially for someone like myself. So when I think about
certification programs, I mean, is it possible we can start
getting--especially in the IT field--some of these
certification programs down even into the high school level
where we can start developing that talent even earlier instead
of waiting later?
I would like to get your thoughts on that.
Mr. Watkins. First, I would like to say that I have an 18-
month old daughter and I got her a little net book and she
seems to have outstanding--adept at using that. But interesting
that you ask that.
Michael Pinella, he is the local IT director for Holmes
County School Systems, and that is something they are already
working toward, in particular CompTIA, the certifications that
they have at a high school level that gives a great foundation
if they want to go directly into the workforce after high
school or if they want to use that as a foundation for going to
college. It is something that I think is extremely important,
and I think that that is a very good thing to do.
Mr. Ralls. I would echo. A good example of that is the
Cisco programs. Cisco academies will have regional academies
and you will have high-school-based academies that are
cooperating with community colleges and moving onto the
universities with CC&A and CC&P.
And another thing about certifications that I think helps
in this process is it is based on competency. It is not based
on seat time. So if a student gets a certification in high
school and a CC&A, there is no reason they have to get a CC&A
when they get to college. And so we can be more efficient about
education in that regard because we have trust in the standards
that are out there. In these cases, standards that are defined
by industry.
Ms. McNelly. We actually have an example in San Antonio,
Texas, with a career academy high school that is training
individuals. They happen to support the aviation and aerospace
industry and workforce, and we had the opportunity bring one of
the young women to Washington. And not only did she come, she
is a first-generation college goer now. She has graduated from
high school. But she graduated from high school with industry
certification and college credit. And it was 36 college credit
hours that she walked into that community college with.
Not only that, she is employed with an employer who in fact
is helping to support her postsecondary education. And this in
a family environment that didn't necessarily have an
opportunity to understand the importance of postsecondary
education, and she will be the first college graduate.
And industry based certifications linked to employment, a
number of our employers all invest in continuing education for
their employees; and having that link and that opportunity
really helps create and strengthen the future for those that
traditionally have not had access.
Mr. Tadajewski. If I could add to that. One of the things
that we are working on is, if you think about, especially in
our sixth, seventh, and eighth grade areas, we know we lose a
lot of kids in math. Okay? For the math teacher today, they try
to introduce them to--with the use of calculators, algebraic
equations, and those type of things.
One of the things we are doing--or going to be doing is
through our community college--because this is part of their
feeder system as well--is to bring an electric multimeter, a
digital multimeter into those classrooms. Why? A multimeter is
really just another calculator, except it gives you an actual
measurement and gives you actual relevancy that every small
business owner can participate, come in, and team teach--a lot
of things to integrate that, to bring those certifications in,
as well as keep those young people in school.
So there are things like that that are applied. You can
apply that to torque, all kind of things that impact
manufacturing, small businesses, computers, assemblies, all
those type of things. So, yes, it is absolutely important if we
are going to change the dropout rate.
Mr. West. And I think you just hit on the critical aspect.
We have to make education, even in high school, relevant. It is
not just teaching the theory. Now we need to talk about the
practical application thereof with the local private sector so
that we can start growing that talent that can go into that
private sector. And every kid does not have to go to college,
but they can have a certain skill set. They can be a
contributing member to their community.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Velazquez; and I would like to thank our panelists for their
testimony today.
I would like to make it clear from the outset that I agree
with many of the points that you have raised, that our Nation's
educational systems need to be reformed to reflect the
realities of a 21st century economy, and appreciate the
valuable services that you provide to that end. Our national
systems simply must keep pace with technological innovation or
we will find ourselves in an even worse workforce readiness
situation than we are in now.
We used to live in an America where an individual with just
a high school diploma and a healthy work ethic could get a good
middle-class job that could sustain a family. These families
formed the backbone of our Nation's middle class. However, this
is increasingly no longer the case due in large part but not--
absolutely not limited to inevitable advances in technology.
So, that being said, what I am having an issue with is the
basic macroeconomic situation. Our consumer-spending-based
economy finds itself in a vicious cycle where the overall lack
of jobs feeds into an anemic consumer spending which in turn
perpetuates our bleak job situation. For every heartening story
like that of Tim Price which Dr. Ralls shared with us, there
are tragically many more stories of individuals who are now
saddled with debt from attending universities, trade schools,
and other job training programs with the hope of improving
their prospects yet continue to find themselves unemployed. Tax
rates are at a historic low and interest rates are effectively
zero, yet our economy did not add any jobs in the month of
August. So my question to the panel is, what would be your
suggestion to stimulate our stagnant economy?
Ms. McNelly. I don't know that I have a silver bullet, but
I do know that education is the pathway out for a nation.
Because fundamentally we, as a nation, are doing more with
less. We have the highest productivity rates that we have ever
had. And what I do know in a manufacturing environment with big
technology is that ultimately innovation is a human process.
And in order for innovation to occur, though it may happen in a
lab in the research triangle--and I have the greatest respect
for those innovations--it truly is the frontline staff that day
in and day out notice, if I just make this slight change, the
entire process moves.
I do think that having a strong foundational workforce in
this country is critical to our long-term economic success so
innovation can happen and we can grow jobs within small and
medium manufacturers today.
And I don't have the complete answer to people pursue
careers. I think that is a right-sizing of our education
system. And part of why we selected industry based credentials
as the benchmark for academic success was because it changed
the conversation from an academic conversation to an industry
employment conversation. And those standards are updated
through the rigor of third parties on a regular basis. So they
are never out of date more than 3 years; and, you know, that is
pretty current in an education environment.
Ms. Clarke. So then let me add to the mix as the rest of
you sort of think through how you would address my comment.
Because the reality is that we have a lot of educated folks
who have been graduating over the past 5 years who have all of
the skill and ability yet they find themselves in this economy
where hiring is not taking place, right? Highly skilled from
every one of our top-notch universities down to any training
programs that may exist. If the companies aren't hiring and
these individuals are skilled, what is it? What is the mix?
What is happening? So I will shut up so that--because my time
is running out.
Mr. Watkins. You mentioned the phrase the self-feeding
anemic situation where students are leaving college, they are
in debt, jobless, how do you fix that situation. I think Roger
here mentioned earlier how it is important for--as Mr. West had
mentioned, the importance of high school students acquiring
credentials so that when they leave high school they can have
the ability to at least enter the job workforce and begin
working and paying for the school as they go or even if they
leave school to have some sort of credentials that they could
use to enter the workforce. It gives them more power over what
they are needing.
Mr. Tadajewski. I would like to add to that as, again, like
Jennifer mentioned, I don't have the silver bullet here. But I
can tell you from my experience with small business, medium
businesses, that right now, when and if they start to hire and
when they do hire, it is going to be a very evolving process,
meaning the very first people hired might have to be wearing 25
hats, just like a lot of people are wearing now today. And
having some of these skill certifications that are multiple,
transitional, transformational across different processes,
sometimes maybe even different divisions within a company, are
going to be critically important.
Because, as the economy does grow, people come into that
process, and whether they have a 4-year degree, a 2-year
degree, or a set of stackable portable credentials, as I
mentioned earlier in my testimony, is what can you do. And as a
business grows and you may be assembling one piece for 6
months, but then they may need to move you into another
position that helps with quality control or whatever it might
be.
So those stackable credentials, whether it is in the IT
industry, the automotive industry, the manufacturing,
especially in the supply chain are going to be critical so that
the transitioning workforce that is laid off right now can find
a way into this and start to see some pieces in there.
I think for small business as well, working with our
technical community colleges across the country--and we heard
from Dr. Ralls--is when they walk into these colleges today,
they have to see today and the future. And that takes
investment from what I mentioned before to the three legs and
Federal dollars to help with some of this advanced technology.
Whether it is rapid prototyping systems, five access mills,
automotive diagnostic equipment, whatever that might be, it is
going to take some investment. So when small business owners
come into that community college and they see today and they
see the future, they are knowing this is where I can get
workforce development and become productive.
Mr. Ralls. I also don't have the silver bullet. I
personally believe there are no easy answers. I think we are
through with the easy answers.
And I know that education is certainly no guarantee of a
job. And as an educator, I cannot guarantee anybody a job. If
we do our jobs well as educators and in the roles we play, then
hopefully everyone who walks through our doors has a much
better shot at a job as a result of that, and that is the best
we can do. And I think that is very important.
I think in that context, too, it is important that we value
all types of work and we value all types of colleges. Sometimes
you hear the question, I don't know that everybody should go to
college. I believe everybody should go to college, but I am
including our community colleges as colleges. Now, that doesn't
mean everybody has to get a 4-year degree, but everyone needs
to go beyond high school. For that reason, I believe everybody
should go to college. But we have to think about what college
is and what college means, and even as an educator I have to
rethink that as well. I will give you an example.
Last year, I visited every one of our 58 colleges to talk
about student success. I have been on this kick. We have to
have more college completion. I visited a welding program in
the far mountain area of our State, and the welding instructor
walked in with a stack of pay stubs. He said, I know you have
been on this completion kick; and I have got to tell you up
front, only 6 percent of our students in this welding program
complete their program. And the reason is right here, because
they are all getting paid with jobs. Now, they weren't all
working in the region. They were working all around the world.
But they were not completing their programs.
We have to step back I think sometimes and think about
education broadly. We have to think about community colleges in
the mix of higher education, which sometimes doesn't happen.
And we have to think of the value of all work and how it plays
into job opportunities, and sometimes when we get into our
credentialism in different ways that doesn't happen. So I think
that is important.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. I would like to thank all of you for
appearing here today. You have obviously given us a lot of
insight into the private sector and some of the job training
opportunities that are out there. But it is very insightful.
I would ask unanimous consent that all members have 5
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record.
Without objection, that is so ordered.
And, with that, again we appreciate you all. Some of you
came in a long ways, and we very much appreciate it. Sorry for
the vote interruption.
This hearing is adjourned. [Whereupon, at 2:39 p.m., the
Committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


