- BEYOND THE SIZE STANDARDS: SUSTAINABILITY OF SMALL BUSINESS GRADUATES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BEYOND THE SIZE STANDARDS: SUSTAINABILITY OF SMALL BUSINESS GRADUATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 14, 2011

__________

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TONGRESS.#13

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-033
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov/house

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
71-177                  WASHINGTON : 2009
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
ROBERT SCHILLING, Illinois

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
JANICE HAHN, California
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, Chief Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Graves, Hon. Sam.................................................     1
Velazquez Hon. Nydia.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Hon. Gerry Connolly, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington,
DC.............................................................     3
Ms. Tonya M. Speed, Executive Director, Mid-Tier Advocacy,
Washington, DC.................................................     7
Mr. Christopher Yukins, Professor of Government Contracts Law,
Co-Director of the Government Procurement Law Program, George
Washington University, Washington, DC..........................     9
Mr. Michael D. Frisbey, Government Suppliers and Associates,
Knoxville, TN..................................................    11
Margot Dorfman, CEO, U.S. Women's Chamber of Commerce,
Washington, DC.................................................    13

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Hon. Gerry Connolly, U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.............................................    28
Ms. Tonya M. Speed, Executive Director, Mid-Tier Advocacy,
Washington, DC.............................................    31
Mr. Christopher Yukins, Professor of Government Contracts
Law, Co-Director of the Government Procurement Law Program,
George Washington University, Washington, DC...............    47
Mr. Michael D. Frisbey, Government Suppliers and Associates,
Knoxville, TN..............................................    62
Margot Dorfman, CEO, U.S. Women's Chamber of Commerce,
Washington, DC.............................................    69
Questions for the Record:
Owens, Hon. Bill.............................................    73
Answers for the Record:
Mr. Michael D. Frisbey, Government Suppliers and Associates,
Knoxville, TN..............................................    74
Additional Materials for the Record:
Statement of Mid-Tier Advocacy...............................    76

BEYOND THE SIZE STANDARDS: SUSTAINABILITY OF SMALL BUSINESS GRADUATES

----------                              --
---

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:09 p.m., in room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Sam Graves (Chairman
of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Bartlett, Chabot, West,
Ellmers, Hanna, Schilling, Velazquez, Critz, Altmire, Clarke,
Chu, and Keating.
Also Present: Representative Mike Rogers of Alabama.
Chairman Graves. Good afternoon, everyone. We will call
this hearing to order. And before we get started, I want to
welcome our newest member to the Committee, Representative Bob
Schilling from Illinois. He is a small business owner and
should be a great asset to the Committee. Welcome, Bob, and
glad to have you on board.
We are here today to talk about what happens to companies
once they outgrow the Small Business Administration's
definition of small. According to the Small Business Act, a
small business is one that is independently owned and operated
and which is not dominant in its field of operation. The Small
Business Administration further restricts the definition by
applying size standards which cap the number of employees or
the annual--or the amount of annual receipts a firm may have if
it wishes to qualify as small. One reason for the definitions
is to establish which companies will have access to small
business government contracting programs.
As our country spent over half a trillion dollars through
Federal contracts last year, and given that there is a goal of
awarding 23 percent of those dollars to small businesses, prime
contractors, access to these programs translates into real
opportunities for small firms and it also creates tension. What
happens to firms when they no longer qualify as small,
according to the SBA size standards, but which still meet the
Small Business Act definition of small.
I am going to be joined today--or we are--on the dais by
Congressman Mike Rogers, who has been detained right now at a
markup. He should be here any minute. And our first witness is
Congressman Gerry Connolly. Both of these gentlemen have seen
the challenges faced by firms that are independently owned,
operated, and not dominant in their field of operations when
they outgrow the SBA size standards. Consequently, both of my
colleagues have proposed pilot programs to address the
challenges facing medium-sized businesses. I look forward to
hearing more about their proposals.
As this Committee considers these proposals, we do so with
two mandates in mind. First, any medium-sized pilot must
benefit taxpayers and the government. Even the best-crafted
pilots will incur costs and create an additional requirement
for contracting personnel.
The second mandate is fundamental to this Committee. We
have to protect small businesses so that they continue to
create jobs, introduce innovations and increasing competition.
I strongly believe in the value of a vigorous small business
contracting community and advocate increases in the small
business goal from 23 percent to 25 percent. But at this time,
the administration is awarding only as little as 20 percent of
the prime contracts to small firms. Given that the current
small business goals are not being met, we have to figure out
how to ensure that a new program for larger businesses is not
going to make it harder for smaller businesses to compete.
With that, I am going to thank ahead of time all of our
witnesses for being here today on the first and second panel. I
will now yield to Ranking Member Velazquez for her opening
statement.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For small
businesses, having the Federal Government as a customer often
means the difference between failure and success. For an early-
stage firm, Federal projects can be a reliable revenue source,
helping them stay solvent as they expand their client base.
Equally important, unlike their larger competitors, when a
small firm secures a Federal contract, the influx of new work
inquires them to add employees to their payroll. If we want to
generate new employment opportunities for Americans, breaking
down the bias to small business competition in the Federal
marketplace will be key.
Unfortunately, for entrepreneurs looking to tap into the
Federal market, significant hurdles remain. The SBA's annual
scorecard continues to find that the Federal Government is
falling short of its 23 percent goals for procurement action
that should go to small firms. In fact, for many agencies, the
level of contracting for small firms seems to have dropped
between fiscal year 2009 and 2010, exactly the direction we
should not be headed in.
Agencies are also expected to meet certain goals for
enterprises owned by women and service-disabled veterans, yet
for prime contracts in 2010, the Federal Government came up
short.
While the obstacles keeping smaller firms out of the
Federal marketplace are many, the practice of contract bundling
is one of the most prominent. When small firms' procurement
actions are lumped together into a single large contract, it
may result in less work for Federal bureaucrats, but also means
less opportunity for small firms. In fact, for every $100 in
contracts that are bundled, entrepreneurs lose $33 in business.
That is adding up to billions of dollars that could be creating
additional jobs for our Nation.
While this Committee wants to do everything possible to
help businesses of all size foster job growth, the record makes
it clear we must finish the task at hand, making the Federal
marketplace fairer for small businesses. If we are to explore
methods for creating new venues for larger firms,, it is
critical that we keep in mind a number of key principles. Size
standards remain a critical measurement stake not only when it
comes to competing for government work but qualifying for other
benefits like technical assistance in government work, for
qualifying for technical assistance or the SBA's capital access
program. Any steps that begin undermining this system in order
to generate new opportunities for medium-size companies run the
risk of creating more problems than they solve.
It has also become clear, thanks to this Committee's work
and numerous GAO investigations, that large businesses are
siphoning off contracts which should go out to small business.
The GAO has repeatedly found that the HUBZone program is rife
with fraud and abuse. Even more disturbing, the Committee's
investigative work has uncovered numerous cases where veteran
entrepreneurs lose work to dishonest big companies that game
the system. Given this shortcoming, it will seem that a more
immediate priority may be needed to be ensuring current set-
aside programs function as intended before we start creating
new ones.
Mr. Chairman, in every previous recession, small business
has been the drivers of our economy, creating new jobs and
restoring America to prosperity. As we contemplate changes to
the size standard system, and new initiatives for medium-size
businesses, we can never lose sight of the vital role small
firms play in our economy and how procurement policy can help
them create new jobs. With that I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much, Ranking Member.
And at this time, I am going to introduce our first
witness, Congressman Gerry Connolly from Virginia. In addition
to being sponsor of H.R. 1812, the Small Business Growth Act,
Congressman Connolly is the ranking member on the Subcommittee
for Technology, Information Policy and Intergovernment
Relations and Procurement Reform on the Oversight and
Government Reform Committee. He also serves as co-chair of the
Smart Contracting Caucus. Welcome. And I look forward to
hearing your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. GERRY CONNOLLY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
having me here today. Ranking Member Velazquez and members of
the Committee, I really appreciate being here. I have a
prepared statement and I am not going to read it to you. I will
submit it for the record.
I listened carefully to the opening statements,
particularly of Ms. Velazquez, and I looked at some of the
testimony you are going to hear from. And let me just say that
some of the fears expressed are understandable, but I think if
you look at the respective bills Mr. Rogers and I have
introduced, they are limited pilot programs and they keep the
small business set-aside entirely intact.
You are going to hear testimony, apparently, from the
Women's Chamber of Commerce. Their testimony, their assertions,
are absolutely false. My legislation does not in any way change
the size standards of the existing program and in fact
explicitly has a provision that this pilot program at GSA for
mid-tier companies to see if it works cannot take away any
business that otherwise would go to a qualified set-aside small
business. Period. And I want to make that very clear from the
outset.
I also want to talk about why I introduced this bill and I
assume Mr. Rogers has a similar experience. His bill is limited
to DOD. My bill is limited to GSA. And I had a number of small
businesses, minority-owned businesses in my district, come to
me and they have been successful. So they are graduating from
the small business status and the problem is that we sent them
into Federal contracting limbo on the next day. So they now
find themselves still relatively modest in size, albeit
successful, in part because of the programs this Committee has
helped to create and foster and needs to do more of, as Ms.
Velazquez says.
But now you have got a minority-owned business successful
in that category that has to compete with the big guys. And
what is very interesting is they don't get any help. They are
now graduated. On day one. And frankly, many of them find
themselves in an impossible situation because they are
competing against multibillion-dollar entities who have all the
resources in the world to do red team, to put together
professional proposal writing to make sure they are scouring
for opportunities in the Federal Register and the like.
And what happens to these midterm companies? Often they get
just bought up or they go out of business. And so all your hard
work in fostering and encouraging, correctly, opportunities,
diverse opportunities in America for smaller businesses,
especially minority, female, and veterans-owned businesses,
sometimes gets blown away the minute they graduate because
there is nothing for them in terms of transition.
And so my minority-owned Federal contractors who have been
part of the small business set-aside came and said, ``Can't you
try to address this? We are not asking for permanent help, but,
gee, to become, say, a $30 million business and now we are
expected to compete with a $20 billion business. Little wonder
that your CSIS study shows--if you look at the bar graph they
have in their study for this Committee, the big guys are
crowding out everybody else. They are getting bigger. The small
business set-aside companies are sort of holding their own in
that bar graph. There may be a little improvement up and down a
little bit, but holding their own.
It is the mid-tier category that is actually shrinking. The
Federal Government doesn't keep accurate data on mid-tier
companies, so it is a little hard to provide a lot of empirical
data. But anecdotally I can tell you, at least in my district--
and I represent a lot of Federal contractors--this is an
increasing source of concern. So that was the genesis of the
program. I took into account the concerns, legitimately raised
by Ms. Velazquez and others. I read the Committee memo, and I
thought it was a very thoughtful memo by staff, that there are
still some issues that we want to work with you in terms of the
definition of mid-size. I kind of looked at it from an IT
perspective and kept the definition at the employee number
size, because I am only dealing with GSA and I am largely
dealing with IT contracts.
But I understand, as the staff points out in their memo to
this Committee, well, there is a lot of diversity and there are
a lot of different definitions. And I do actually take into
account the staff's concern about one size fits all. We can't
do that. I understand that. You can't do it in the small
business set-aside either.
There is a multiplicity of Federal agencies with lots of
different realities in Federal agencies. But my plea to this
Committee is can't we, on a very limited basis, create a pilot
to see if we can do some good and that preserves and enhances
the minority-owned companies you have worked so hard to
incubate and foster, as opposed to just setting them out in a
Darwinian world where, day one, they are expected to compete
with big guys who have mega-resources, which frankly they
cannot compete. I believe if we can do that and succeed in that
goal, it is a good deal for taxpayers; it will foster
innovation because a lot of times, especially with the smaller
contracts, it is the smaller innovative companies that actually
are the creative ones who are providing new solutions. And I
think it would be win-win in terms of fostering and enhancing
the legitimate goals of this Committee to create small
minority-owned--female owned--veteran and disabled veteran-
owned businesses as part of the fabric of American contracting.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would be glad to entertain any
questions.
Chairman Graves. Thanks, Congressman Connolly.
[The statement of Mr. Connolly follows on page 28.]
Chairman Graves. I will turn to Mike Rogers, our guest
today. If you have anything, Mike, you want to add, or
questions. And then I am going to turn to the ranking member.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much, first, for letting me sit
in on this hearing. And I share most of everything that he
said, the same observations as Mr. Connolly mentioned. My
amendment really only focuses with the DOD. And I don't
represent a lot of DOD contractors, but we have a lot of them
in Huntsville, a lot of missile defense. And exactly what Mr.
Connolly said is happening. We have these very creative, very
innovative technology companies that are nurtured under the
current system, but once they cross that threshold of 1,000
employees or $30 million in gross revenues, they are on their
own, and you can't compete with Raytheon or Boeing or one of
these major corporations at that level yet. And invariably they
get bought out and that stifles the very creativity and the
flexibility small companies have. And frankly, they lose a lot
of brain drain because a lot of their tech people don't want to
work for a big company. They like being in the smaller
environment.
So what I am after, as a member of the Armed Services
Committee, is for us to nurture these companies to get up to
around 2,500 where they can possibly be players in competition
for large contracts, because the fact is in the DOD there are
four or five companies and they own this place. And they need
some competition. It is good. It makes them be better and it
helps us, as the government, get better deals.
So that is my motivation and I hope that this Committee can
embrace the concept and let us just see how it works for a few
years. And with that, I yield back. Thank you again for letting
me visit.
Chairman Graves. Ranking Member Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Connolly. I do share your concern, because thanks to the
Committee work. And for 14 years I have been producing a
scorecard report and bringing in the administrator and all the
big offenders, starting with the Department of Defense and
Education, and even Small Business Administration, failing to
achieve the contracting goals set up by Congress. But since it
has been set up, it has never been achieved. And that means
small business has been losing out; yet because of the
proactive work of this Committee, they have been more
responsive in achieving those contracting goals. And the latest
one for 2010 was 22.6. So we haven't achieved the 23 percent.
And it means that small businesses are losing out billions of
dollars in contracting opportunities.
So my question to you is businesses that are other than
small already receive 78 percent of Federal contracts, while
small businesses have yet to attain the 23 percent goal. So the
duration of your pilot program is 5 years. At the end of this
period, how will you measure whether this program has been
successful?
Mr. Connolly. Well, I would want to--first of all, I take
seriously your implied concern this could be a zero-sum game,
and I don't want it to be. I believe the two, in fact, are
extensions of each other. I think we can and should try to
reach the 23 percent goal and try to help graduates of that
program stay in business as minority, veteran-owned, female-
owned businesses, as opposed to becoming----
Ms. Velazquez. The question is: Is this the right place?
Mr. Connolly. Is what the right place?
Ms. Velazquez. To establish a pilot program that will take
awards, contracts, away from small business.
Mr. Connolly. No. I would say that it doesn't. I think you
could have a pilot program that actually enhances--because you
are trying to build on the successes you are creating and want
to enhance on the small business set-aside. It is not a zero-
sum game where if we create any kind of pilot program from mid-
tier necessarily that takes away from small- and minority-owned
businesses. I don't believe that is true. I believe experience
will prove that it is not true.
Ms. Velazquez. You are aware that GSA implemented a
training program that is directed at providing technical
assistance to those who graduate?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Velazquez. Why can't we wait to see the type of
results?
Mr. Connolly. Well, again you could. It might be--all I
can--Ms. Velazquez, just as your experience validates and
directs where you go on issues, I have to tell you as somebody
who has spent 20 years as a Federal contractor, including for
big guys and including for little guys, and having to implement
these goals and programs in the private sector until the day I
got here, and now hearing from my constituents in a district
that probably has more Federal contractors than anybody else,
it is my small, minority businesses that are clamoring for some
relief from the mid-tier category.
That is why I think there is a void that a pilot program,
which is modest and not too dangerous or expensive, can
address. And then we can learn whether it works or not.
Ms. Velazquez. In other contracting programs such as the
service-disabled veterans, GAO has found that there has been
some problem with self-certification. In many cases,
investigations have shown that businesses did not meet all
necessary eligibility requirements, even though they self-
certified otherwise.
It appears that your program would allow for the same sort
of self-certification. So my question, knowing that this
problem exists with self-certification, how do you propose we
ensure that the representations made by participants are
accurate?
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Velazquez, from my point of view, I would
be guided by the wisdom of this Committee. So if this Committee
were uncomfortable with the self-certification process and
chose to do something else, I would certainly support that and
welcome that. I am not going to--I am not on this Committee,
and I would not substitute my judgment for that of this
Committee. So obviously if that--if you have decided that that
is a problem and has to be addressed, I would be supportive of
that.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Any other members wish to be heard, or
questions?
Mr. Connolly. Just for the record, Mr. Chairman, I want you
to know my testimony roundly praises Mr. Rogers for his
legislation. I thank all of you for your indulgence. I really
appreciate it.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much for coming and I
appreciate it.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, one more thing. May I ask
unanimous consent that a letter supportive of this effort by
the Professional Services Council be entered into the record as
part of my testimony?
Chairman Graves. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I appreciate it. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much. We will go ahead and
seat the second panel.
I want to welcome our second panel and our second group of
witnesses. And we are first going to hear from Ms. Tonya Speed.
She is the executive director of Mid-Tier Advocacy. Mid-Tier
Advocacy represents a community of small- and mid-sized firms,
providing goods and services to the Federal Government.
Welcome. And I look forward to hearing your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF TONYA M. SPEED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MID-TIER
ADVOCACY, (MTA); CHRISTOPHER YUKINS, PROFESSOR GOVERNMENT
CONTRACTS LAW, CO-DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT LAW
PROGRAM, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY; MICHAEL D. FRISBEY,
GOVERNMENT SUPPLIERS AND ASSOCIATES, KNOXVILLE, TENNESSEE, ON
BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS ASSOCIATION; AND MARGOT
DORFMAN, U.S. WOMEN'S CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

STATEMENT OF TONYA M. SPEED

Ms. Speed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Graves,
Ranking Member Velazquez, and the esteemed members of this
distinguished panel, I am honored to be here today as executive
director of Mid-Tier Advocacy to discuss the disappearing mid-
size firm and to support the Connolly bill, the Small Business
Growth Act, H.R. 1812.
The MTA represents a community of small and mid-sized firms
that provide employment for thousands of people across the
United States and across multiple industries. MTA is an
organization of the country's top veteran-owned service-
disabled, HUBZone-certified, minority-owned and women-owned
businesses. Mid-size or mid-tier refers to other than small
businesses that may have exceeded the size standard for the
industry as determined by NAICS code. They are seasoned
businesses as a result of having been in the Federal market for
10 and sometimes 30 years or more. Their revenues may range
from 10 million to 350 million and will likely employ from 100
to 2,000 people. They no longer are considered small
businesses, but neither are they large in the Federal
marketplace.
Our testimony today will attempt to focus on two points,
the disappearing mid-size business and why Congress should
protect its investment, also creating jobs to strengthen the
industrial base. We believe the standards used to define small
business by the North American Industry Classification System
better known as NAICS, are inadequate because in most cases the
NAICS code defines small business as a company that has less
than a certain threshold in annual revenues over a 3-year
average. The reality is that once any company surpasses this
standard, it is considered other than small.
One of the greatest challenges for successful small
business is to survive beyond the size standards. By its own
admission, the SBA is responsible to the public for ensuring
that size standard levels are rational and flexible enough to
reflect the effects of inflation and changing economic
conditions while promoting competitive viability among small
businesses.
We believe that the current NAICS codes classifications
fail that standard and fail the successful small emerging
business. Small businesses that grow beyond the limits set by
the NAICS codes are punished for doing what any business needs
to do, and that is simply to grow. Once they become moderately
successful in the Federal market, they are thrust into
unrestricted labor market, they must compete without the
infrastructure or the capital to compete successfully against
significantly larger businesses.
And I do have a chart that I would like to share.
Representative Connolly touched upon the differences among the
very large companies and the small business concerns that we
are really talking about. Most small businesses provide
services where the NAICS ceiling is either at 7 million or 25
million, translating to roughly 100 to 150 employees, whereas
on the chart you can see with the large integrators they have
up to 136,000 employees, on average 130,000 employees. And
these are in fact the people that--the businesses that we
represent today are in direct competition with. It is not the
very small concerns, but the much larger integrators or the
giants in the industry.
Our concern is that thousands of small businesses who have
graduated or matured have disappeared from the landscape of the
Federal marketplace. The policies that drive the standards and
the criteria and the entry level in developing firms
unfortunately stifle many of them who are achieving some modest
success. We believe standards should encourage growth by
securing balanced competition at all levels: set-up,
developing, and our matured phase.
Under the Connolly bill, mid-sized contract opportunities
would come from unrestricted procurement and not come from
small business set-asides. We believe since the government
invests in small companies, it should protect the investment
and continue to support them or at least monitor their progress
after they graduate. This makes perfect policy and economic
sense. Taxpayers want to know what sort of return they are
getting on their small business investment.
And finally, I will close by saying that MTA strongly
supports the Small Business Growth Act, H.R. 1812, because it
goes to the heart of the government can get a better return on
its small business investment. And to quote Mr. Connolly's
office: The success of these small businesses is what is
helping to drive the economic recovery. And the loss of
incentives is what is helping--is what is threatening not only
their ability to compete but also their ability to hire.
And finally again, we will also quote Mr. Graves as saying
that: The cost saving strategy can actually help Washington
address our out-of-control Federal debt and help create jobs
for all the reasons stated above. The establishment of a mid-
size business category would ensure that government would get
the best bang for its buck.
Thank you very much for allowing me to provide testimony.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Ms. Speed.
[The statement of Ms. Speed follows on page 32.]
Chairman Graves. Next, we are going to hear from Professor
Christopher Yukins. Professor Yukins teaches on government
contract formations and performance issues, anti-corruption
measures, bid challenges, and government contract litigation
and comparative issues in public procurement at the George
Washington University School of Law. Thank you for being here,
Professor.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER YUKINS

Mr. Yukins. Thank you, Chairman Graves, Ranking Member
Velazquez, members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today regarding a potential
preference for medium-sized businesses for H.R. 1812,
Congressman Connolly's pending legislation.
As Chairman Graves alluded to, I am a professor at GW Law
School and I teach procurement law there. And in the interest
of full disclosure, I should say that Ms. Northcutt was
actually counsel--is actually a former student of mine. I am
very glad to see her here today.
The problem the Committee is addressing today, the problem
of mid-sized firms in the government marketplace, really has
two different aspects. First, there is a problem of graduating
small businesses, which grow up under the protection of various
small business preference programs and then must compete as
mid-sized firms without any preferences or protections.
Second and more broadly, mid-sized firms face special
competitive obstacles in the Federal procurement market, a
market which sometimes favors the largest firms, in part
because of its steep barriers to entry. There is a perception
that mid-sized firms in general face special difficulties in
the government procurement marketplace because those mid-sized
firms do not have access to the preferences enjoyed by small
businesses and because the mid-sized firms lack the economies
of scale and sheer economic and political muscle of the largest
prime contractors.
There are three possible options to assist medium-sized
businesses. First would be to create a preference category
called medium-sized businesses. For the reasons that I will be
discussing, this option, the option of creating a category
called medium-sized businesses could create serious problems in
our international trade negotiations.
The second option would be to expand to the small-business
size standards to include medium-size businesses. This is a
technical issue, not a legal issue. And it is an issue I will
not be addressing today.
The third option is to use an innovative pilot program,
such as H.R. 1812 outline, to leverage existing mentor protege
programs to assist medium-sized firms.
Turning to the first option, the question of whether or not
mid-size firms' access to procurement contracts should be
resolved by creating a new category called medium sized
enterprises, H.R. 1812 does not squarely present this issue.
The bill does not create a new medium category of firms, but
instead creates a special pilot program for certain medium-
sized firms. But this issue is likely to arise as policy
discussions continue.
The answer to this question, whether or not to create a
special category called medium-sized firms, may lie buried in
the World Trade Organization agreement called the Government
Procurement Agreement. The WTO members, the World Trade
Organization members, that joined the Government Procurement
Agreement, which is a subset of the WTO, agreed to open their
procurement markets to vendors from other members of the GPA.
The United States is a leading member of the GPA. And in fact,
the United States has been pushing this initiative to open up
procurement markets since just after World War II.
China is negotiating accession to the GPA, and India is
likely to follow China in joining the agreement. The Government
Procurement Agreement, which has been an important part of U.S.
trade policy for many decades, is arguably the cornerstone to
opening world procurement markets for U.S. exporters over the
coming years.
The United States, when it joined the GPA, made a number of
reservations, including one vitally important to our discussion
today. The United States reserved its right to give a
preference to U.S. small businesses, even if that meant
discriminating against foreign vendors seeking to sell to
Federal agencies. The reservation which is set forth in the
United States' general notes to the Government Procurement
Agreement states that, quote, This agreement will not apply to
set-asides on behalf of small and minority businesses. So while
the United States opened up its procurement markets in general
underneath the Government Procurement Agreement, it reserved
its right to discriminate in favor of small- and minority-owned
businesses.
The United States has not reserved a right to discriminate
against foreign vendors from GPA nations with regard to medium-
sized businesses. A new unreserved U.S. preference for
procurement from medium-sized businesses would undermine the
United States' negotiating position with China and other
developing nations which are seeking broader protections for
their own emerging industries before they agree to join the
GPA.
Moreover, were the United States to create a preference for
medium-sized business, that preference could trigger a
challenge by the European Union or other GPA members under the
WTO dispute process. In sum, it could create serious trade
problems where we create this category of medium-sized
businesses.
That leaves us then with the proposed pilot program for
mentor protege participants. And I talked about some of the
practical issues in my prepared statement.
I just want to briefly touch on a couple of the issues. The
first one is whether or not the affiliation rules should apply
to companies in the pilot program. The affiliation rules say
that if a small business has an affiliation with another
company, typically through joint control, that other company's
resources should count and the small business should be
considered essentially a larger business.
There are two ways this issue could possibly arise under
this bill. The first one is if a medium-sized firm were to
reach outside to a third party and affiliate with that firm. So
a firm less than 1,500 employees, which is a medium-sized firm,
would reach to another firm, for instance, to seek additional
capital from that other firm. That could become a large
business then. That would be a serious issue that the
legislation should address.
Another possible form of affiliation, though, would be
between a mentor firm and a protege firm. And that kind of
affiliation is arguably something the legislation should
encourage. So I would argue that the legislation should allow
that form of affiliation between mentor and protege.
Mr. Chairman, I see that my time is up. I reserve the rest
of my comments to my prepared testimony. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much, Professor.
[The statement of Mr. Yukins follows on page 48.]
Chairman Graves. Next we are going to hear from our third
witness, Mr. Michael Frisbey, the founder of Government
Suppliers and Associates, Inc., of Knoxville, Tennessee. Mr.
Frisbey is testifying on behalf of the National Small Business
Association. Thanks for being here.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL D. FRISBEY

Mr. Frisbey. Thank you very much. If you hear knees
knocking, they are mine.
Good morning, Chairman Graves and Madam Velazquez. I want
to thank you first for allowing me to be here and to talk
specifically about the Small Business Growth Act. My name is
Michael Frisbey. I am a member of the National Small Business
Association. I am also a small-business government contractor
and I have 40 years of experience in government contracting
work. Again, I would like to thank you for being here.
Let me give you a little background on my company and why
we are so opposed or why the NSBA is so opposed to this pilot
program. I started the company in 2002. In 2004 we received our
first prime vendor contracts with the Department of Defense. In
2009, those contracts, those first three contracts that we won
were completed. In 2009, in open competition again, even
against unrestricted businesses, we won two more prime vendor
contracts. Those contracts today are worth $11 million.
In addition to the Department of Defense, we are a
registered supplier to 15 allied Ministries of Defense around
the world where we sell U.S.A.-made product in direct
competition against Chinese, Korean, Bangladeshian and other
foreign countries.
In 2008, my wife and I purchased the assets of Columbia
Sewing and started a new company, Government Sewing and
Apparel, LLC, which is located in Hope, Arkansas, and today
employs approximately 80 people directly, and approximately 200
people through our subcontractors. I want to try to take this
project and bring it back to reality for you. I believe that
all of us agree in that Federal procurement, if it were not for
that, there would be no small businesses.
We also believe that small businesses are a great balance
and a needed necessity in Federal contracting. Yet we talk a
lot about small-business creation. In 1997, as you mentioned,
Ms. Velazquez, the act was passed at 23 percent, and since it
was passed, we have not hit 23 percent yet. We do not need to
divide 23 percent into a new category. If the category were to
create a medium-sized program, we have no problem with it. But
to take 23 percent that the government has not yet hit and
divide it up and make it smaller, we see no value in.
I am going to give you a real-world example of what we are
up against as a small business. In August of 2010, a
solicitation was posted by the Department of Defense for a
program called MOLLE. MOLLE stands for Modular Light Load-
bearing Equipment program. This contract when awarded will
represent $98 million a year, or $297 million over the 3-year
life of the contract. MOLLE consists of 43 items, individual
items just like the two I am holding here. Each of these has
their own national stock number, each of them has their own
specification number. Those 43 items are assembled into seven
sets and used by the military: rifleman set, medium rucksack
set, large rucksack set, pistolman set, grenadier set, medic
set. All of them are individual components. They could be made
by 43 individual small businesses, the entire set-aside.
When the set-aside--when the contract was issued or when
the solicitation was issued, it was issued as unrestricted. The
justification was that all of the items had to be interoperable
and that by putting them into small businesses rather than
letting one large contractor do them, we could not assure that
these products would work together. The interoperability that
they are talking about is actually nothing more than the
purchase of a piece of 1-inch nylon elastic and being sure that
that 1-inch nylon elastic from one product slips into the
second product. That is interoperability. That is the
justification for not having it as a small business set-aside.
I want to thank personally in this hearing, Congressman
Mike Ross from the State of Arkansas, who worked diligently
with us to try to convince the Department of Defense to set
aside a part of that contract. After much back and forth with
DSCP, we were successful in getting a whopping 2.4 million, or
under 2 percent of that contract set aside for small business.
That is what small business is up against today. That is
why we don't hit 23 percent, because the large businesses do
that. That is why we are so adamantly opposed to this bill,
because we believe first and foremost, the Federal Government
must hit the 23 percent level that it set for small business
set-asides before it can consider any other type of category of
business.
And we would encourage you, as was suggested by Chairman
Graves, to not only increase--not only support the 23 percent,
but increase it. I would beg you, increase it to 25 or 30
percent. Small businesses represent 50 percent of the GDP of
this country. Small businesses represent 50 percent of the jobs
in this country, and yet all we have is 23 percent of
government contracts and that hasn't been met since 1997. I beg
you, please, do not pass H.R. 1812. It will destroy small
businesses in this country. I am a small business contractor
and if it is passed, I can assure you I will be out of business
within a year of it. Respectfully submitted. Thank you very
much.
[The statement of Mr. Frisbey follows on page 75.]
Ms. Velazquez. It is my pleasure to introduce Ms. Margot
Dorfman. Ms. Dorfman is the founder and CEO of the U.S. Women's
Chamber of Commerce. The Women's Chamber of Commerce represents
500,000 members, three-quarters of whom are small businesses
and Federal contractors. Through her leadership, this
organization has championed opportunities to increase women's
business, career and leadership advancement. Additionally, Ms.
Dorfman has done extensive background in business, including 10
years in executive positions with General Mills and other
Fortune 500 firms. Welcome, Ms. Dorfman.

STATEMENT OF MARGOT DORFMAN

Ms. Dorfman. Thank you. Chairman Graves, Ranking Member
Velazquez and members of the House Small Business Committee, I
am here today on behalf of the U.S. Women's Chamber of
Commerce, under 500,000 members, three-quarters of whom are
American business owners and Federal contractors.
The U.S. Women's Chamber of Commerce strongly opposes H.R.
1812, the Small Business Growth Act and other similar
legislation. H.R. 1812 arbitrarily and unscientifically
abandons the well-established small-business size standards
methodology which is managed by the Small Business
Administration, carving out a new contracting set-aside program
for firms that are not small.
The SBA already has tools to assist small-business growth.
First, SBA size standards methodology has scientific basis,
ongoing oversight, and includes the specific objective to
assure competition among industries. The methodology employed
by the SBA to provide small-business size standards is
scientifically sound, well documented, and includes a mandate
to foster competition.
Through the size standards process, the SBA regularly
examines the structural characteristics of industry as a way to
regularly--as a way to assess industry differences and the
overall degree of competitiveness of an industry and of firms
within the industry.
Industry structure is examined by analyzing five primary
factors: average firm size; degree of competition within an
industry; startup costs and entry barriers; distribution of
firms by size; and small business share in Federal contracts.
SBA also considers other secondary factors as they are relevant
to the industries and the interests of small businesses,
including technological change, competition among industries,
industry growth trends and impacts on SBA programs.
At the core of the whole size standards philosophy and
process is the intent of promoting industry competition, which
is why the SBA includes industry competitive analysis through
the measurement of concentration or market power to determine
the extent to which a particular industry is dominated by a few
large firms. This is also why the SBA recently increased and
continues to adjust the employee and/or revenue size number of
industry size standards, appropriately fine-tuning industry
size standards to reflect the current competitive landscape.
In other words, the SBA is already making sure that the
definition of ``small'' for each industry encompasses the
larger firms so as to assure a strong competitive climate.
Additionally, the Federal Government is not meeting its
statutory obligations and goals for contracting with small
businesses. These ongoing shortfalls should be of paramount
concern for Congress. Over the last 5 years alone, American
small businesses have lost $22 billion in revenues as the
Federal Government has consistently failed to achieve the
statutory requirement to place 23 percent of prime contracts
within small businesses. This is a horrific loss of opportunity
for small businesses, their employees, their families, their
communities and the American economy. And within the prime
contracts that are placed with small businesses, the goals for
emerging market businesses like women-owned small businesses,
are missed year after year.
Over the last 5 years, American women-owned small
businesses have lost over $29 billion in revenues as the
Federal Government has failed to achieve the goal of 5 percent
prime contracting with women-owned firms.
So what can be done to assure the growth of small
businesses that fall within industry size standards? Congress
can take action in a number of ways to support businesses that
do qualify as small to assure maximum growth:
First, take the caps off the contracting limits within the
women-owned small business set-aside program.
Increase the overall goals for contracting with American
small businesses to a percentage that is more in alignment with
our numbers.
Increase small business access to capital and compel banks
to lend.
Continue to fight to eradicate bundles, big business sole-
source contracts and fraud.
And stop inappropriate in-sourcing. This practice is
destroying opportunities for thousands of American small
businesses. And finally, remove the goaling exclusions that
limit the ``small business eligible'' dollars and drive down
our opportunities for growth. And I have a list of these at the
end of my testimony.
Thank you for the opportunity to share our views. We
strongly encourage Congress not to step outside the well-
established small business size standards. Instead we ask you
to focus on assuring that businesses that are small secure
access to larger contracts so that we might continue to grow
and prosper and drive economic growth for the American economy.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Dorfman follows on page 70.]
Chairman Graves. Thank you to all of our witnesses. We are
going to start questions with Mr. West.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Velazquez. And, Mr. Frisbey, go Big Orange. It is football
season. We have got to beat these Gators this weekend.
As I sit here and listen to the testimony, in my simple
Southern way, it seems like we are talking about hell,
purgatory and heaven. Small business owners operate, it seems,
in a hell. And we have got to make sure that we prop them up
and we protect them and enable them to be successful. Because
as you say, they are an economic engine.
But yet I would think that we have some of these small
businesses that do want to graduate maybe out of hell and get
to purgatory; but yet in purgatory they find themselves, you
know, kind of left out to hang. And I don't want to see us
create this gap where all of a sudden these businesses that
have grown become mid-size businesses and then they fall off
the map and then that creates a new problem. And, of course,
heaven represents the big guys.
So I guess, as my question is to the panel, what do we do
to make sure that we continue to protect--we have got to get to
those right levels, the 23 percent contracts for small
businesses as you talked about for women-owned businesses.
But what do we do to also make sure that we incentivize
growth for small businesses to get out of hell, to get into
purgatory, and they can stay there and at least we can have
that vibrant--if we wanted to talk about a middle class--but a
middle operating range for businesses here in America.
So my question is: What do we do to make sure we are
incentivizing coming out of that small business to get into the
medium-range business, but then not taking away from those
small businesses?
Mr. Frisbey. Could I respond to that?
Mr. West. Any way we want. Of course, you are a Tennessee
Vol, so you get to go first.
Mr. Frisbey. I think that if you look at what we talked
about before, you have got 23 percent for small business and
the balance for large business. To create a medium-size
category, to me in my mind, makes perfect sense. But it needs
to be a separate category. It does not need to come out of the
23 percent, that small business set-aside. If we were hitting
23 percent regularly and had done it for a number of years, you
wouldn't hear from me because I would say that is--we are
accomplishing our objective. But when you haven't hit the 23
percent, to turn around and take that large business category
and let them compete on ours, just to make the number, makes no
sense.
And I will put it in perspective for you. When we talked
about 1,500 people--now, I don't know the category, but I am
out of the textile clothing and uniform business--there are
four large companies that dominate the uniform and textile and
clothing business as primes to the Department of Defense,
companies like American Apparel and Proffer, for example. At
1,500 people, guess what? They are now small. They just wiped
us out. We don't even exist anymore, because there is no way I
can compete with them.
Ms. Speed. May I also respond?
Mr. West. [Nonverbal response.]
Ms. Speed. In all due respect to my esteemed panelists
here, and to Mr. Frisbey in particular, as Mr. Connolly
described his bill, H.R. 1812, and as we interpret it, it
doesn't take from small business concerns. First of all, what
the bill is attempting to do is to allow a growth path or a
transition for companies who have already exceeded their NAICS
codes. They are no longer considered small, but they are not
large enough to compete on the large-scale business with
Northrop Grumman and SAIC and others.
So what we are looking at is--I think I am hearing from
most of the folks here today, the goal is one issue, and that
needs to be addressed. But how we allow businesses to grow is
yet in itself another issue. And this bill is a pilot which
simply is designed to protect small business by allowing small
business to continue to grow up to 1,500 based on an employee-
sized standard that currently I believe falls in
telecommunications today. So it is not even a new standard. It
is something that does exist. But now we are utilizing it in
this pilot to allow more businesses to grow up to 1,500.
They are also required under the pilot to mentor to other
small business. Mentoring is important because it allows for
that business to gain the necessary infrastructure. What we
find in this range of mid-sized companies or larger ``smalls''
is that they have added benefit in terms of their accounting
systems and infrastructure, and they can reach back to help
other small businesses to be able to gain those same types of
things, to strengthen their infrastructure.
And I believe someone mentioned the business breakthrough
at GSA. That is aimed at those businesses, by the way, that
were small, and they accelerated so quickly, they blew through
their NAICS Code size standards, but they still operate as a
small business but not as a medium-sized business. They don't
have the infrastructure in place.
And so the business breakthrough program is designed to aid
those businesses with needed technical assistance and the types
of things that they can't get otherwise, because they no longer
qualify as a small business. So we are really looking at a
growth path. And I recede.
Ms. Dorfman. I would say the core issue is the bundling
issue, because the contracts have been set aside for small
businesses, and then those that are not set aside for small
businesses are typically quite large, and a medium-sized
business could never attain that. So I believe that we keep the
small business set-asides for small businesses and then take
care of the anti-bundling, remove the bundling as an issue.
Then those who do graduate into a larger business, but not the
super-large, would have a vehicle to then grow their business.
Mr. Frisbey. Ms. Velazquez also hit the nail on the head. I
have got 40 years in the defense business. I have seen
firsthand the fraud and the manipulation that goes on. When you
have got a company that goes out of the small business
category--there are a number of them and I am not going to name
them here--but there are a number that will try to set up
businesses under wives, kids, family members, other company
names, just to try to get around the small business standards.
I have seen factories where orange construction barrier
tape was run through the middle of the factory, 200 operators
on one side, 200 on the other. When you push to find out why
that is there, they are mentoring another small business on the
other side of the construction barrier tape. There is not the
enforcement there to even really aggressively go after
enforcing the small business standards and we compete against
it all the time.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Yukins, under
the Women's Procurement Program, the contracts eligible for
restricted competition are limited to those valued at less than
5 million for manufacturing and less than 3 million for all
other contracts. The mid-tier contracting programs that have
been suggested have no caps on the value of contracts that can
be awarded through restricted competition methods.
Can you think of any policy that will justify why mid-sized
companies should be allowed to receive contracts of unlimited
value through restricted competition, and the value of
contracts that can be awarded to small businesses through these
methods are constrained?
Mr. Yukins. The problem is even bigger than that, which is
that the way that the pilot is set up, all contracts will be
subject to full and open competition, which will presumably
exclude the IDEQ and the GSA schedule contracts. All contracts
that are subject to full and open competition would
presumptively have to be considered first for this program. So
you could have a huge--potentially billions of dollars for
contracting funneled through this program.
It would be very important for the Committee to consider
ways to constrain, because otherwise you could have a few firms
that are inside the mentor protege program suddenly become
enormously wealthy. It is as though you are taking a river and
channeling that river through a very small little stream. And
the people who happen to be sitting in that stream are suddenly
very, very wealthy. So your question is very important because
the way the legislation is set up right now, all the contracts
are pushed through that little tiny stream, the mentor protege
program.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. I raised the issue with
Congressman Connolly about the fact that large businesses have
presented themselves as small businesses and are taking
contracts away from small businesses. And this has happened,
and it has been documented with an investigation conducted by
the GAO and the SBA's IG. So this is all happening despite the
fact that there are several monitoring devices in the program,
such as annual audits and site visits.
So my question to you is: What kind of fraud prevention
tools would be necessary in this pilot program to ensure that
the targeted mid-sized businesses are receiving the contracts
instead of large cooperations?
Mr. Yukins. The logical solution would be to subject the
companies in this program to size protest, a normal SBA size
protest process.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. So my question to you is: Which agency
will handle that?
Mr. Yukins. The size protest could be handled in the first
instance by SBA. The problem is that SBA--the size standards
that you would apply only apply to small businesses, so the
size standards would have to be revised. And then when you
apply the size standards to these mid-sized companies, the size
standards are incredibly complex and it adds a layer of
complexity of management difficulty for those mid-sized
companies.
Ms. Velazquez. Given the constraints, budget-type
constraints of the Small Business Administration, they don't
have the resources and manpower to monitor and make sure that
the 23 percent contracting goal is achieved. So now we are
going to give this other responsibility.
Mr. Yukins. That is definitely an issue with whether or not
they have the capacity, and also whether or not the mid-size
firms have the capacity to deal with the very complex size
standards.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Speed, in your testimony you mentioned that a mid-tier
program will strengthen the industrial base of these
businesses, create jobs and encourage competition.
Has your organization done any research as to how
significant impact of changes we can expect to see with the
introduction of these types of programs? What hard data do you
have? What type of research has been conducted?
Ms. Speed. That is a wonderful question, Ms. Velazquez. I
would say we haven't done internal research per se, but there
is anecdotal research based on other relationships that have
been built. Again, these companies and MTA is comprised of are
very mature companies; they have been around 10--some almost 30
years, and they have understood and have operated even with the
constraints that policy has today, that it is all about
building relationships. And along the way, what we have gleaned
from that is in terms of mentoring other companies, that gives
the assistance that they need, that lends itself to greater
capacity for those smaller firms. But also with the medium-size
firm, they are the ones who can actually go out and hire. When
a contract is awarded, and I believe there have been several in
the past, that are larger-sized contracts from the unbundling
days--but now they are all bundled--there was work. And the
bottom line is there just isn't enough work.
Ms. Velazquez. Ms. Speed, in a recent article in Washington
technology, you stated that mid-sized companies were a key
element to the Federal marketplace, and these companies are apt
to hire more people than small businesses. However, research
has shown that small businesses have created more than two-
thirds of new jobs in the last 15 years.
Additionally, in a study referenced by Professor Yukin's
testimony, job losses were found to be attributable to low-
impact firms with more than 500 employees. Thus, following your
logic, shouldn't we instead put renewed effort in small
business contracting programs since these are the companies
that are responsible for most of the job creation in this
country?
Ms. Velazquez. So one of the imperatives that we are faced
with here in this Committee is how can we get the best bang for
the buck, right? And the President announced his proposal and
initiatives. We need to create jobs. So based on the data that
we have, it seems to me that resources will be better and more
productive if we target small companies that are the ones
creating the jobs that we think we need at this moment to get
the economy growing again.
With that, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
calling this important hearing. In listening to the witnesses--
you know, I know there has been a lot of talk about Mr.
Connolly's bill. But I have got the one that goes just to the
DOD. And I talked a little earlier about, you know, my focus
has to do with missile defense. I am on the Strategic Forces
Subcommittee. This is a real issue in the missile defense
industry.
Ms. Speed, in your comments you talked about Mr. Connolly's
bill. Do you see any problems with the DOD pilot study that I
am proposing to nurture these mid-sized companies?
Ms. Speed. Thank you, Mr. Rogers. Actually, no. We are in
support of both approaches. In fact, whether it is DOD, GSA, or
possibly even DHS, the idea is to allow these companies the
ability to continue to be able to have the necessary
infrastructure and resources without being restricted. I heard
earlier of the disincentivizing of companies--I believe Mr.
Frisbey made the point. Some companies are trying to do all
they can to remain small. It is all about work and the
employees that you have. So we do support you and support your
approach as well.
Mr. Rogers. Ms. Dorfman, you made reference to the fact
that size standards are being reviewed regularly and adjusted
by the SBA. Not in the missile defense industry. They have not
changed the size standards or the volume of revenue that you
can generate in decades.
Ms. Dorfman. Well then, if that is the case, then they
obviously need to focus in on that. But we do need to adhere to
the size standards. Otherwise, small businesses will be usurped
by the larger businesses.
Mr. Rogers. Well, here is what I am trying to get at: We
are not dealing with small businesses in my proposal. We are
saying, over and above what is set aside for small businesses.
So the concern that Mr. Frisbey had is not a concern in the
bill that I proposed because we aren't going to penetrate down
into that 23 percent. This is over and above that, because the
truth is Mr. Frisbey one day probably would like to be a little
bit bigger business and then be able to nurture that next
level. So I guess I am trying to figure out what is your
opposition about the proposal?
Ms. Dorfman. Our focus is making sure that we get the
emphasis on the small business goals. They need to be met. And
that is our first concern.
Mr. Rogers. And I agree with that. So what is your
opposition to that?
Ms. Dorfman. So then the secondary nature is when we take a
look how to move forward, I agree we do have to help small
businesses get to that next level; but in doing so, we feel
that we have to make sure that there is a sound technique that
is put in place and that the small business size standards are
included in that process because they have been there and they
have worked.
Mr. Rogers. My proposal is a pilot study. That is the whole
purpose of a pilot study is to find out where the bump in the
road is and what works and what doesn't. So why would you
oppose a pilot study?
Ms. Dorfman. Again, we would like to see Congress work on
making sure that the small business goals are being met. And I
believe that the larger firms can access the contracts if they
were put together in a way that was not in the bundling
fashion, where they are so large that they can't access them.
Mr. Rogers. So you don't have any amendment language that
you would like to see incorporated to make you happy? You are
just against it is what you are saying?
Ms. Dorfman. At this point, yes.
Mr. Rogers. That is unreasonable. As I told Chairman
Graves, I am open to any kind of amendment that calms the
concerns of any sector. But I am not okay with just
obstructionism. And that is what I am hearing. Mr. Frisbey
seems fine, as long as his concerns are met. But it sounds like
you are saying you don't care what concerns are met, you are
against it. And that is a reasonable position, I guess, in your
view, but it is not reasonable to me. I am hoping this
Committee will make any kind of changes you want to make. But
we ought to at least look at nurturing these businesses up to
this next level, particularly in missile defense because this
is serious stuff.
And right now when it comes to the big guys, Raytheon and
Lockheed and Boeing, they don't have competition.
Ms. Velazquez. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Rogers. Absolutely.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you for yielding. My question is, do
you have small businesses that grew and that are mid-sized?
Mr. Rogers. Oh, absolutely.
Ms. Velazquez. And that you feel that they have problems
with the size standard?
Mr. Rogers. Absolutely. That is the problem. They are being
bought up once they go over 1,000 employees.
Ms. Velazquez. So two things could happen. One is that
those businesses that feel that the size standard needs to be
changed or adjusted should apply to SBA to get that reviewed;
but also SBA, as we speak, is reviewing the size standard
issue. So there is nothing that will prevent those businesses
in your district from requesting SBA to look at the size
standard issue.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentlelady. The fact is, that
gentleman right there would object to that, if they wanted to
raise that size standard so that companies that went over 1,000
employees could now compete for this 23 percent. And the fact
is that the companies that I--and I don't represent them, I
wish I did, but they are in Huntsville, can't get SBA to even
consider those adjustments. So I am just trying to figure out
how we can solve the problem and I hope you all work with me in
any way, and I am amenable to any kind of amendments you all
want to make. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Chu.
Ms. Chu. Thank you Mr. Chair. This question is for Ms.
Dorfman. Of course we know that the Federal Government has a 5-
percent goal for contracts to be awarded to women-owned small
businesses. But it has taken 10 long years after the
legislation authorizing the program was passed to get the
women's procurement program in place. Now women's businesses
are able to compete. But the program still has a ways to go.
And so considering the 5-percent goal that has yet to be
achieved, if a mid-sized program were to be implemented, how do
you think it would affect the ability of women-owned small
businesses to get contracts and meet the 5-percent goal?
Ms. Dorfman. It would actually be devastating for our
members simply because it has been actually 17 years since the
goal has been put into place. The Federal Government has never
met that. You have to understand, women-owned firms represent
one-third of all businesses in the United States. The goal of
5-percent can't even be met. The goal really should be, if we
are playing fair, 30-percent. So it is very important that we
make sure that women-owned firms and small businesses overall
have access to these contracts and the goals are achieved.
Ms. Chu. And how many women-owned firms are mid-sized? Are
there examples of mid-sized women-owned firms that have been
successful in receiving Federal contracts? And where is the
critical need for women-owned businesses right now?
Ms. Dorfman. At this point, what we are seeing is the
critical need is making sure that the program is up and
running, where they are accessing the contracts as it is. We
have a number of different levels of firms, from the small to
up to $30 million in revenues, that I have seen. We had done a
survey last year. And what was interesting about the survey is
that actually the larger mid-tier firms, when you looked at job
creation, they would hire one person, where the smaller ones
were poised to grow and they would commit to hire three to four
people if they had the proper funding and the proper access to
contracts.
So I think you can see why I am really focused on making
sure that the small businesses, as a whole, have access to the
contracts and we meet those goals.
Ms. Chu. You mentioned a way of assuring growth is to take
caps off the contracting limits within the women-owned small
business set-aside program. Can you expand on this? Would this
include increasing the size limit of women-owned firms allowed
to compete for the same contract and opening the field to
small, mid, and large? And basically is there a way to improve
the way that this program is implemented?
Ms. Dorfman. Right. The caps were part of the original
legislation where a women-owned firm contracting officer would
set a contract aside for a women-owned firm and $3 million
would be the largest contract you could have unless it was
manufacturing, and then it would be $5 million. The problem
with the caps is that it does not allow women-owned firms to
grow their businesses, and it keeps them small. So that is why
we are asking for those caps to be removed.
Ms. Chu. Are there other ways to improve the implementation
of this women procurement program?
Ms. Dorfman. Absolutely. One of the things that we have
seen is that the leaders--and I would say, you know, Congress
and the executive branch have the oversight to ensure that the
agencies meet their goals. And it would be very helpful if the
agency heads were held accountable for not meeting their goals
of women-owned firms and small businesses. And I think that is
paramount because it starts at the top. If there is not a
commitment from the Secretary, it is not going to happen.
Ms. Chu. And one question for Mr. Frisbey. In this pilot
program created by the bill, by Mr. Connolly's bill, small
businesses will be excluded from participation if it was found
that the rule of two is not satisfied. That is under this rule,
where contractors have to set aside a contract requirement that
says that if two or more small businesses are capable of
performing the contract, then--but so therefore they couldn't
compete. But there are small businesses that are able to win
contracts in full and open competition with larger companies.
So would small businesses lose contracting opportunities under
this rule?
Mr. Frisbey. Yes, ma'am. The rule of two is absolutely
critical to small business contracting. It is one of the few
things where we have a chance to--before the formal
solicitation goes out, to go back and challenge the contracting
officer and basically say, hey, wait a minute; here are two
companies or here are three companies that are capable of
handling this program as it is structured; and because of that,
they are both small businesses or they are both HUBZone
businesses or they are both women-owned businesses; and
therefore this should be set-aside for it. So that rule of two
is a critical element in giving us a chance to fight to try to
get a part of those contracts, even though they are under the
23 percent. And I just want to comment, one of the reasons that
they don't get to the 23 percent is because there is absolutely
no penalty. Okay, so what, I don't get the 23 percent. I don't
get coffee this week, or whatever the--there is no attention.
There is no focus or requirement to do that. A little bit of
pressure that you guys are able to create, but there is no
punitive action. It doesn't go against their reviews. It
doesn't go against their performance. It is just one of those
things that--it is kind of like I have got to do it.
And that is one of the key reasons why that 23 percent
doesn't get met at all levels, because there is no enforcement.
And that is why--and I appreciate it. That is why the Small
Business Administration, the national Small Business
Administration is so opposed to this bill is simply because we
see it just continuing to chip away at the 23 percent, rather
than growing the 23 percent to 30 or 35 percent or 25 percent,
as Mr. Graves suggested. It just chips away at the 23 percent.
We would like to see that percentage increase to represent more
of what small businesses in this country really represent.
I am not sure, did I answer your question correctly?
Ms. Chu. Yes. I yield back.
Mr. Graves. They are going to call votes pretty quickly. So
I want to try to accommodate Mrs. Ellmers and Ms. Clarke.
Mrs. Ellmers. I just have a couple of quick questions. I
have heard repeatedly that the 23 percent limit has not been
hit. Where are we then? I mean how far away from that 23
percent are we?
Mr. Frisbey. We are 22.6 in total right now. That is why I
brought up specifically the example of MOLLE because there is a
$98 million contract that could be all small business. But for
the contract officers, it is easier to administer one contract
than----
Mrs. Ellmers. Rather than----
Mr. Frisbey [continuing]. Than five or four or three or
anything else. So if I can get just one company, I have done my
job. The contract is let, so be it, and move on.
Mrs. Ellmers. Just streamline it and try to get it through.
And again, there is a 5 percent for women-owned contracts. How
far away are we on that?
Ms. Dorfman. Well, I think at the last count, the SBA said
we were about 4 percent. What we have to understand is that the
data that has been out there has been flat over the years, so
we don't know what is accurate. We did a study a few years
back, and 2 years running, SAIC was the number one women-owned
firm accessing contracts--not that they were a women-owned
firm, but they were shown. So the number was skewed.
And then last year also, the inspector general for the SBA
came out and said that the error rate was about 96 percent in
the data for the SBA. So we don't really know what the true
data is. That is kind of what it is. And then when you take a
look at the 23 percent, again, it doesn't include the
exclusions which we calculated over the last 5 years as about
$60 billion in lost opportunities for small businesses.
Mr. Frisbey. I would usually say they are cooking the books
on 10 percent.
Mrs. Ellmers. Therefore, that is one of the issues that we
need to really be looking at then, to make sure we are getting
accurate data based on what is out there.
The other issue--and I know we have addressed this
considerably. For those small business owners who have
performed so well at that level and they have basically grown
into that mid-level size and now, unfortunately, they are
competing with those much larger entities and they just simply
can't compete, Ms. Speed, what would you say? What is an answer
there for that? What can we be doing to help that situation?
Ms. Speed. I think we should look at both pilots that Mr.
Rogers and Mr. Connolly both have. They both are sound
legislative vehicles for looking at how we grow business. But I
also want to just talk--just one more point about the pilot
that we really didn't get a chance to address, and that is, in
the pilot and in the concept of it, the ability to grow; for
the small companies, they can continue to bid up. That is
something we did not talk about.
But in terms of the larger ones and the mid-sized ones who
are emerging, they don't bid down. So in effect if there is a
contract award that goes out on the street, small businesses
can still team and align themselves in all the ways that are
under SBA's guidance and rules which we, I think, are hearing
today should be applied to the mid-sized as well and the
emerging firms. Then what we should be doing is allowing
companies to continue to grow and bid up and not have the
larger ones coming down, which is what we are seeing from the
very large integrators.
Mrs. Ellmers. And Mr. Yukins, you are the only one that
hasn't commented. What would you say to that?
Mr. Yukins. In terms of increasing opportunities?
Mrs. Ellmers. Yes. Just in making sure that those companies
that have moved their way up and now they are unfortunately
lumped into that much larger group and are really incapable of
competing with that larger entity, do you see solutions there
that we can be approaching?
Mr. Yukins. Yes. The Europeans have dealt with exactly this
same question over the last few years. For internal political
reasons, the Europeans can't have a category called ``small
business'' that they give preference to. So what they did is
they did a comprehensive review of their procurement rules and
they said, What can we do to make life easier for small- and
medium-sized businesses, not necessarily creating rigid
preferences, but how can we facilitate their involvement in
this marketplace? And those efforts are ongoing in Europe right
now. We should do the same thing here. It is what the Obama
administration is doing with his business breakthrough program.
But expand that. Do a comprehensive review of the rules and
figure out how do we make life easier for small- and medium-
sized businesses.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you very much. I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Chairman Graves. With the Committee's information, I can
tell you that the number is closer to 20 percent on small
business contracts. The SBA, they get a little creative with
the math to make the percentage look higher than it is.
Mrs. Ellmers. The more accurate number is about 20 percent?
Chairman Graves. Yes, absolutely. Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ranking
Member Velazquez. I want to thank the panelists because this
has been a very, very good discussion. I am not quite
convinced, however, that there is not a need for a graduated
process. When I think about the businesses in my district,
particularly small businesses, and as they grow and they sort
of hit the glass ceiling, I have found that they either get
bought out or they die. And for small businesses like the ones
that you are advocating for, what do you see as the remedy for
that?
I mean, certainly, Mr. Frisbey, if your business now gets
to the point where it can no longer avail itself of the
procurement opportunities as stimulated under an an 8a program
or any other program, what would you suggest would be the next
step for yourself? I want you to consider that. And then I want
to put it out there for the rest of the panelists because it
has been my experience that there hasn't been another rung on
the ladder that enables a small business to really compete out
there against some of these companies that are, you know,
basically preeminent in the space.
So I would like to hear some of your solutions or some of
your ideas around how we bridge that gap, because it is
significant and we--I don't think we should be blind to it,
which is sort of where I have heard us going here. It is like
small business, let's preserve our domain. But small businesses
grow. And you reach that point where that growth either takes
you where you need to go or it kills you on the vine. Let me
end my comments there.
Mr. Frisbey. Let me try to respond to your question, then.
And one of the gentlemen said it earlier; yes, I would
definitely like to grow. I must be missing something somewhere
along the line because to me, it seems quite logical to have a
second rung on the ladder called mid-tier that is above small
businesses. Leave the percentage--increase it to 25 percent,
but then set aside a second tier on the ladder for another 10
percent and call it medium businesses. Why can't we do that? If
that is an issue with the trade issues, then deal with it
through the trade issues and negotiate it that way. It makes
perfect--maybe I am missing something. But yes, I think there
should be another rung on the ladder and I think that would be
an appropriate way to do it.
But my opposition is, because I have seen it happen so many
times, the manipulation by large businesses coming down and
chomping out another big chunk of the small business set-
asides, and that is exactly what is going to happen if this
bill goes through, because every one of the large businesses is
going to turn around and mentor their wife or their cousin or
their son or whatever in a small business and they are going to
get the small business set-aside.
Ms. Speed. If I may also address your issue and your
statement. And it is absolutely as you describe, as these
businesses continue to grow, graduating from NAIS code they say
is like falling off a cliff because there is no transition
currently. And we believe that the pilot provides a venue, an
opportunity. And what are the parameters again of the pilot? It
allows you to gather the data. Currently there is no data on
mid-sized companies, how many are out there. We know they are
shrinking. But we can't even track how many actually graduate
and survive to begin with.
We have some sense of that through the CSIS study which
showed that there were at least 2,700 still existing. And that
is a far short number of how many small businesses you have
that you would hope are able to continue growing within that
space. And if they are not growing, then there are also some
disincentives, we believe, that are in place that are
preventing that.
And I go back again to what Mr. Frisbey contends, that a
number of businesses are spinning off and trying to remain
small. They are doing all these things. The idea is not just to
keep them in a category or a subcategory all their lives. They
should eventually become prime contractors, which is what we
are trying to suggest today; that when you get to that glass
ceiling, there should be an opportunity for you to break
through, along with all of the training and technical
assistance that you can get based on where you were. You were
getting it the day before. Now you are too large, and you can't
get anything and you are expected to compete against the
integrators.
So we believe the pilot allows, first of all, to test it.
Let's test and see what is going on with these mid-sized
companies so that we can come back and make great sound policy
decisions around the actual sizes that they should become.
That is something that your Committee, I believe, Mr.
Graves and Ms. Velazquez, can quite clearly easily do and we
really are looking forward to how this moves forward with your
assistance. And we are here to lend our support. Several of our
MTA CEO Roundtable members are here and sitting behind me. They
have been passing me notes to help me on technical questions.
So I really thank you.
Ms. Clarke. Ms. Dorfman, I know my time has run out; but,
Mr. Chairman, I would be interested in a woman's perspective,
if you would indulge us?
Chairman Graves. Sure.
Ms. Clarke. Ms. Dorfman.
Ms. Dorfman. Sure. I agree there is an issue for the small
businesses trying to jump into the next tier. What we have been
hearing today is, it is not a formulated process that is going
to protect small businesses. It really is a pilot program that
doesn't have any parameters. Out of the GSA, there is no Small
Business Administration involvement; there are no protections
really for small businesses.
What we see right now is if you use what we have for the
Small Business Administration, they have parameters set that
will protect small business interests, and we need to make sure
that they are used and enforced. I think a big issue right now
for those who are trying to make that leap is the bundling
issue. And the bundling that happens is, you really have the
set-asides for small businesses or you have the super-sized
contract that a mid-tier cannot actually access. So if we can
break apart those contracts and provide different sizes of
contracts appropriately, I think that would answer all the
questions, including Mr. Roberts with the DOD issue.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Graves. Thank you all for participating in today's
hearing. I appreciate the fact that we had a broad spectrum of
opinions, obviously, represented in your testimony. It is going
to help us better understand the challenges that are facing the
smallest of our government contractors as well as those just
emerging from the small business contracting firms.
I ask unanimous consent that all members have 5 legislative
days to submit statements and supporting materials for the
record. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows on page 74.]
Chairman Graves. This hearing is adjourned. I thank you all
for coming out very much.
[Whereupon, at 2:35 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1177A.050


