- U.S. TRADE STRATEGY: WHAT'S NEXT FOR SMALL BUSINESS EXPORTERS?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. TRADE STRATEGY: WHAT'S NEXT FOR SMALL BUSINESS EXPORTERS?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 16, 2012

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 112-068
Available via the GPO Website: www.fdsys.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

76-474                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

SAM GRAVES, Missouri, Chairman
ROSCOE BARTLETT, Maryland
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
STEVE KING, Iowa
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado
MICK MULVANEY, South Carolina
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JEFF LANDRY, Louisiana
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
ALLEN WEST, Florida
RENEE ELLMERS, North Carolina
JOE WALSH, Illinois
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania
RICHARD HANNA, New York
NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Ranking Member
KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
MARK CRITZ, Pennsylvania
JASON ALTMIRE, Pennsylvania
YVETTE CLARKE, New York
JUDY CHU, California
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
CEDRIC RICHMOND, Louisiana
GARY PETERS, Michigan
BILL OWENS, New York
BILL KEATING, Massachusetts

Lori Salley, Staff Director
Paul Sass, Deputy Staff Director
Barry Pineles, General Counsel
Michael Day, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Sam Graves..................................................     1
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     2

WITNESSES

Ambassador Miriam Sapiro, Deputy United States Trade
Representative, Office of the United States Trade
Representative, Washington, DC.................................     3
Thomas Crafton, President, Thermcraft, Inc., Winston Salem, NC...    19
Robert B. Sinner, Partner and President, SB&B Foods, Inc.,
Casselton, ND..................................................    20
Joshua Meltzer, Ph.D, Fellow, Global Economy and Development,
Brookings Institution, Washington DC...........................    22
Mark Luden, CEO, The Guitammer Company, Westerville, OH..........    24

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Ambassador Miriam Sapiro, Deputy United States Trade
Representative, Office of the United States Trade
Representative, Washington, DC.............................    31
Thomas Crafton, President, Thermcraft, Inc., Winston Salem,
NC.........................................................    37
Robert B. Sinner, Partner and President, SB&B Foods, Inc.,
Casselton, ND..............................................    42
Joshua Meltzer, Ph. D, Fellow, Global Economy and
Development, Brookings Institution, Washington DC..........    45
Mark Luden, CEO, The Guitammer Company, Westerville, OH......    51
Questions for the Record:
Rep. Ellmers Questions for Ms. Sapiro........................    57
Rep. Mulvaney Questions for Ms. Sapiro.......................    58
Chairman Graves Questions for Ms. Sapiro.....................    59
Answers for the Record:
Ms. Sapiro Answers for Rep. Ellmers..........................    60
Ms. Sapiro Answers for Rep. Mulvaney.........................    62
Ms. Sapiro Answers for Chairman Graves.......................    63
Additional Materials for the Record:
National Council of Textile Organizations Statement for the
Record.....................................................    64
eBay Comments for the Record.................................    75
Letter to Ambassador Ron Kirk for the Record.................    79
Association of Small Business Development Centers Statement
for the Record.............................................    85
American Frozen Food Institute Statement for the Record......    89

U.S. TRADE STRATEGY: WHAT'S NEXT FOR SMALL BUSINESS EXPORTERS?

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 16, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:00 p.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Sam Graves (chairman
of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Graves, Chabot, Mulvaney, Tipton,
West, Ellmers, Hanna, Schilling, Velazquez, Schrader, Chu,
Cicilline, and Hahn.
Chairman Graves. We will call the hearing to order. Good
afternoon to everybody. I want to thank you our witnesses on
both panels for being here and I look forward to all the
testimony that is going to be given today.
As we celebrate World Trade Month, it is only fitting to
have Deputy United States Trade Representative before the
Committee to discuss the administration's trade strategy.
First, I appreciate your effort to expedite the implementation
of the free trade agreements with Korea and Colombia, which
actually just went into effect yesterday. I hope the FTA with
Panama is quick to follow. The certainty and protections
provided by these agreements will help thousands of small firms
increase their sales, grow their businesses, and ultimately
create many more jobs.
Small businesses rely heavily on negotiated agreements to
remove trade barriers and to be competitive in the global
marketplace. Unlike large corporations, most small firms do not
have the personnel and resources to navigate technical trade
barriers. As a result, many either do not export at all, or
only export to just a few countries. Given the right
circumstances and tools, I know America's small businesses can
do a whole lot better. We must provide small businesses with
the resources necessary to increase their exports.
That means we need an aggressive trade strategy to open new
markets, streamline the trade process, and combat unfair trade
practices. As we have heard, the president's goal to double
exports by 2014 puts small businesses as the number one
priority. While I applaud this effort, we have yet to see a
real strategy. Small firms and the U.S. economy cannot wait
another five years for the next trade agreement.
This Committee has made increasing exports an absolute
priority, and that is why I recently introduced the Export
Coordination Act of 2012 to make the export process more
efficient while reducing duplication and wasteful spending on
federal trade promotion agencies. I look forward to working
with the administration on identifying ways to improve the
system.
Again, I want to thank you for being here and also thank
our other witnesses for being here. And I will turn to Ranking
Member Velazquez for her opening statement.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Ambassador
Sapiro.
We have heard time and again about the need to put small
businesses at the forefront of our economic recovery, but
perhaps no other group is more critical to this effort than
small exporters. According to U.S. Treasury Department figures,
more than 50 million American workers are employed by more than
250,000 small and medium-sized companies that export goods
overseas. Small businesses that export grow faster, create more
jobs, and pay higher wages than other businesses. Clearly, in
order for the recovery to gain steam, our economy will
increasingly depend on foreign trade to fuel new growth.
Despite these advantages, it remains difficult for small
businesses to take up the mantle and enter foreign markets. By
some estimates, just 1 percent of the 28 million small firms in
this country are doing so. Even though they account for 97
percent of America's exporting companies, the exports account
for only a third of all goods shipped overseas. Most sell their
goods to only one foreign country and to only one customer in
that country. Clearly, these theorems possess untapped economic
potential and today's hearing will help us understand how this
may be accomplished in the wake of passage of the South Korea,
Panama, and Colombia free trade agreements last year.
Balanced free trade agreements have the potential to be a
significant driver of prosperity. By eliminating tariffs and
other barriers, these agreements can help small firms expand
sales globally and create jobs at home. In order for these
benefits to be fully realized, we must hold our trading
partners accountable for unfair practices and ensure that our
small businesses receive the level playing field they were
promised.
Unfortunately, our history in this area does not inspire
much optimism. In 1993, before the North American Free Trade
Agreement took effect, the U.S. had a 1.6 billion trade surplus
with Mexico, which supported 29,400 jobs here at home. Since
then, imports from Mexico have grown much faster than U.S.
exports, resulting in large trade deficits that have displaced
682,900 jobs nationwide. Although many of the workers that were
laid off due to NAFTA were reallocated to other sectors, the
majority were relocated to the service industry where average
wages are a fraction of what they received before. As long as
the U.S. persists in trying to play by free trade rules while
foreign nations are allowed to play the 400-year-old game of
mercantilism, we can expect to see similar results. Still, we
must be diligent in our efforts to get it right.
In regard to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, this sweeping
agreement has the potential to remove numerous barriers and
give American small firms access to new markets on the Pacific
Rim. However, there are concerns that are reaching beyond areas
that have traditionally been the purview of trade policy.
Reports have emerged that this agreement may seek to bind the
U.S. to new standards for everything from foreign investment to
pharmaceutical prices and copyright protections. It will be
critical that these issues be discussed in an open and
forthright manner before this agreement can be finalized. And
it is my hope that the office of the USTR will make good on its
commitment to do so.
Now, more than ever, our country needs policies that
encourage fair trade and promote small business growth. I look
forward to hearing how our existing and potential future trade
agreements can achieve these goals, as well as how export
assistance programs can assist small firms.
I would like to thank the witnesses in advance for their
testimony, and I am pleased they could join us today. I look
forward to hearing from them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Nydia.
Our first witness is Ambassador Miriam Sapiro. She is the
deputy U.S. trade representative with the Office of the United
States Trade Representative. She is responsible for trade
negotiations and enforcement with Europe, the Middle East, and
the Americas. She also oversees the Office of Small Business
Market Access and Industrial Competitiveness at the USTR. Thank
you for being here, and I look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MIRIAM SAPIRO, DEPUTY UNITED STATES TRADE
REPRESENTATIVE, OFFICE OF THE U.S. TRADE REPRESENTATIVE

Ms. Sapiro. Thank you very much, Chairman Graves, Ranking
Member Velazquez, and Members of the Committee, especially for
convening this hearing today and for giving me the opportunity
to testify about what we are doing to support small business
and thereby support greater economic growth and jobs throughout
the country.
Despite a fragile global economy, the growth of U.S.
exports over the last year has been a bright spot. Our exports
of goods and services have surpassed their pre-crisis peak and
we are making good progress towards meeting President Obama's
goal of doubling exports by the end of 2014. During the past 12
months, the United States exported more than $2 trillion in
goods and services, which is the highest level of exports in
any 12-month period in U.S. history. As our economic recovery
continues, we have added private sector jobs for 26 straight
months, for a total of 4.25 million jobs over this period.
As the President has emphasized, America's small businesses
are key engines of our nation's economic growth and job
creation. They are a critical source of innovative processes,
products, and services. I speak as someone who started and ran
a small business before re-entering government and experienced
firsthand the challenges, the risks, and the opportunities
involved.
America's smaller firms are already playing a major role in
international trade, accounting for nearly 98 percent of all
exporters. Direct and indirect exports by U.S. small businesses
support four million jobs and account for an estimated 40
percent of the total value of our goods and services exports.
These trends are very positive, but we believe our small
companies still have significant room for export growth. Only a
small fraction, as you both pointed out, currently export, and
of those, most tend to go only to one market and have one
customer. With 95 percent of the world's customers living
beyond our borders, we can, and we must, do better.
To accomplish this, we are pursuing a robust trade policy
that supports small business and broader economic growth by
tearing down barriers to trade and by creating new
opportunities for U.S. farmers, ranchers, manufacturers, and
service providers. We are also vigorously enforcing our trade
rights, insisting that countries fulfill their commitments and
act according to the rules to which they agreed.
Our trade agreements now with nearly 20 countries open the
doors for valuable export opportunities for our small
businesses.
With this Committee's strong support, Congress approved the
FTAs with South Korea, Colombia, and Panama, and as you pointed
out, just yesterday the Colombia Agreement entered into force.
This makes it easier and less expensive for small businesses,
like the meat packers and the dairy farmers in your district,
Mr. Chairman, to export their products to this important Latin
American country.
And this week we are concluding the 12th round of the
Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations in Dallas, Texas.
Relevant to this Committee is our focus on developing specific
provisions to help small businesses participate more actively
in regional trade, including through information sharing. Our
commitment builds upon the joint APEC Trade-SME Ministers'
meeting that Ambassador Kirk held last year in Big Sky.
We are also helping small business by opening Russia's
market of 145 million customers. Russia's WTO membership will
create new export opportunities and bind Moscow to a clear set
of rules for trade and transparency. However, for U.S.
companies to enjoy these benefits, Russia's WTO membership this
summer, Congress will have to act quickly to terminate
application of the 1974 Jackson-Vanik amendment to Russia. We
hope this Committee will strongly support Chairman Camp's
efforts to do just that.
In the Western Hemisphere, we are collaborating with other
agencies to connect more of our small businesses to regional
partners and entrepreneurs there as President Obama announced
last month on his way to the Summit of the Americas.
As we continue to strengthen the international rules-based
trading system and hold our trading partners accountable, we
are also enhancing our trade enforcement capabilities. The
Interagency Trade Enforcement Center, known as the ITEC,
recently established by the President will increase our
capacity to prioritize and to aggressively challenge unfair
trade practices brought to our attention by smaller companies.
Ambassador Kirk and the entire USTR team continue to reach
out to small businesses across the country to highlight not
only export opportunities that we have created but to hear more
about the existing trade challenges. As a result, last year we
were proud to launch the FTA Tariff Tool, a free online way for
small firms to do market research and look up specific tariffs.
In conclusion, we are very proud of our small businesses
that offer high-quality, ``Made in America'' products and
services to customers around the world. We are determined to
see that they have the trade policy tools they need to compete
and to succeed in the global economy. We look forward to
working with you to accomplish that goal. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much.
I will turn to Mr. West.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and also Ranking Member.
And thank you, Ambassador, for being here.
We had an Ag roundtable down in our district area, Martin
County, and one of the major complaints came from a gentleman
who has Yee Farms down there about the flooding of tomatoes
coming in and how it is affecting our market out of Mexico. So
the big question I am sure that the farmers down in South
Florida would like to know, what are the specific things that
we are putting in place to help them as far as, you know, the
tariffs and the non-tariffs and the NAFTA and also the CAFTA,
how we can open up China and other Asian markets for our
agricultural products so that they are not penalized.
Ms. Sapiro. Thank you for that important question. We had a
terrific year in 2011 in terms of our Ag exports. We are fully
committed to doing everything that we can to help farmers
across the country compete in every single global market. With
our free trade partners we do that by lowering tariffs and also
reducing the non-tariff barriers behind the border that you
cannot always see at first. But as you may well know, our
ability to fight what we call SPS, sanitary and phytosanitary
restrictions that are not justified by science or by risk
assessments, is really an important part of what we do every
single day at USTR.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Ms. Velazquez. Ambassador, Ambassador Kirk has expressed a
commitment to maintaining transparency in the negotiations for
the Trans-Pacific Partnership and in all the talks that have
been conducted this week in Dallas I just would like to ask you
why did he make the decision to further restriction public
involvement in the negotiations by eliminating the full day
stakeholder forums?
Ms. Sapiro. The talks that are going on in Dallas right now
had a very robust set of stakeholder consultations. The
negotiators broke for several hours to sit down with all of our
stakeholders who have a very important role in terms of giving
us feedback on what they would like to see in the TPP
agreement. So we have spent considerable amounts of time
working with our stakeholders both before the round in Dallas
and also in Dallas.
Ms. Velazquez. Why the decision to eliminate the full-day
stakeholder forum?
Ms. Sapiro. I think what we did was break up the
consultations into different periods of time so that we could
accommodate the schedules of different stakeholders as well as
the negotiators. I know, Ranking Member, that we have had a
very robust set of consultations with our stakeholders at this
round in Dallas, just as we have at previous rounds and just as
we will continue to do so.
Ms. Velazquez. Yeah, in other rounds that have been
conducted, in other places you have not eliminated the full day
stakeholder forum. So I am just wondering why. How do you
reconcile the fact that he said we are going to maintain
transparency and engagement and then yet you cancel this event?
But I would like to ask you who is representing or how are
small businesses represented in the stakeholder forums?
Ms. Sapiro. We have a number of small businesses that are
part of the stakeholder groups. For example, we have our
advisory committees that are the more formal way in which we
receive input, and we have small and minority business advisory
group that is very robust and provides terrific input. And we
also have informal ways of reaching out across the country. I
do not think there is a trip that Ambassador Kirk or Ambassador
Marantis or I take where we do not reach out to small business,
as well as Ambassador Siddiqui, who is our agricultural
negotiator and who meets with farmers across the country.
So outreach and transparency are a critical, critical part
of our job that we take very seriously, both in Dallas at this
round and in our broader work.
Ms. Velazquez. Well, I am glad to hear that. Moving forward
I hope that you will not cancel again the full day stakeholder
forum so that we can have more engagement.
But talking about small businesses, we hear that small
businesses make up 9 of every 10 businesses that export goods
from the U.S. But when it comes to the negotiation process for
trade agreements, the interests of the small business community
often take a backseat to that of large multinational
corporations. My question is what is your agency doing to
integrate safeguards in the TPP to ensure that the interests of
big corporations are not disproportionately favored and expend
small businesses. And if you hear a level of pessimism coming
from my line of questioning, we have seen this rerun before
where we come here, we discuss trade agreements, and we always
raise the issue that even though 97 percent of all exporters
are small businesses, they are always at a disadvantage.
Ms. Sapiro. I understand your concern and I would like to
reassure you. If I cannot do it in my limited time today then
to come back and visit with you. We are working very hard to
make a difference and I think we are starting to see the
results.
So just to give you a few examples. For the first time we
have one person designated to handle SME issues within our TPP
negotiating team. So they are looking out just for SMEs. And
that role is two-fold. One, it is crosscutting to make sure
that SME interests are represented in general chapters on, for
example, trade facilitation or business competitiveness. And
then also for the chance in this negotiation to have a separate
chapter on small and medium enterprises focused on giving them
the tools they need to succeed in the TPP region. And I am very
pleased that that chapter is going exceedingly well right now
and we think we may have agreement with our other TPP partners
in terms of the robust approach that the United States is
taking towards helping SMEs.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. I have other questions so in the
second line I will come back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Mulvaney.
Mr. Mulvaney. Ambassador, I would like to talk about
textiles for a few minutes if we can. One of the members of the
TPP assuming it goes through will be Vietnam, one of our major
textile trading partners. As most folks know, it is not an open
economy. It would be different than some of the other members--
New Zealand, Australia, Singapore--in that fashion. It is a
government that still has a lot of state-owned enterprises. It
is a government that still manipulates its currency. What is
the USTR going to be doing as part of the TPP to protect our
businesses domestically generally but also the textile industry
specifically against market manipulation by the Vietnamese
government?
Ms. Sapiro. We are working very closely with all of our TPP
partners to develop a truly 21st century trade agreement. And
the obligations obviously run two ways. So we intend to hold
each and every one of our partners, including Vietnam, to the
highest standards that we succeed in negotiating. And that goes
for the range of issues, whether we are talking about goods or
non-tariff barriers or state-owned enterprises, which is a very
important topic I think related to your question in terms of
agreeing on some basic rules of the road.
So with respect, for example, to state-owned enterprises,
it is not that countries cannot have them but that we have a
common understanding of how they operate when it comes to
international trade so that they do not disadvantage
businesses. This is a really key piece of the TPP effort that
we are undertaking. But our goals for TPP as you know are very
ambitious. We have been consulting closely with members of
Congress. I believe we have had several hundred consultations
at least, and we intend to have many more because this is an
issue, including particularly on textiles, where our
stakeholders have clear interests and we want to do our very
best to be responsive to those interests as we all work
together to forge what we hope will be a very ambitious 21st
century agreement.
Mr. Mulvaney. Specifically, because Vietnam is a nonmarket
economy, are you all looking at extended phase out or phase
down provisions for textile tariffs?
Ms. Sapiro. It is hard to speak publicly about specific
negotiating objectives but, we would be very happy to brief you
and your staff in more detail.
Mr. Mulvaney. Let me ask a question that hopefully you can
answer publicly, which we have heard back home that the
Vietnamese negotiators have taken a fairly hard line on this
and said that they do not want any restrictions on textile
exports in the United States and that if there are any it will
be a nonstarter for them for the rest of the negotiations. Can
you comment on that?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, I can say that there is often a lot of
posturing in public about trade negotiations, not just with
respect to TPP but across the board. What I will say and
promise you is that Ambassador Kirk and I, and the whole team
are committed to vigorously defending U.S. interests, both with
respect to the negotiation of trade agreements and then, of
course, with respect to their enforcement so that everybody
lives by the rules as I mentioned earlier to which they have
agreed. That is a critical, critical piece of what we believe
is a robust trade agenda.
Mr. Mulvaney. And as part of our previous robust trade
agendas that we have with various countries and various other
regions, we have a fairly traditional and fairly standard yarn-
forward rule. Are you familiar with what that is?
Ms. Sapiro. Yes.
Mr. Mulvaney. Is it currently the USTR's position that they
will be pushing that same rule as part of the TPP or have you
decided to change your position on that?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, I am not going to speak for our chief
textile negotiator who has been down in Dallas working this
issue but I do believe that that is an important component of
what our general policy is. So I would be happy, if you like,
to take a question for the record and get back to you with a
specific answer if that is useful.
Mr. Mulvaney. That would be great. Anything you can do. And
I recognize you cannot do everything publicly here. I know how
negotiating works.
Let me ask one question though that I do get from folks
back home, which is what is the schedule? It seems so often
that textiles, for example, sort of go to the very end of the
line and are negotiated in the last couple of days and weeks
before there is a deadline approaching. What is the schedule
for the overall negotiation and where do textiles fit in that
timeline?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, the schedule is that President Obama and
other TPP Leaders have asked the negotiators to wrap up their
work by the end of this year. They asked that last November,
and so we have been on an accelerated schedule ever since.
Mr. Mulvaney. End of this calendar year?
Ms. Sapiro. This calendar year. Correct, 2012. And so as I
mentioned, Dallas is the 12th round. We have also had some
informal intercessional rounds so we can get our work done. We
are scheduling several additional rounds this year with the
goal of trying to wrap this up. As you know, sometimes the most
difficult issues are those that end up being worked at the end
but at the same time each round we are making progress, in our
view, on the textile issue as well as all the other issues. It
is a 25-chapter roughly agreement and so textiles are a
critical piece and other stakeholders have interest in other
chapters. So we are really trying to push everything as much as
we can in favor of our interests.
Mr. Mulvaney. Thank you, Ambassador. And I will just close
by saying that I recognize it is 25 chapters. Mr. Chairman, it
always struck me that free trade agreements could be written on
one page which is you lower your tariffs, we will lower ours
and we will just go and compete. It is a shame that we get into
these documents that would make the health care bill look
simple, for example. But I appreciate you coming today and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Hahn.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member Velazquez.
Ambassador Sapiro, it is great to have you here.
I am the founder and co-chair of the Bipartisan Port Caucus
back here in Congress and I have made it a priority of mine to
raise the profile of ports in Congress and the importance for
our nation's economy which obviously includes exports. And
everyone knows that our trade policies affect all businesses,
whether they directly export a project, import a component or a
part or sell foreign merchandise. And all these goods need to
get to and from our ports of entry in a timely and efficient
manner. It was recently reported that goods imported through
the Port of L.A. took 48 hours to travel to Chicago and an
additional 30 hours to get across Chicago. And it is safe to
assume that exports will also be facing transportation
bottlenecks.
Last week, I sent a letter to the transportation companies
highlighting the critical need for our country to have a
national freight policy, to have a national plan on how to best
move imports and exports throughout our country. So
specifically with this goal to double our exports in a few
years, could you discuss if you think it is important for us to
have a national policy on moving goods throughout this country,
investing in our infrastructure, grade separations, whatever. I
am worried that businesses are poised to benefit from exports
but we may get bogged down in our infrastructure in this
country so that will slow things down.
Ms. Sapiro. Well, thank you for that question. We are very
supportive of efforts to make sure that the United States has
modern infrastructure, whether we are talking about ports or
airports or highways or railroads. As you know, President Obama
is very dedicated to doing everything that the Administration
possibly can to create and build an economy that will last. So
I think the point that you are making is a very important one
and an effort that we are very supportive of from the trade
perspective.
Ms. Hahn. You know, with just a few minutes left, one of
the things I hear from my small businesses as well is there are
particularly women-owned, minority-owned businesses. They would
love to get involved in the international trade industry. They
would love to get somehow involved in exporting their goods.
There is a big disconnect between small businesses and this
incredible opportunity. What are you doing? What can we do a
better job of in terms of educating our small businesses in how
they can access capital and how they can get the experience and
how they can get the training to actually be involved.
I have businesses that can literally see the Port of Los
Angeles but yet have no idea on how they might benefit from
this huge growth opportunity in exports.
Ms. Sapiro. Well, at USTR, working with SBA and the
Commerce Department and others, we are very focused on doing
everything possible to publicize our export opportunities to
ensure that small businesses have the finance tools and the
other tools they need to access these opportunities.
I think one step that they can hopefully take if they are
interested in exporting is to contact the local SBDC, the local
Small Business Development Center. We have about 2,000
throughout--actually, we have about 1,000 throughout this
country and nearly 2,000 in the hemisphere and we are looking
to expand more because these SBDCs--and I know the ranking
member has at least one in her district--they are great tools
to be able to sit down one-on-one and consult with our
entrepreneurs and companies that are smaller, to find out what
is their product. Are they interested in a market where we have
a free trade agreement? If so, the public online tariff tool
that I mentioned is a great way to help them look up their
product code. They can right away see what is the tariff
treatment with respect to Colombia, since the Agreement entered
into force just this week, as we noted. We hope Panama will be
in force within the next few months. Korea entered into force
on March 15th and we have 17 other agreements where we have
either zero tariffs or relatively low tariffs.
So I think contacting in the first instance the SBDC that
is local could be a very important step to get them started. We
are ready to help as well and ready to work with you on other
ideas. But publicizing I think what we are already doing as
much as possible and the tools we have. While at the same time,
within the government, we are looking at ways to be more
efficient and make sure as much as possible we have one stop
shopping, whether it is our Business USA initiative or going to
www.export.gov, or using the tariff tool. We are going to try
as much as we can to continue to make this easier for people
because we know at first it can seem quite complex. So we would
like to work with you to simplify things.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Schilling.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Chairman, and Ranking Member. And
thank you, Ambassador, for being here today. We appreciate your
time.
My home state of Illinois ranks second in the country for
ag exports to nations and China is a major market, of course,
as you are well aware to U.S. ag products. But International
Trade Commissions stated China's tariff and non-tariff barriers
inhibited between 1.3 billion and 2.1 billion in annual sales.
What is the USTR doing with regard to the issue with China?
Ms. Sapiro. We are very much focused on ensuring that China
lives up to the obligations that it took on when it joined the
WTO 10 years ago. And so with respect especially to the SPS
restrictions we really want to make sure that they are science-
based and consistent with valid risk assessments.
We have been very active in using international remedies
through the WTO when we feel that China is not living up to its
obligations. I am thinking, for example, of broiler parts. We
filed an action against China that is proceeding because of the
way they were treating our poultry. Because we are so
competitive in ag exports. I mentioned how we have had a banner
year and we want to have another one this year thanks in part
to Illinois. We are also very focused on Russia. We negotiated
with Russia for many, many years, and finally wrapped those up
last fall successfully so that we could provide greater access
to the Russian market for our pork, for our poultry, for our
beef, and for a number of U.S. products where we are highly
competitive and we want to see more access.
Mr. Schilling. Thank you for that.
We often hear about the negative implications of free trade
agreements. Do you think the United States economy and small
business exporters are better off with them in place or worse?
Ms. Sapiro. With trade agreements?
Mr. Schilling. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Sapiro. I think they benefit clearly small business,
which simply do not have the tools and the resources that
larger companies have to try and figure out what is the trade
regime of another country. And unfortunately, the trade
agreements cannot be one page. They are sometimes many, many,
many pages. But the reason we do that is to try to provide
clarity on what the rules of the road are. And that benefits
our small business.
So I am very supportive of the efforts I mentioned in TPP,
trying to involve more small businesses in this effort and
doing it with transparency as I mentioned earlier. I indicated
that it was not so much that we canceled an event; rather, we
reallocated the time and we had an intensive round of
consultations with all of our stakeholders. We simply broke it
up, as I understand it, differently than we did in other
rounds. But transparency--so small businesses understand what
we are negotiating, and when we are done explaining to them
clearly how they can benefit--is a critical part of our work
and our agenda.
Mr. Schilling. Very good. So that leads me to the next
question. That is a good lead-in.
Considering only 1 percent of small businesses in the
United States export, what do we need to do to get them to
participate a little bit more, I guess?
Ms. Sapiro. I think part of it is continuing to speak
forcefully, and I commend the Chairman and all of the members
of this Committee for speaking across the country, about the
importance of trade and why what we are doing is so critical to
help small businesses thrive and help our economy succeed as a
whole. So a large part of this is outreach and making clear
what the tools are. That we are negotiating TPP. That we have
negotiated in APEC, which is a broader group. The Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum is a broader group than TPP.
What we are doing with the European Union, one of our
closest trading partners. We, like they, are very committed to
making our SMEs a higher priority. They think we are doing
something right. We think they are doing something right. So it
is a wonderful opportunity for the sharing of best practices.
I mentioned in the Western Hemisphere this effort to
connect our SBDCs with those hopefully to the north in Canada,
and also down through Mexico and Central America and into South
America, particularly in Colombia, our newest trade partner.
So as you look around the world, we are very committed to
making things as easy as we can so that our small businesses
can thrive. And I would add also we are giving them the
confidence to try another customer in an existing market or try
a new market. So again, I think it is a collaborative effort
working with all of you to try to figure out where the gaps
still are, and what we can do together, as partners, to try to
fill them because we have the same interest here, which is
letting our small businesses thrive and export more.
Mr. Schilling. Very good. Thank you, ma'am. With that I
yield back.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Chu.
Ms. Chu. Well, I also sit on the Judiciary Committee, where
I have been working hard to address business concerns about
intellectual property rights. And this is a major priority for
my constituents in the San Gabriel Valley of California.
Your testimony mentions that you are pursuing a robust
trade policy that supports small business and vigorously
enforcing our trade rights. How is USTR making sure that the
small businesses are protected from overseas intellectual
property rights violations? What recourse does USTR provide for
small businesses to ensure that they can report violations and
seek redress given their limited resources and what can you do
to strengthen relationships between these small businesses and
regulatory agencies such as the Department of Justice so that
these small businesses can have more confidence in exporting
overseas?
Ms. Sapiro. Thank you for that very important question.
The importance of intellectual property rights and
enforcement is another reason why I believe that small business
can benefit greatly from our trade agreements. In our trade
agreements we always seek to have a very robust intellectual
property chapter so that we lay out the rules of the road and
make clear that if other countries want to partner with us, and
have more access to our market through reduced tariffs, they in
turn have to provide the kinds of protections that we want to
see for all U.S. companies but that particularly benefit the
smaller companies that do not have the resources to engage
legions of lawyers to bring litigation in foreign countries. So
I think that is another reason why small businesses might want
to look first and foremost to trade with our partners under an
FTA because of the additional comfort that that provides.
For trading partners that are not FTA partners we, of
course, have the WTO agreements. I am thinking in particular of
the TRIPS agreement with respect to intellectual property
rights. We have, for example, prosecuted successfully a case
against China in the WTO with regard to audiovisual. And in
fact, just a few months ago we reached an important agreement
with them on implementing some of their commitments in the film
and audiovisual area. So it is an ongoing process where we are
very committed to doing what we can to enforce these rights
because of the innovation that they foster, and because of the
entrepreneurship that depends on them.
I would add also that the new ITEC, the Interagency Trade
Enforcement Center is going to be looking at a range of areas
to make sure that we are keeping our trading partners focused
on our rights and if they are not implementing them, that we
have the capacity to launch investigations and do what we can
to enforce our rights. And again, small businesses I think,
which can be disproportionately affected by barriers can also,
we hope, gain by the new ITEC; our additional resources mean
that when smaller companies come to us with a problem we will
be able to look into it ourselves. The larger companies, again,
have the resources to look into these questions on their own
and then come to us. The smaller companies do not. By having a
robust enforcement capability as a new tool in our arsenal, we
believe we will be able to benefit small businesses again in
this manner.
Ms. Chu. Thank you for that.
I went on a delegation to China recently and I was very
startled to find that half of the wine that the Chinese consume
comes from France, while only 5 percent comes from the U.S. And
yet we have some of the best wines in the world, particularly
from my home state of California. So what programs are
available in the national export strategy to help particular
industries like the wine industry enter these new markets
abroad?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, I am also a fan of California wines. I
hope I do not insult anyone from another state, but they are
excellent.
I wonder if we have had a trade mission to China focused on
the wine industry or what the great potential is for the export
of California wines. I think this is an important industry for
California and also for other states, a growing industry
certainly in Virginia as well. I think it is something that we
can certainly look into in conjunction with the Commerce
Department and its ability to lead trade missions.
Ms. Chu. Okay, finally, let me ask, there are many small
businesses in my district but nearly two-thirds of my district
does not speak English at home. And they have trouble accessing
the services that they need in order to export. What do you do
to offer assistance to business owners who are not native
English speakers?
Ms. Sapiro. I would certainly hope that an SBDC located in
an area where there are business owners who speak other
languages could have someone on staff to help. I would have to
look into whether that is indeed the case but I am guessing
that probably the Commerce Department has done something to
address this concern.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Hanna.
Mr. Hanna. I heard a couple people mention currency
manipulation. Tell me everything you know about it and with
Vietnam, with China, it is alleged--I think personally I think
maybe some of it is blown out of proportion but what do you
know about it?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, I know it is in the papers a lot.
Certainly, it is a hot topic for discussion in Congress and I
will say this is something that the Administration is very
focused on. Secretary Geithner has been very involved in this
question and I would probably best refer that question to him
and his team because they really have done the most work on
this.
Mr. Hanna. But is that not an integral part of what makes
you successful or not successful? I mean, the value of the
dollar right now has a lot to do with our changing export
picture. So conversely, is it not the same when it is coming in
the opposite direction?
Ms. Sapiro. The value of the dollar can certainly have
bearing on the export question. But as I mentioned, Secretary
Geithner and his team are focused on the currency fluctuations
and discussing that issue with other countries. So I have to
defer to him on this question.
What I can say is that we are very focused on, no matter
what, is the international climate in terms of monetary policy.
We make sure that our companies have the tools that they need
to succeed in the marketplace in terms of the free trade
agreements and in terms of the other tools, such as enforcement
capabilities that we are very committed to pursuing.
Mr. Hanna. But how can you do one without understanding or
at least having a handle on a lever, if you will, on the other?
Ms. Sapiro. As a government, we are very involved across
the board in these kinds of questions. But USTR's role is to
formulate trade policy and make sure that we can negotiate
trade benefits for our companies of all sizes and then, of
course, that we have the ability to follow up on the
enforcement side. Our jurisdiction does not get into currency
questions, and those we defer to the Secretary of the Treasury
because that is his expertise.
Mr. Hanna. In terms of dairy policy, in Russia for years we
have been shut out. Assuming that the Jackson-Vanik goes away
and they join the WTO, do you have an idea--I come from a place
that is a lot of dairy farms--how you can encourage our
products to go over there and that particular product?
Ms. Sapiro. If Congress is able to terminate the Jackson-
Vanik amendment, then our companies, including our dairy
farmers, will be able to enjoy the benefits that we negotiated
in terms of, for example, the SPS rules. And if Russia does not
abide by the rules to which they have agreed, we would then
have the option of dispute settlement. So strict adherence to
the SPS rules that can benefit dairy farmers and enforcement
tools, should we need them, would be very important benefits I
think for the farmers of New York State. But it all depends on
whether or not Congress will act quickly this summer to
terminate this provision, which dates from 1974, before Russia
becomes a Member. Otherwise, our exporters will not be able to
enjoy the additional benefits that we negotiated.
Mr. Hanna. Thank you, ma'am. I appreciate it. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Ms. Ellmers.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Sapiro, I am from North Carolina. I represent
the 2nd District. Textiles and tobacco are very important in my
district. My first question to you is in regard to tobacco. A
moment ago you were mentioning the amount of transparency and
trying to increase the amount of transparency. I was recently
told as a member of Congress that I am allowed to request the
language on tobacco within TPP; however, I am not allowed to
share any of this language with my staff or any of my
constituents that have concerns. My question to you is why have
we not seen this language and why is the USTR attempting to
halt the discussion of the tobacco exemption in Dallas as we
speak? And why are they unwilling to share the language on this
issue in the agreement?
Ms. Sapiro. The tobacco question is obviously an important
one that is being worked first interagency and with Congress
and with stakeholders. I know I am not personally involved in
that discussion because I am not handling the TPP negotiations
on a day-to-day basis, but I know it has been the subject of a
lot of discussion and consultation in terms of finding the
right proposal to move forward with.
So I just want to reassure you that this is a very
important issue, one that the Administration and USTR is taking
very, very seriously. And we are doing our utmost to work with
everyone to find the right path ahead.
Ms. Ellmers. But the question being why is, you know,
again, on the issue of transparency, why would the language not
be readily available for, of course, myself, but I would need
to go over that information with my staff and possibly some of
my constituents who are tobacco farmers and have these
concerns. Why would that be not forthwith? Why are we holding
back on that?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, I cannot speak to the exact details but
what I can say is we do a significant amount of outreach with
Congress, and at the staff level as well. So I am not sure
exactly what happened but I do think in general we try to be
very transparent with Congress because it is such an important
part of what we do, making sure that we are being responsive to
you and your concerns and the concerns of your staff.
Ms. Ellmers. Great. Well, then I will make sure that my
staff is reaching out to you on those issues.
My next question, and I understand that my colleague, Mr.
Mulvaney has already touched on this issue, and of course, that
is the yarn-forward rule. And my understanding is now we are
looking at possibly changing that and going forward with the
flexible rule of origin. And of course, you know, again, in
some of the discussion that I listened to with my colleague,
Mr. Schilling, you were talking about the concerns that we have
with China, and yet this will actually benefit China.
So I am wondering why on earth would we consider this rule
and once again throw the textile industry under the bus as was
done in the South Korean Free Trade Agreement forcing textiles
to work against another free trade agreement, as well as, for
instance, myself. I ended up, I am a big proponent of free
trade, fair trade, but I had to vote no on that agreement
because of my textile industry. Do not do that to us again. And
I am going to do everything that I can to make sure that that
does not happen. But if you could maybe just touch on that
again I would truly appreciate it.
Ms. Sapiro. I would be happy to, Congresswoman. I cannot
stress enough how important the textile industry is to our
ability to trade. And we take their interests and their
concerns very, very seriously. So I just want to reassure you
that we are doing that in TPP as well. This is an important
issue, an important constituency, and we want to see them
succeed.
Ms. Ellmers. So why would there be some favorable thinking
here on the flexible rule of origin rather than the traditional
way that we have looked at this issue when it comes to the
textile industry? I mean, where is the change and why have we
made that?
Ms. Sapiro. I have not been involved in the specifics. Our
chief textile negotiator has been very involved and is working
this issue in Dallas. But I can say as a general matter that we
are very committed to making sure that all of our exporters,
including the textile industry, remain competitive, and that
they remain a vibrant part of our own economy.
Ms. Ellmers. Thank you. I am sure that that will be
reassuring to the textile industry. Thank you. And I yield back
the remainder of my time.
Chairman Graves. Do you have any more questions?
Ms. Velazquez. Ms. Sapiro, Ambassador, despite the fact
that for the last two decades there has been an emphasis on
free trade agreement as a primary tool to increase trade and
the facts that we have before us in respect to small businesses
is that only 1 percent out of 28 million are exporting a
product to a country and then when you come before our
committee and there are trade negotiations you are telling us
that trade agreements are going to benefit small businesses. So
it seems to me that after two decades, and I have been here now
for two decades and I have been hearing the same rhetoric, if
you will, that those trade agreements are not living up to the
promises that were made to small businesses. They are doing
great for big corporations but not for small businesses.
And to tell me that SBDCs, small business development
centers, they are not experts on trade promotions, they provide
technical assistance for startups, microbusinesses, small
businesses domestically, but they do not have the expertise. So
there has to be a better job, interagency jobs when it comes to
trade promotion and we are not seeing that.
Ms. Sapiro. I want to assure you that one of the key
priorities of the National Export Initiative, launched by the
President, is focused on SMEs. All of the agencies involved in
trade are working together to have the most robust set of tools
we possibly can to help our SMEs succeed.
I cannot speak to what happened earlier but I can tell you
in the last two years I have seen an unprecedented level of
coordination interagency and coordination with our trading
partners. In probably every meeting I have had with a foreign
counterpart I have raised SMEs. How can we work together to
help? And, just like they are the backbone of our economy, they
are the backbone of most economies around the world. So there
is great interest in working together more closely to establish
these regional links between our SBDCs, which link at the micro
level, to partners in different countries around the world so
that they have a virtual network and they have real resources,
too, including access to financing tools and export promotion
opportunities to succeed.
This is a challenge, and I am not suggesting that we have
answers, but I am suggesting that we have a firm commitment and
a real dedication and priority placed on this issue that I do
not think has been a hallmark of previous administrations. We
are determined to work with you to figure out exactly how to
make a difference.
For example, under a number of our FTAs we are starting
small and medium enterprise committees so that we can, again
together, focus on how do we help. How do we connect our SMEs
together so that they have export opportunities in both trading
partners, or in additional partners? So it is a challenge but
we have done a lot. I think there is a lot more to do and that
is part of the reason I wanted to come today and see how we can
work more closely together in the future.
Chairman Graves. Mr. West.
Mr. West. Ambassador, you just mentioned the National
Export Initiative. One of the countries that the Administration
is pushing hard to get into that is Brazil. And this Committee
was contacted by a small business owner, this health care
equipment manufacturer, and he faced on average 65 percent
import tariffs as opposed to on this side only 3 percent. So
how can, if we want Brazil to be a part of this National Export
Initiative, how can we level that playing field so the small
businesses can participate in that? I mean, 65 percent versus 3
percent? I mean, that is exorbitant. I mean, what can the USTR
do to get Brazil to level that playing field out so that, you
know, free trade is fine but it has to be fair trade. And
again, I have to echo the comments of the Ranking Member. We
talk about small businesses but they are put at a severe
disadvantage.
Ms. Sapiro. Brazil is a challenge. We do not have a trade
agreement with Brazil. We do not have an investment agreement
with Brazil. We did have the first meeting under the new Trade
Partnership Agreement that Ambassador Kirk signed last year. We
held that meeting in March. So we are very focused on
developing a much closer partnership with Brazil. There are
many issues we do see eye-to-eye on. Others we are still
working towards.
SMEs are an issue where they do want to work with us.
Investment is also an issue, not in terms of an agreement but
in terms of a dialogue. So we are looking for areas of common
ground where we can work together. High tariffs are a concern;
so are some of the non-tariff barriers. We have been forthright
with them in trying to address these concerns and we will
continue to push with Brazil to do that.
Mr. West. Well, I guess is there some numerical threshold?
You know, part of being a member of this export initiative, we
are going to say that this is nonnegotiable with them. I mean,
I do not want us to, you know, roll over and allow our bellies
to be scratched and our small businesses end up losing out. So
is there a threshold? Is there some point of no return where we
are going to push the table? Push the envelope?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, we are pushing the envelope, Congressman,
as far as we can with Brazil, through looking for areas where
we can work together. So, for example, they are hosting the
World Cup, and other events as well, so they have
infrastructure needs. In some cases, initially that benefits
the larger companies but then they subcontract with the smaller
companies. So it is not an ideal solution, but it is something
that we are working towards at this point. And as I said, they
have focused domestically on SMEs. And so one opportunity might
be to link our SMEs through this ``Connect the Americas
Initiative.'' Then they can have more access to each other
through virtual networks and other forms of assistance.
Mr. West. Well, that is an important thing for us because,
like Ms. Hahn said, you know, we have got Port of Miami, Port
Everglades, and Port of Palm Beach down in our neck of the
woods and that is very beneficial. So thank you, Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member. I yield back.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Hanna.
Mr. Hanna. Some of the bills, for example, the highway bill
has a ``Buy America'' provision in it. Do you have an opinion
about those? And do you have an idea of how the net effect--
what the net effect might be on American businesses?
Ms. Sapiro. Well, we do hear a lot from our trading
partners, regarding concerns about ``Buy America'' provisions.
We try to gain as much access as we possibly can to trading
partners' procurement markets. We do have to obviously offer
access here as well, or they will not allow us to access their
markets.
In general, if a country is a trading partner and they are
a party to the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement, then
they have broad access. But there are, of course, some
exceptions. So it is a continuing source of friction with our
international trading partners. On the other hand, domestically
we know that this is important especially for our small and
medium enterprises, so they can compete effectively through
those procurement processes here.
Mr. Hanna. Do you think it works?
Ms. Sapiro. In terms of helping SMEs or in terms of giving
us more access overseas?
Mr. Hanna. Both.
Ms. Sapiro. I think it does help in terms of SMEs. I have
seen the statistics and they are certainly getting more and
more federal procurement contracts. Overseas, as long as we
have exceptions, it is a tougher push for us to make. So I have
not seen stats on how that balances out yet. It is a very good
question.
Mr. Hanna. Well, thank you, ma'am. I yield back. Thank you,
Chairman.
Chairman Graves. Any other questions?
Seeing none, I want to thank you, Ambassador, for being
here today. It is obviously clear that we have a lot of
opportunity, I think, to remove some trade barriers and open
new markets for our small businesses. And we need to stay
aggressive and continue to make small business a priority. But
we very much appreciate you coming in today and I look forward
to working with your office. So thank you very much.
Ms. Sapiro. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Ranking Member. Thank you, everyone.
Chairman Graves. We will seat the next panel.
[Recess.]
Chairman Graves. We are going to go ahead and start. We
have a series of votes coming up between 2:25 and 2:30, so that
will create a little bit of a problem. We will probably have to
recess for those votes and then we will come back, but we will
try to get through as much testimony as we can.

STATEMENTS OF THOMAS CRAFTON, PRESIDENT, THERMCRAFT, INC.,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
MANUFACTURERS; ROBERT B. SINNER, PRESIDENT, SB&B FOODS, INC.,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN SOYBEAN ASSOCIATION;
JOSHUA MELTZER, PH.D., FELLOW, GLOBAL ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT,
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION; MARK A. LUDEN, CEO, THE GUITAMMER
COMPANY, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS
ASSOCIATION

Chairman Graves. I will go ahead and introduce our first
witness, which is Mr. Thomas Crafton. He is the president of
Thermcraft, Inc., in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Thermcraft
is a leading manufacturer of high quality thermal processing
equipment, including industrial furnaces that can reach over
3,000 Fahrenheit. They currently export to 12 countries. He is
testifying on behalf of the National Association of
Manufacturers. And welcome to the Committee.
I might point out each of you have five minutes and the
lights will be green up to the last minute it will turn yellow
and then red at the end of five minutes. But Mr. Crafton, thank
you for being here.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS CRAFTON

Mr. Crafton. Thank you for the invitation. Chairman Graves,
Ranking Member Velazquez, and members of the House Committee.
You know, we appreciate the opportunity to present our
experiences regarding international trade as a small business.
Again, my name is Tom Crafton with Thermcraft, Inc., and we
are located in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. Founded in 1971
and we just celebrated our company's 41st birthday and now
employ more than 70 people. We manufacture high temperature
equipment, supplying to many different types of industries like
solar cell industry, aircraft, glass, nuclear components, OEMs,
fiber optics, just to name a few industries. We are also a
member of NAM, National Association of Manufacturers, which is
one of the largest national trade organizations.
Thermcraft started out 41 years ago in a small 5,000 square
foot building in a very poor section of Winston-Salem, and we
have now grown to having our own building and about 70,000
square feet with about 70 employees. But we grew rapidly from
making small laboratory equipment, small systems to much larger
systems for high volume manufacturing. Customers currently
include most of the Fortune 500 companies, like the General
Electrics, Boeings, DuPonts, Corning Glasses, Rockwell, again,
just to name a few.
Our customers with international presence actually is what
got us started in exports from the standpoint our specialty is
designing custom systems for manufacturing. A U.S. customer
here would purchase equipment, a custom furnace for a
particular manufacturing process. They would be in discussions
with sister companies that were overseas. The sister companies
would need to duplicate that process so they came to us. And
that is how actually we began. Our start in exporting was a
result of our dealings with U.S. companies.
But the bulk of our exports have been primarily the
semiconductor industry worldwide, mainly Asia and Western
Europe. In the early 1990s, we began dealing with an MRO,
maintenance repair and overhaul organization in Europe, and
they began distributing our heaters to the semiconductor
industry there. In the late 1990s, we began to see much of that
business move to Asia, so as a result we began relationships
with Asian representatives in several Asian countries,
including Japan, Taiwan, Singapore, China, and they helped us
support that business there.
The business in Asia continued to increase, which again
gave us more experience, more exposure to exporting. And again,
in a variety of different countries. Each country kind of
presents its own different sets of challenges based upon the
product that you are shipping into and in Asia, Europe, and
even within any of those communities.
By 2008, our export business had actually reached about 35
percent of our total sales which was probably in excess of $4
million a year. And during the same time period, in order to
help generate additional export sales, we developed a standard
line of equipment that was more of a catalogue distributor-type
item versus custom equipment. And we participated in the
Commerce Department's new export initiative, Gold Key
distribution program in Singapore, which we were very
successful in finding a good qualified distributor there.
We also worked with the U.S. commercial service
representatives locating distributors in China, Korea, again,
Singapore, and many of the other Asian countries. And we are
currently working on distributor networks in Europe and the
Middle East, but in order to get that Middle East business
developed further, there are trade shows we participate in.
Most recently, in the Arab Lab Expo, which is a laboratory
equipment trade show that was in Dubai. And as a result of
doing that show, we have located a number of possible strong
prospects that have potential of enhancing our export items
through distributors throughout the Middle East.
And that has been the positive side. We have had a lot of
help with the U.S. commercial service. We had a lot of export
issues arise on a daily basis that continue to be a problem and
mainly it is a matter of finding one source for information to
be able to help us get the information we need to be able to
adequately export to a particular country.
Commercial officers seem to, by our experience, have more
or less the big picture and when we start trying to get into
the small picture they are just not in a position to help. They
do not have that information or expertise to be able to help.
You know, regulatory changes are constant and trying to find
one source, again, one source in one place, to locate that
information is a challenge. It takes hours and hours and people
that we simply, we do not have the manpower to be able to
support those types of things.
And we have also gone to private export consultants that
have helped us and many have experienced the same problem. You
know, we always thought it was our problem as a small business
but we find out it is more of a small business issue versus
just our small business. But, you know, we can all benefit from
improved access to markets abroad. And we are looking to see
recent implementation, new trade agreements, which we think can
be beneficial to us. But we hope the Small Business
Administration will redouble efforts to help pursue more FTAs
and be able to help find a local single source to be able to
help small businesses, like us, get the information we need.
And again, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to
testify about my experiences and I am happy to answer any
additional questions.
Chairman Graves. Thank you, Mr. Crafton.
Next, I would like to introduce Mr. Robert Sinner. Bobby is
the president and partner of SB&B Foods in Casselton, North
Dakota. He is a family farmer of over 30 years and has
extensive experience in international trade. SB&B is a two-time
winner of the Export of the Year award from the State of North
Dakota and he is testifying on behalf of the American Soy Bean
Association. Thanks for being here.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT B. SINNER

Mr. Sinner. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee. My name is Bob Sinner. I am a fourth-generation
partner in a family farming business and president of SB&B
Foods, Inc. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to provide my views concerning trade policy and its
effect on small business exporters.
Our company, SB&B, employs approximately 30 people who
produce, package, and export an extensive line of Identity
Preserved soybean products to customers worldwide. With annual
export sales between $20 and $25 million for the past three
years, our largest exports are in Asia.
When our business first expanded to the international
marketplace, we received funding for promotional activities in
Japan from Food Export, USA, a non-profit funded by USDA's
Market Access Program (MAP). I cannot overstate the success and
value of USDA's export promotion programs in expanding farm
exports globally.
One of the challenges we have encountered over the years is
we have expanded to other markets is the lack of consistency in
international standards, specifically the patchwork landscape
of countries that require a phytosanitary certificate, and the
inconsistency of our government to provide them. In this
regard, the U.S. government must work towards achieving
international harmonization of standards in order to facilitate
trade between small businesses and global markets.
Under the Korea Free Trade Agreement, food-grade soybean
producers now have access to a zero tariff-rate quota (TRQ) for
the first time outside of that country's state trading
enterprise. But access to the quotas will be a challenge for
small exporters because the TRQ is managed by local processor
associations and competing member companies. On this point, I
strongly urge our government to ensure a certain level of
transparency on the implementation and administration of the
TRQ so that U.S. exporters can reap the full benefits of the
FTA.
I would also like to share some thoughts about our
infrastructure and transportation system, which challenges a
small exporter's ability to compete effectively. We have a
transportation system in the United States that prices
equipment into and out of large metropolitan locations in favor
of bridging many of the rural supplier states en route to
departure ports. This approach ignores the importance and
necessity of timely food shipments, and we are concerned that
as the world continues to demand more grains and soybeans from
the U.S., small exporters may not be able to compete unless we
have available container equipment at competitive pricing.
Finally, it is also my hope that the Food Safety
Modernization Act does not impose an additional set of
burdensome and costly requirements on small businesses in
addition to food quality standards already required by our
customers and safety requirements already established by
foreign governments.
As I have stated, small exporters face enormous competition
and a web of international regulatory constraints. Our export
promotion programs are among the few tools that help American
agricultural exporters stay competitive abroad. And while
rapidly growing markets in the Asia-Pacific region are key
drivers of the food-grade soybean demand, we must break down
remaining barriers to meet increased demand for our products in
the region. We hope that a TPP FTA is successful in easing
foreign regulatory burdens so that U.S. companies can operate
more seamlessly abroad and help small businesses participate
more effectively in international trade.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to present our
views. I am happy to respond to any questions.
Ms. Velazquez. Mr. Chairman, it is my pleasure to introduce
Dr. Joshua Meltzer. He is a fellow at the Brookings Institution
specializing in global trade and development. His work focuses
on issues related to international trade, as well as U.S. trade
with key economies such as China, India, Japan, and the
European Union. He currently serves as an adjunct professor at
the John Hopkins University School for Advanced International
Studies in Washington, D.C., as well as an adjunct professor of
law at Georgetown University Law School in Washington, D.C.
Thank you and welcome.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA MELTZER

Mr. Meltzer. Chairman Graves, Ranking Member Velazquez,
honorable members of the Committee, thank you for this
opportunity today to share my views with you on U.S. trade
strategy and what is next for small business exporters.
In 2011, it became clear that concluding the WTO Doha Round
in its current form is not possible. Efforts are therefore
underway to make progress on elements of the Doha agenda and
the United States is taking the lead in such areas as services
liberalization.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations are really
the only other trade negotiation to which the United States is
currently a party. The nine countries involved in these
negotiations including the United States are Australia, Brunei,
Chile, Malaysia, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, and Vietnam. The
TPP also has the potential to be the building block for a wider
free trade agreement of the Asia-Pacific region, a goal
endorsed by APEC leaders and recently reiterated by United
States trade representative Ron Kirk at the TPP negotiations in
Dallas this week.
Given the focus of the current administration on completing
the TPP negotiations this year, I will focus the rest of my
testimony on the implications of the TPP for the United States
and small businesses. In particular, I will focus on the
economic implications of the TPP, the role of the TPP in
achieving free trade in the Asia-Pacific region, and finally,
we will discuss some of the implications for small businesses.
The Asia-Pacific region is crucial for the United States.
It is the fastest growing region in the world and a key driver
of economic growth. Indeed, the region already accounts for 60
percent of global GDP and 50 percent of international trade,
and is expected to grow by around 8 percent this year.
In 2011, the United States' exports to TPP economies were
worth approximately $105 billion and imports were valued at $91
billion, giving the United States a trade surplus in the range
of $14 billion. However, the economic benefits to the United
States of the TPP will be greatly expanded as more countries
join. In this regard already Canada, Mexico, and Japan have
expressed interest in joining. And should these countries join,
the agreement will end up covering over $800 billion worth of
exports and $875 billion worth of imports of goods and
services.
The potential economic gains to the United States from the
TPP highlights its significance as a template for free trade in
the Asia-Pacific region. The recently created free trade
agreement which came into effect on March 15th of this year
will likely serve as a baseline in the negotiations. USTR is
also seeking agreement on a range of new rules such as on
regulatory coherence to reduce trade barriers arising from
unnecessary regulatory diversity among TPP countries and rules
of state-owned enterprises that will discipline the trade-
distorting impact that they have when they are not operating
according to competitive market-based principles.
The TPP should also address the realities for businesses
which rely on supply chains located in different countries,
often in the Asia-Pacific region. Developing coherent rules of
origin is one way of ensuring that the TPP reflects these
business realities. Progress on trade facilitation, which
reduce the cost of moving goods through customs is another one.
The TPP can also provide an important framework to develop
new rules that protect the free flow of data across borders.
The Internet is now a key driver of trade and actually,
especially for small and medium-sized enterprises as these
companies are now able to use the Internet to access customers
overseas and at scale.
The TPP will also address the trend in the Asia-Pacific
region toward regional economic integration that excludes the
United States. For instance, ASEAN, the Association of South
East Asia Nations, has free trade agreements with China, Japan,
South Korea, Australia, and New Zealand. These agreements
divert trade from the United States, and in the absence of U.S.
participation in developing these trade rules undermines the
United States' leadership in the region.
In this light, the TPP will also be an important vehicle
for pursuing economic integration that is both Asia-Pacific in
scope and involves the United States.
Small and medium-sized businesses will stand to gain
significantly from trade liberalization under the TPP. In fact,
almost 98 percent of all exporters and 97 percent of importers
are small and medium-sized enterprises, though representing
only 40 percent of goods and 31.5 percent of imports, so there
is clearly room for growth.
In addition to this, 94 percent of small and medium-sized
enterprises both import and export. Therefore, trade agreements
which as the TPP which both liberalize barriers in the United
States and abroad should benefit small businesses. Small
businesses will also benefit the most from government efforts
to reduce trade barriers as the capacity to overcome these
barriers, for instance, by establishing subsidiaries overseas,
is certainly limited. The TPP has the potential to be a 21st
century trade agreement, and if it fulfills these ambitions,
small businesses should stand to gain.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify here today.
Chairman Graves. Thank you very much. Our final witness is
Dr. Mark Luden. He is the chief executive officer of Guitammer
Company in Westerville, Ohio. They manufacture the speaker and
sound systems that are used in major theaters around the world,
including IMAX. He is testifying on behalf of the Consumer
Electronics Association. Welcome. I appreciate your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MARK A. LUDEN

Mr. Luden. Thank you very much. Chairman Graves, Ranking
Member Velazquez, members of the Committee, thank you very much
for having me here today and for your efforts on this important
matter. I also very much appreciated the depths of the
questions the Committee asked to the ambassador previously.
As Chairman Graves said, my name is Mark Luden. I am the
president and CEO of The Guitammer Company. We are based in
Westerville, Ohio, a suburb of Columbus, and we make the
ButtKicker-brand of consumer electronics products. And what
they do is let you feel bass like a silent subwoofer so that
you are able to have the full experience without the volume.
And our products are used by the world's best musician in home
theaters by video gamers and in movie theaters around the world
and in Kansas City. I am also a member of the Board of Industry
Leaders and of the Consumer Electronic Association (CEA) and
past chairman of CEA's small business committee. The CEA
represents over 2,100 diverse technology companies, and my
company, The Guitammer Company, is proud to be among them. And
we are also very proud to be a small exporter.
I would like to briefly talk about two things. First, that
well-crafted free trade and free trade agreements can and do
help small businesses. And secondly, to recommend three actions
Congress can take to continue to help our small businesses grow
and thereby allow us to hire more Americans.
So why is free trade important to our small business?
Historically, 35 percent of our sales are outside the U.S. In
fact, in Q1 of this year, 45 percent of our sales were outside
the U.S.--10 percent in Canada and 35 percent outside of North
America. In the past six months alone, we have shipped
ButtKicker-brand products around the world--Spain, Belgium,
France, South Korea, Brazil, the Netherlands, Germany, the
U.K., Singapore, Japan, Denmark, Switzerland, Portugal, Kuwait,
and more, including product to a Chinese movie theater chain.
So we are proud to let you know that we are shaking Chinese
movie theaters' ``you know whats'' with Kentucky-made
ButtKickers.
So as you can see, exports are a vital part of our
business. For example, the Korea Free Trade Agreement dropped
an 8 percent tariff on our products that we sell to a Chinese
movie theater chain. It made us much more competitive. The New
Colombia Free Trade Agreement should reduce the price of our
products exported there about by 11 percent, and we were just
recently contacted by their leading cinema company asking about
our products. So that will make us, I think, more competitive
and have a better chance to win that business. These lower
costs help us sell more products and our international
customers to buy more of our products.
Trade barriers act as a tax on transactions and create a
zero sum gain where no one wins. Trade barriers and trade
policies can unfairly and disproportionately affect small
businesses who are not able to absorb these extra costs and it
can make it harder for us to compete against large
multinational companies. But well-crafted free trade agreements
do not cause small businesses to lose jobs. Instead, they can
be the reason small businesses create jobs.
So what can Congress do to help? I would like to make three
recommendations. First of all, I ask you to support the Trans-
Pacific Partnership. This agreement is of key importance to CEA
members and the tech industry as a whole. Successfully
negotiated it will include tariff elimination and removes
technical barriers to trade.
Secondly, support the expansion of the Information
Technology Agreement (ITA). Guitammer and CEA strongly support
the efforts to expand the product coverage within this
agreement. Since its passage, which I think was about 15 years
ago, ITA has helped drive innovation, create jobs, open new
markets, and lower consumer prices across the globe. Yet, since
its passage, the product scope of this agreement has never been
expanded, leaving products that we all use now, such as tablets
and Smartphones outside of the scope of the current agreement.
And finally, pass the TRADE (Transparent Rules Allow Direct
Exporting and Jobs) Act as sponsored by Representative Tipton.
This act, the TRADE Act, creates an easy-to-use tool for
companies to access country-specific information regarding
export regulations and trade requirements, and there is
something to be said for simple-to-use points tools. And you
are right, I do agree the SBDCs, they are not experts in it so
the TRADE Act really will help. This tool will make it more
cost-effective for a small business to easily access
information about foreign regulations, labor requirements,
custom declaration information , and more.
So thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to
testify. I welcome any questions you may have.
Chairman Graves. We are into this vote series. There are
three votes, so it may take us--hopefully we will be back
within 30 minutes and then we will ask questions if that is all
right with you all. So we will recess for a short period of
time and we will be right back.
[Recess.]
Chairman Graves. We will bring the hearing back to order.
Ms. Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Mr. Meltzer, critics of the USTR have
complained that negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership
have been conducted behind closed doors, and in fact, one of
the congress ladies was questioning about the tobacco issue.
And nobody will know what the proposal will look like until it
has been signed off by all the parties involved. Does this
secretive approach to the negotiating process pose risks that
the agreement may not be able to garner public support once it
sees the light of the day?
Mr. Meltzer. Thank you for our question. And I am a very
big supporter personally of transparency throughout government,
certainly as far as possible in the trade negotiating process.
My sense is that generally speaking USTR has done a very good
job of trying to be transparent in its trade negotiating
processes with the TPP as well as with its other free trade
agreements. I do understand that often these issues involve
somewhat of a tradeoff between providing as much information as
possible to stakeholders and keeping them informed of the
developments in the negotiations while at the same time
providing a certain level of confidentiality for negotiators
from the United States and other countries to also express
their views freely and frankly. And I think that is always an
ongoing balance.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
I think, Mr. Sinner, you spoke about the lack of
coordination in terms of trade promotion assistance. What in
your opinion would be the quickest and most cost-effective
means of improving coordination between the different agencies
and harmonizing their support when it comes to putting together
strategies that will help small businesses and medium-sized
businesses reap the benefits of trade agreements?
Mr. Sinner. Well, in agriculture you have regional
divisions of Food Export USA, which is a division of MAP. And
those are funds that are available for export promotion, export
promotional materials, and those are actually, you know, quite
helpful to help a small business get started. Many of the trade
offices in the states in cooperation with the Department of
Agriculture which have a conduit link to Food Export USA or the
regional offices of MAP are also very helpful to small
exporters to looking at the regulatory regulations and some of
the things, the first steps to get started. So, I mean, there
is a process and I think at the ground level those have been
helpful.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. Mr. Crafton. Thank you, sir.
While the recently passed trade agreements and Trans-
Pacific Partnership improve access to foreign markets, they
will not translate into improved market share for small
businesses if problems accessing credit go unresolved. How
might the ongoing lack of trade financing impact your
industry's capacity to export abroad?
Mr. Crafton. We have been fortunate that it has not made a
major impact simply because we have forged partnerships with
distributors. We utilize them to handle the financial
transactions. At the same time, we also were dealing with some
larger potential projects at this point and having the
association with EX-IM Bank has been a tremendous boon to
allowing us to actually get orders that we otherwise probably
would not be able to handle.
Ms. Velazquez. So when you say ``we,'' are you referring to
your company?
Mr. Crafton. Yes, to the company. Yes.
Ms. Velazquez. And do you have any kind of anecdotal
stories coming out of the manufacturing sector?
Mr. Crafton. Not specifically. I mean, again, it has just
been a lot of cases. We deal with markets that are maybe Middle
East and someone's maybe marginal credit so that we have to
deal with financing that, you know, EX-IM allows us to do that
where otherwise we just do not have the resources to do
otherwise.
Ms. Velazquez. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Crafton. You are welcome.
Chairman Graves. Mr. West, questions?
Mr. West. Thanks to the panel and thanks you Chairman and
Ranking Member. You all were here when the ambassador was here.
If you could trade places with the ambassador or the actual
USTR ambassador and there were two things that you would
implement which would help our small businesses and the arena
of free trade, fair trade, what would be the two policy
initiatives that you would enact?
Mr. Sinner. Congressman West, I will respond to that first.
And it was addressed by Ranking Member Velazquez a couple times
earlier today.
Those of us that are involved in international trade would
like to be involved and would like to be somehow in the
discussion of some of the negotiation.
Mr. West. At the table?
Mr. Sinner. At the table so that we understand what is on
the table. I hear all the time from customers in Asia their
fear of what this is going to be. They are asking me questions
about what is involved in this TPP. To be honest with you, I do
not know the nuts and bolts of the TPP. But I would like to be
more involved in that. So, that is one thing.
Mr. West. And that concerns me because, Mr. Luden, you
asked us to make sure we support the TPP, but Mr. Sinner just
said he does not exactly know what is in it. And that is one of
the problems we have up here on Capitol Hill sometimes. We pass
things that we do not know what is in it. But next?
Mr. Meltzer. Congressman, if I might, the two things that I
would think would help small businesses the most in the United
States on the trade liberalizing front generally speaking,
reducing tariffs and tariff barriers both overseas but also
importantly here in the United States I think would be
significantly beneficial. You know, it always needs to be
remembered that when we talk about improving the opportunities
for small businesses and businesses generally to be competitive
internationally, imports are an important part of that
equation. And in fact, the statistics do demonstrate that
approximately 55 percent of imports into the United States are
actually used as imports into production processes into making
other goods which are then sold. So actually reducing those
types of barriers can also be particularly helpful.
The other thing which is probably not particularly
necessarily in the purview of the USTR but I think would go a
long way towards improving the competitiveness generally of
small businesses are some of the more longer term but really
crucial policies which evolve around things like education,
innovation, infrastructure, and creating really the environment
here in the United States which allows these businesses to be
highly productive and competitive.
Mr. Luden. And if I may answer, Representative West, I
would agree with Mr. Sinner that the inputs from the SMEs to
the USTR to these processes, although I am sure they are
getting them, maybe a wider ask to the SMEs so that they knew
it was available to speak on those topics, a way of soliciting
comments, of soliciting input maybe in a more aggressive manner
I think would be very helpful.
The other point I would go back to is Brazil that one of
the representatives brought up. It is a booming market. It is a
burgeoning market for our type of product. The disparity, I
think you brought that up.
Mr. West. Yes, 65 percent.
Mr. Luden. Yes, the disparity is something that although
the USTR is working on it, that is something that if that is
equalized out could certainly open new markets for us.
And to your point about the TPP, I do urge you to support
it but only as all the members have said, if it is well crafted
and if it makes sense. So in the old review standpoint of being
able to reduce tariffs and to break down trade barriers, that
makes sense and I am totally in favor of that. But done poorly,
no. A bad bill is not a good bill.
Mr. West. Absolutely.
Mr. Crafton. I agree with Mr. Sinner and Mr. Luden for the
most part. From our standpoint, the free trade agreements do
not directly impact us quite as greatly only from the
standpoint of we have such a diversity of industries that we
cater to. We are not focused through electronics, through
textiles, through one other one necessarily. But the bottom-
line is it is important that the organizations that are
supposed to be helped have some input into what has been
crafted in the bill.
Mr. West. And if I may, Mr. Chairman, last question. Will
there ever come a time when we do not need the Export-Import
Bank?
Mr. Crafton. I think not. When you are dealing with smaller
companies, smaller, you know, our sales are 10 to 15 million
range and we simply do not have the resources and any other
way--it is also a safety net. If a customer defaults on a bill
or defaults on payments, the Ex-Im Bank is able to--acts as an
insurance policy in addition to it, so it allows us to go after
things which otherwise might be too risky.
Mr. Sinner. My comment is we do not use Ex-Im Bank. We use
an International Credit Insurance Company. It works fine. We
did use some Ex-Im Bank a few years ago but the level of
protection was a little bit lower than going with an
International Credit Insurance Company.
Mr. West. Okay.
Mr. Luden. We do not take advantage of the Ex-Im Bank
either at this point.
Mr. West. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. I
yield back.
Chairman Graves. You all have been successful in or
experienced some success at least with exporting and creating
jobs. Do you have any recommendations you would give to
businesses who are struggling with starting that process or not
wanting to start that process just because they are afraid of
it or whatever the case may be? Any advice? What would that
advice be?
Mr. Crafton. Our main benefit is there are a lot of U.S.
government and state resources that are available to help
companies like us export. You know, North Carolina, for
example, has six offices scattered throughout the world and
those offices have a dedicated employee that their sole job is
to help companies like me be able to develop export markets
within that country or that region. So again, just through a
little research, finding those resources, government resources
that are available because most of the time they are of no
expense to the company.
Chairman Graves. Mr. Sinner.
Mr. Sinner. That is a good question. And I am quite
involved on the state level, involved in the North Dakota trade
office and we are very proactive with companies, encouraging
them and put together resources on the state level through
export assistance with companies that have experience in
helping smaller companies get started. We have done okay with
that, and a lot of companies at first, you are right, they are
scared. I do not really need this. And once they get started
and involved they do very well.
You know, people are people and doing business with someone
is no different than how you want to be treated. If you can
develop an honest relationship, Americans are notorious for
wanting to make a quick buck, but when you get outside the
borders of this country it is all about relationships and
building integrity with a relationship. Of course, quality is
always important but it can be done.
Mr. Meltzer. I will just say briefly, Chairman, that the
preamble to the World Trade Organization in fact says something
along the lines of I am ensuring the predictability of the
instability of the world trading system and I think that from a
business perspective, even though these are long and certainly
at times complex rules, the key underlying goal here is really
to create a certain degree of certainty and reduce the risk for
businesses when they do want to engage in trade overseas. So
despite the what can appear at times daunting length of some of
these trade agreements, taking time to understand the extent at
which they provide them with actually more certainty and
predictability than without them might actually be some help.
Mr. Luden. I would like to answer that may be a little
differently. And I think what we need to do is to help convince
people that you can do it. That you must need to take the jump.
And with no disrespect, you know, the saying is, one of the
worst things you hear is we are the government. We are here to
help. And I guess in this case that that is really--the
government from state, local, and federal level on the export,
you guys have done a masterful job on this. And I do not know
that that message is quite getting out of how much on a
bipartisan effort that you are really trying to make it
something that is accessible. And so I think what happens to an
SME, especially a very small one, is the amount of regulations
and the ensuing possible risk can be very daunting. And then
the question is where do you find the help? How do you get the
help? And will anybody help me? And again, as a small
businessperson, it is all about the level of risk you are
comfortable with. Right? You do not want to take more risk not
to get the reward.
In this instance, just look at what you are doing here with
this hearing by bringing the USTR ambassador in. You were kind
enough, Ranking Member, to meet with us when I was with the SBC
Small Business. I mean, it has been something that you folks
have really lived and have put your hearts into. And there are
some real resources out there that make it possible. We were
not born with this knowledge. Our lady who does our export and
does the harmonizing codes and learns that, we have gotten
help. And candidly, we have gotten help from the government.
So I think one of the things--I would answer this just to
summarize in two ways, Chairman. One is the message I think
would be jump in, the water is fine. And secondly, that your
government--state, local, and federal--is really trying to pave
the way and has the sense of focus to make it a level playing
field because when given that chance American small businesses
really do compete and they compete well. So I thank you for the
question and I thank you for your efforts on this.
Ms. Velazquez. Are you sure you were not my witness?
Mr. Luden. I was born in Queens as you remember.
Chairman Graves. Well, with that the Committee is going to
obviously continue to closely follow the impact of trade policy
on small businesses. And I appreciate all of you coming in
today. Some of you came a long way and that is very much
appreciated. And your testimony was very helpful. And with that
I would ask unanimous consent that members have five
legislative days to submit statements and supporting materials
for the record. Without objection, so ordered. And with that
the hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:39 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


